<doc id="99613" wikidata="Q33550" url="?curid=99613" title="Frederick the Great">
<text>Frederick II (; 24 January 171217 August 1786) was the monarch of Prussia from 1740 until his death in 1786. He was the last Hohenzollern monarch titled &quot;King in Prussia&quot;, declaring himself &quot;King of Prussia&quot; after annexing Royal Prussia from the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1772. His most significant accomplishments include military successes in the Silesian wars, reorganisation of the Prussian Army, the First Partition of Poland, and patronage of the arts and the Enlightenment. Prussia greatly increased its territories and became a major military power in Europe under his rule. He became known as Frederick the Great () and was nicknamed &quot;Old Fritz&quot; ().

In his youth, Frederick was more interested in music and philosophy than war, which led to clashes with his authoritarian father, Frederick William I of Prussia. However, upon ascending to the throne, he attacked and annexed the rich Austrian province of Silesia in 1742, winning military acclaim. He became an influential military theorist, whose analyses emerged from his extensive personal battlefield experience and covered issues of strategy, tactics, mobility and logistics.

Frederick was a supporter of enlightened absolutism, stating that the ruler should be the first servant of the state. He modernised the Prussian bureaucracy and civil service, and pursued religious policies that ranged from tolerance to segregation. He reformed the judicial system and made it possible for men of lower status to become judges and senior bureaucrats. Frederick encouraged immigrants of diverse backgrounds to come to Prussia. While Protestantism remained the favored faith, he allowed religious freedom and tolerated Jews and Catholics in Prussia, however his actions were not entirely without prejudice. He supported the arts and philosophers he favoured, and allowed freedom of the press and literature. Frederick was almost certainly homosexual, and his sexuality has been the subject of much study. Because he died childless, he was succeeded by his nephew, Frederick William II. He is buried at his favourite residence, Sanssouci in Potsdam.

Nearly all 19th-century German historians made Frederick into a romantic model of a glorified warrior, praising his leadership, administrative efficiency, devotion to duty and success in building Prussia into a great power. Frederick remained an admired historical figure through Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I, and the Nazis glorified him as a great German leader prefiguring Adolf Hitler, who personally idolised him. His reputation became less favourable in Germany after World War II, partly due to being symbolically adopted by the Nazis as a historical hero. Historians in the 21st century tend to view Frederick as an outstanding military leader and capable monarch, whose commitment to enlightenment culture and administrative reform built the foundation that allowed the Kingdom of Prussia to contest the Austrian Habsburgs for leadership among the German states.

== Early life ==
Frederick was the son of then-Crown Prince Frederick William of Prussia and Sophia Dorothea of Hanover. He was born between 11 and 12 p.m. on 24 January 1712 in the Berlin Palace and was baptised with the single name &quot;Friedrich&quot; by Benjamin Ursinus von Bär on 31 January. The birth was welcomed by his grandfather, Frederick I, as his two previous grandsons had died in infancy. With the death of Frederick I in 1713, his son Frederick William I became King in Prussia, thus making young Frederick the crown prince. Frederick had nine siblings who lived to adulthood. He had six sisters. The eldest was Wilhelmine, who became his closest. He also had three younger brothers, including Augustus William and Henry. The new king wished for his children to be educated not as royalty, but as simple folk. They were tutored by a French woman, Madame de Montbail, who had also educated Frederick William.

Frederick William I, popularly dubbed the &quot;Soldier King&quot;, had created a large and powerful army that included a regiment of his famous &quot;Potsdam Giants&quot;; he carefully managed the kingdom&#x27;s wealth and developed a strong centralised government. He had a violent temper and ruled Brandenburg-Prussia with absolute authority. In contrast, Frederick&#x27;s mother Sophia, whose father, George Louis of Brunswick-Lüneburg, had succeeded to the British throne as King George I in 1714, was polite, charismatic and learned. The political and personal differences between Frederick&#x27;s parents created tensions, which affected Frederick&#x27;s attitude toward culture, his role as a ruler, and his relationship with his father.

In his early youth, Frederick lived with his mother and sister Wilhelmine, although they regularly visited their father&#x27;s hunting lodge at Königs Wusterhausen. Frederick and his older sister formed a close relationship, which lasted until her death in 1758. Frederick and his sisters were brought up by a Huguenot governess and tutor and learned French and German simultaneously. Undeterred by his father&#x27;s desire that his education be entirely religious and pragmatic, the young Frederick developed a preference for music, literature, and French culture. Frederick Wilhelm thought these interests were effeminate, as they clashed with his militarism, resulting in his frequent beating and humiliation of Frederick. Nevertheless, Frederick, with the help of his tutor in Latin, Jacques Duhan, procured a 3,000-volume secret library of poetry, Greek and Roman classics, and philosophy to supplement his official lessons.

Frederick William I had been raised a Calvinist in spite of the Lutheran state faith in Prussia, but feared he was not one of God&#x27;s elect. To avoid the possibility of his son Frederick being motivated by the same concerns, the king ordered that his heir not be taught about predestination. Despite his father&#x27;s intention, Frederick appeared to have adopted a sense of predestination for himself.

== Crown prince ==

At age 16, Frederick formed an attachment to the king&#x27;s 17-year-old page, Peter Karl Christoph von Keith. Wilhelmine recorded that the two &quot;soon became inseparable... He served my brother from feelings of real devotion&quot;. Wilhelmine would further record that &quot;Though I had noticed that he was on more familiar terms with this page than was proper in his position, I did not know how intimate the friendship was.&quot; As Frederick was almost certainly homosexual, his relationship with Keith may have been homoerotic, although the extent of their intimacy remains ambiguous. When Frederick William heard rumours of their relationship, Keith was sent away to an unpopular regiment near the Dutch frontier.

In the mid-1720s, Queen Sophia Dorothea attempted to arrange the marriage of Frederick and his sister Wilhelmine to her brother King George II&#x27;s children Amelia and Frederick, the heir apparent. Fearing an alliance between Prussia and Great Britain, Field Marshal von Seckendorff, the Austrian ambassador in Berlin, bribed the Prussian Minister of War, Field Marshal von Grumbkow, and the Prussian ambassador in London, Benjamin Reichenbach. The pair undermined the relationship between the British and Prussian courts using bribery and slander. Eventually Frederick William became angered by the idea of Frederick being married to an English wife and under the influence of the British court. Instead, he signed a treaty with Austria, which vaguely promised to acknowledge Prussia&#x27;s rights to the principalities of Jülich-Berg, which led to the collapse of the marriage proposal.

=== Katte affair ===
Soon after his relationship with Keith ended, Frederick became close friends with Hans Hermann von Katte, a Prussian officer eight years older than Frederick who became one of his boon companions and may have been his lover. After the English marriages became impossible, Frederick plotted to flee to Britain with Katte and other junior army officers. While the royal retinue was near Mannheim in the Electorate of the Palatinate, Robert Keith (Peter Keith&#x27;s brother and one of Frederick&#x27;s companions) had an attack of conscience when the conspirators were preparing to escape and begged Frederick William for forgiveness on 5 August 1730. Frederick and Katte were subsequently arrested and imprisoned in Küstrin. Because they were army officers who had tried to flee Prussia for Britain, Frederick William accused the pair of treason. The king briefly threatened the crown prince with execution, then considered forcing Frederick to renounce the succession in favour of his brother, Augustus William, although either option would have been difficult to justify to the Imperial Diet of the Holy Roman Empire. The king condemned Katte to death and forced Frederick to watch his beheading at Küstrin on 6 November; the crown prince fainted just before the fatal blow.

Frederick was granted a royal pardon and released on 18 November 1730, although he remained stripped of his military rank. He was forced to remain in Küstrin and began rigorous schooling in statecraft and administration for the War and Estates Departments. Tensions eased slightly when Frederick William visited Küstrin a year later, and Frederick was allowed to visit Berlin for his sister Wilhelmine&#x27;s marriage to Margrave Frederick of Bayreuth on 20 November 1731. The crown prince returned to Berlin after finally being released from his tutelage at Küstrin on 26 February 1732 on condition that he marry Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Bevern.

=== Marriage and War of the Polish Succession ===

Frederick William considered marrying Frederick to Elisabeth of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the niece of Empress Anna of Russia, but this plan was ardently opposed by Prince Eugene of Savoy. Frederick himself proposed marrying Maria Theresa of Austria in return for renouncing the succession. Instead, Eugene persuaded Frederick William, through Seckendorff, that the crown prince should marry Elisabeth Christine, a Protestant relative of the Austrian Habsburgs. Frederick wrote to his sister that, &quot;There can be neither love nor friendship between us&quot;, and he threatened suicide, but he went along with the wedding on 12 June 1733. He had little in common with his bride, and the marriage was resented as an example of the Austrian political interference that had plagued Prussia. Nevertheless, during their early married life, the royal couple resided at the Kronprinzenpalais in Berlin. Later, Elisabeth Christine accompanied Frederick to Schloss Rheinsberg, where at this time she played an active role in his social life. After his father died and he ascended the throne, Frederick separated from Elisabeth. He granted her the Schönhausen Palace and apartments at the Berliner Stadtschloss, but he prohibited her from visiting his court in Potsdam. They had no children, and Frederick bestowed the title of the heir to the throne, &quot;Prince of Prussia&quot;, on his brother Augustus William. Nevertheless, Elisabeth Christine remained devoted to him. Frederick gave her all the honours befitting her station, but never displayed any affection. After their separation, he would only see her on state occasions. These included visits to her on her birthday, among the rare occasions when Frederick did not wear military uniform.
In 1732, Frederick was restored to the Prussian Army as Colonel of the Regiment von der Goltz, stationed near Nauen and Neuruppin. When Prussia provided a contingent of troops to aid the Army of the Holy Roman Empire during the War of the Polish Succession, Frederick studied under Prince Eugene of Savoy during the campaign against France on the Rhine; he noted the weakness of the Imperial Army under Eugene&#x27;s command, something that he would capitalise on at Austria&#x27;s expense when he took the throne. Frederick William, weakened by gout and seeking to reconcile, granted Frederick Schloss Rheinsberg in Rheinsberg, north of Neuruppin. At Rheinsberg, Frederick assembled musicians, actors and other artists. He spent his time reading, watching and acting in dramatic plays, and composing and playing music. Frederick formed the Bayard Order to discuss warfare with his friends; Heinrich August de la Motte Fouqué was made the grand master of the gatherings. Later, Frederick regarded this time as one of the happiest of his life.

Studying the works of Niccolò Machiavelli, such as &quot;The Prince&quot;, was considered necessary for any king in Europe to rule effectively. In 1739, Frederick finished his &quot;Anti-Machiavel&quot;, an idealistic rebuttal of Machiavelli. It was written in French—as were all of Frederick&#x27;s works—and published anonymously in 1740, but Voltaire distributed it in Amsterdam to great popularity. Frederick&#x27;s years dedicated to the arts instead of politics ended upon the 1740 death of Frederick William and his inheritance of the Kingdom of Prussia. Frederick and his father were reconciled at the latter&#x27;s death, and Frederick later admitted, despite their constant conflict, that Frederick William had been an effective ruler: &quot;What a terrible man he was. But he was just, intelligent, and skilled in the management of affairs... it was through his efforts, through his tireless labour, that I have been able to accomplish everything that I have done since.&quot;

== Inheritance ==
Frederick was twenty-eight years old when his father died and he ascended to the throne of Prussia. Frederick William I had left him with a highly militarised state. Prussia was the twelfth largest country in Europe in terms of population, but its army was the fourth largest, after France, Russia and Austria. Prussia had one soldier for every 28 citizens, whereas Britain only had one for every 310, and the military absorbed 86% of Prussia&#x27;s state budget. The Prussian infantry trained by Frederick William I were, at the time of Frederick&#x27;s accession, arguably unrivalled in discipline and firepower. By 1770, Frederick had doubled the size of the huge army he had inherited. The situation is summed up in a widely translated and quoted aphorism attributed to Mirabeau, who asserted in 1786 that &quot;&quot; (&quot;Prussia is not a state that has an army, but an army that has a state&quot;). Using the resources his frugal father had cultivated, Frederick was eventually able to establish Prussia as the fifth and smallest European great power.

When Frederick ascended the throne as the third &quot;King in Prussia&quot; in 1740, his realm consisted of scattered territories, including Cleves, Mark, and Ravensberg in the west of the Holy Roman Empire; Brandenburg, Hither Pomerania, and Farther Pomerania in the east of the Empire; and the Kingdom of Prussia, the former Duchy of Prussia, outside of the Empire bordering the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. He was titled &quot;King in Prussia&quot; because his kingdom included only part of historic Prussia; he was to declare himself &quot;King of Prussia&quot; after the First Partition of Poland in 1772.

== Reign ==
=== War of the Austrian Succession ===

When Frederick became king, he faced vulnerably disconnected holdings with a weak economic base. To strengthen Prussia&#x27;s position, he fought wars mainly against Austria, whose Habsburg dynasty had reigned as Holy Roman Emperors continuously since the 15th century. Thus, upon succeeding to the throne on 31 May 1740, Frederick declined to endorse the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, a legal mechanism to ensure the inheritance of the Habsburg domains by Maria Theresa of Austria, daughter of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI. Upon the death of Charles VI on 29 October 1740, Frederick disputed the 23-year-old Maria Theresa&#x27;s right of succession to the Habsburg lands, while simultaneously asserting his own right to the Austrian province of Silesia based on a number of old, though ambiguous, Hohenzollern claims to parts of Silesia.

The First Silesian War (1740–1742, part of the War of the Austrian Succession) began on 16 December 1740 when Frederick invaded and quickly occupied almost all of Silesia within seven weeks. Though Frederick justified his occupation on dynastic grounds, the invasion of this militarily and politically vulnerable part of the Habsburg empire also had the potential to provide substantial long-term economic and strategic benefits. The occupation of Silesia added one of the most densely industrialised German regions to Frederick&#x27;s kingdom and gave it control over the navigable Oder River. It nearly doubled Prussia&#x27;s population and increased its territory by a third. It also prevented Augustus III, King of Poland and Elector of Saxony, from seeking to connect his own disparate lands through Silesia.

In late March 1741, Frederick set out on campaign again to capture the few remaining fortresses within the province that were still holding out. He was surprised by the arrival of an Austrian army, which he fought at the Battle of Mollwitz on 10 April 1741. Though Frederick had served under Prince Eugene of Savoy, this was his first major battle in command of an army. Frederick&#x27;s cavalry was disorganised by a charge of the Austrian horse. Believing his forces had been defeated, Frederick galloped away to avoid capture, leaving Field Marshal Kurt Schwerin to lead the disciplined Prussian infantry to victory. Frederick would later admit to humiliation at his abdication of command and would state that Mollwitz was his school. Disappointed with the performance of his cavalry, whose training his father had neglected in favour of the infantry, Frederick spent much of his time in Silesia establishing a new doctrine for them.

Encouraged by Frederick&#x27;s victory at Mollwitz, the French and their ally, the Electorate of Bavaria, entered the war against Austria in early September 1741 and marched on Prague. Meanwhile, Frederick, alongside other members of the League of Nymphenburg, sponsored the candidacy of his ally Charles of Bavaria to be elected Holy Roman Emperor. In late November, the Franco-Bavarian forces took Prague, and Charles was crowned King of Bohemia. Subsequently, he was elected as the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VII on 24 January 1742. After the Austrians pulled their army out of Silesia to defend Bohemia, Frederick pursued them and blocked their path to Prague. The Austrians counter-attacked on 17 May 1742, initiating the Battle of Chotusitz. Frederick&#x27;s retrained cavalry proved more effective than at Mollwitz, but once more it was the discipline of the Prussian infantry that won the field and allowed Frederick to claim a major victory. This victory, along with the Franco-Bavarian forces capturing Prague, forced the Austrians to seek peace. The terms of the Treaty of Breslau, negotiated in June 1742, gave Prussia all of Silesia and Glatz County, with the Austrians retaining only the portion called Austrian or Czech Silesia.
By 1743, the Austrians had subdued Bavaria and driven the French out of Bohemia. Frederick strongly suspected Maria Theresa would resume war in an attempt to recover Silesia. Accordingly, he renewed his alliance with France and preemptively invaded Bohemia in August 1744, beginning the Second Silesian War. In late August 1744, Frederick&#x27;s army had crossed the Bohemian frontier, marched directly to Prague, and laid siege to the city, which surrendered on 16 September 1744 after a three-day bombardment. Frederick&#x27;s troops immediately continued marching into the heart of central Bohemia, but Saxony had now joined the war against Prussia. Although the combined Austrian and Saxon armies outnumbered Frederick&#x27;s forces, they refused to directly engage with Frederick&#x27;s army, harassing his supply lines instead. Frederick was forced to withdraw to Silesia as winter approached. In the interim, Frederick successfully claimed his inheritance to the minor territory of East Frisia on the North Sea coast of Germany, occupying the territory after its last ruler died without issue in 1744.

In January 1745, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VII of Bavaria died, taking Bavaria out of the war and allowing Maria Theresa&#x27;s husband Francis of Lorraine to be eventually elected Holy Roman Emperor. Now able to focus solely on Frederick&#x27;s army, the Austrians, who were reinforced by the Saxons, crossed the mountains to invade Silesia. After allowing them across, Frederick pinned them down and decisively defeated them at the Battle of Hohenfriedberg on 4 June 1745. Frederick subsequently advanced into Bohemia and defeated a counterattack by the Austrians at the Battle of Soor. Frederick then turned toward Dresden when he learned the Saxons were preparing to march on Berlin. However, on 15 December 1745, Prussian forces under the command of Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau soundly defeated the Saxons at the Battle of Kesselsdorf. After linking up his army with Leopold&#x27;s, Frederick occupied the Saxon capitol of Dresden, forcing the Saxon elector, Augustus III, to capitulate.

Under the terms of the Treaty of Dresden, signed on 25 December 1745, Austria was forced to adhere to the terms of the Treaty of Breslau giving Silesia to Prussia. It was after the signing of the treaty that Frederick, then 33 years old, first became known as &quot;the Great&quot;.

=== Seven Years&#x27; War ===
Though Frederick had withdrawn from the War of the Austrian Succession once Austria guaranteed his possession of Silesia, Austria remained embroiled in the war until the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748. Less than a year after the treaty was signed, Maria Theresa was once more seeking allies, particularly Russia and France, to eventually renew the war with Prussia to regain Silesia. During the ten years of peace that followed the signing of the Treaty of Dresden, Frederick prepared to defend his claim on Silesia by further fortifying the province, expanding his army, and reorganising his finances.

In 1756, Frederick attempted to forestall Britain&#x27;s financing of a Russian army on Prussia&#x27;s border by negotiating an alliance with Britain at the Convention of Westminster, by which Prussia would protect Hanover against French attack, and Britain would no longer subsidise Russia. This treaty triggered the Diplomatic Revolution in which Habsburg Austria and Bourbon France, who had been traditional enemies, allied together with Russia to defeat the Anglo-Prussian coalition. To strengthen his strategic position against this coalition, on 29 August 1756, Frederick&#x27;s well-prepared army preemptively invaded Saxony. His invasion triggered the Third Silesian War and the larger Seven Years&#x27; War, both of which lasted until 1763. He quickly captured Dresden, besieged the trapped Saxon army in Pirna, and continued marching the remainder of his army toward North Bohemia, intending to winter there. At the Battle of Lobositz he claimed a close victory against an Austrian army that was aiming to relieve Pirna, but afterward withdrew his forces back to Saxony for the winter. When the Saxon forces in Pirna finally capitulated in October 1756, Frederick forcibly incorporated them into his own army. This action, along with his initial invasion of neutral Saxony, brought him widespread international criticism; but the conquest of Saxony provided him with significant financial, military, and strategic assets to sustain the war.
In the early spring of 1757, Frederick again invaded Bohemia. He was victorious against the Austrian army at the Battle of Prague on 6 May 1757, but his losses were so great he was unable to take the city, and settled for besieging it. On 18 June 1757, Frederick suffered his first major defeat at the Battle of Kolín, which forced him to abandon his invasion of Bohemia. When the French and the Austrians pursued him into Saxony and Silesia in the fall of 1757, Frederick defeated and repulsed a much larger Franco-Austrian army at the Battle of Rossbach and another Austrian army at the Battle of Leuthen. Frederick hoped these two victories would force Austria to negotiate, but Maria Theresa was determined not to make peace until she had recovered Silesia. Despite its strong performance, the losses suffered from combat, disease and desertion had severely reduced the quality of the Prussian army.

In the remaining years of the war, Frederick faced a coalition of enemies including Austria, France, Russia, Sweden, and the Holy Roman Empire, supported only by Britain and its allies Hesse, Brunswick, and Hanover. In 1758 Frederick once more took the initiative by invading Moravia. By May, he had laid siege to Olomouc, but the Austrians were able to hold the town and destroyed Frederick&#x27;s supply train, forcing him to retreat into Silesia. In the meantime, the Russian army had advanced within east of Berlin. In August, he fought the Russian forces to a draw at the Battle of Zorndorf, in which nearly a third of Frederick&#x27;s soldiers were casualties. He then headed south to face the Austrian army in Saxony. There, he was defeated at the Battle of Hochkirch on 14 October, although the Austrian forces were not able to exploit their victory.
During the 1759 campaign, the Austrian and Russian forces took the initiative, which they kept for the remainder of the war. They joined and advanced on Berlin. Frederick&#x27;s army, which consisted of a substantial number of quickly recruited, half-trained soldiers, attempted to check them at the Battle of Kunersdorf on 12 August, where he was defeated and his troops were routed. Almost half his army was destroyed, and Frederick almost became a casualty when a bullet smashed a snuffbox he was carrying. Nevertheless, the Austro-Russian forces hesitated and stopped their advance for the year, an event Frederick later called the &quot;Miracle of the House of Brandenburg&quot;. Frederick spent the remainder of the year in a futile attempt to manoeuvre the Austrians out of Saxony, where they had recaptured Dresden. His effort cost him further losses when his general Friedrich August von Finck capitulated at Maxen on 20 November.

At the beginning of 1760, the Austrians moved to retake Silesia, where Frederick defeated them at the Battle of Liegnitz on 15 August. The victory did not allow Frederick to regain the initiative or prevent Russian and Austrian troops from raiding Berlin in October to extort a ransom from the city. At the end of the campaign season, Frederick fought his last major engagement of the war. He won a marginal victory at the Battle of Torgau on 3 November, which secured Berlin from further raids. Frederick became a casualty when he was hit in the chest by a spent bullet.

By 1761, both the Austrian and Prussian military forces were so exhausted that no major battles were fought between them. Frederick&#x27;s position became even more desperate when Britain, having achieved victory in the American and Indian theatres of the war, ended its financial support for Prussia after the death of King George II, Frederick&#x27;s uncle. The Russian forces also continued their advance, occupying Pomerania and parts of Brandenburg. With the Russians slowly advancing towards Berlin, it looked as though Prussia was about to collapse. On 6 January 1762, Frederick wrote to Count Karl-Wilhelm Finck von Finckenstein, &quot;We ought now to think of preserving for my nephew, by way of negotiation, whatever fragments of my territory we can save from the avidity of my enemies&quot;.
The sudden death of Empress Elizabeth of Russia in January 1762 led to the succession of the Prussophile Peter III, her German nephew, who was also the Duke of Holstein-Gottorp. This led to the collapse of the anti-Prussian coalition; Peter immediately promised to end the Russian occupation of East Prussia and Pomerania. One of Peter III&#x27;s first diplomatic endeavours was to seek a Prussian title; Frederick obliged. Peter III was so enamoured of Frederick that he not only offered him the full use of a Russian corps for the remainder of the war against Austria, he also wrote to Frederick that he would rather have been a general in the Prussian army than Tsar of Russia. More significantly, Russia&#x27;s about-face from an enemy of Prussia to its patron rattled the leadership of Sweden, who hastily made peace with Frederick. With the threat to his eastern borders over, and France also seeking peace after its defeats by Britain, Frederick was able to fight the Austrians to a stalemate. While the ensuing Treaty of Hubertusburg returned the European borders to what they had been before the Seven Years&#x27; War, Frederick&#x27;s ability to retain Silesia in spite of the odds earned Prussia admiration throughout the German-speaking territories. A year following the Treaty of Hubertusburg, Catherine the Great signed an eight-year alliance with Prussia, albeit with conditions that favoured the Russians.

Frederick&#x27;s ultimate success came at a heavy financial cost to Prussia. Part of the burden was covered by the Anglo-Prussian Convention, which gave Frederick an annual £670,000 in British subsidies from 1758 until 1762. These subsidies ceased when Frederick allied with Peter III, partly because of the changed political situation and because of Britain&#x27;s decreasing willingness to pay the sums Frederick wanted. Frederick also financed the war by devaluing the Prussian coin five times; debased coins were produced with the help of Leipzig mintmasters, Veitel Heine Ephraim, Daniel Itzig and Moses Isaacs. He also debased the coinage of Saxony and Poland. This helped Frederick cover over 20 per cent of the cost of the war, but at the price of causing massive inflation and economic upheaval throughout the region. Saxony, occupied by Prussia for most of the conflict, was left nearly destitute as a result. While Prussia lost no territory, the population and army were severely depleted by constant combat and invasions by Austria, Russia and Sweden. The best of Frederick&#x27;s officer corps were killed in the conflict. Although Frederick managed to bring his army up to 190,000 men by the time the economy had largely recovered in 1772, which made it the third-largest army in Europe, almost none of the officers in this army were veterans of his generation and the King&#x27;s attitude towards them was extremely harsh. Frederick suffered a number of personal losses. Many of his closest friends and family members—including his brother Augustus William, his sister Wilhelmine, and his mother—had died while Frederick was engaged in the war.

=== First Partition of Poland ===

Frederick sought to acquire and economically exploit Polish Prussia as part of his wider aim of enriching his kingdom. As early as 1731 Frederick had suggested that his country would benefit from annexing Polish territory, and had described Poland as an &quot;artichoke, ready to be consumed leaf by leaf&quot;. By 1752, he had prepared the ground for the partition of Poland–Lithuania, aiming to achieve his goal of building a territorial bridge between Pomerania, Brandenburg, and his East Prussian provinces. The new territories would provide an increased tax base, manpower for the military, and serve as a surrogate for the overseas colonies of the other great powers.

Poland was vulnerable to partition due to poor governance and the interference of foreign powers in its internal affairs. Frederick himself was partly responsible for this weakness by opposing attempts at financial and political reform in Poland, and undermining the Polish economy by inflating its currency by his use of Polish coin dies. The profits exceeded 25 million thalers, twice the peacetime national budget of Prussia. He thwarted Polish efforts to create a stable economic system by building a customs fort at Marienwerder on the Vistula, Poland&#x27;s major trade artery, and by bombarding Polish customs ports on the Vistula.

Frederick used Poland&#x27;s religious dissension to keep the kingdom open to Prussian control. Poland was predominantly Roman Catholic, but approximately ten per cent of Poland&#x27;s population, 600,000 Eastern Orthodox and 250,000 Protestants, were non-Catholic dissenters. During the 1760s, the dissenters&#x27; political importance was out of proportion to their numbers. Although dissenters still had substantial rights, the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth had increasingly been reducing their civic rights after a period of considerable religious and political freedom. Soon Protestants were barred from public offices and the (Polish Parliament). Frederick took advantage of this situation by becoming the protector of Protestant interests in Poland in the name of religious freedom. Frederick further opened Prussian control by signing an alliance with Catherine the Great who placed Stanisław August Poniatowski, a former lover and favourite, on the Polish throne.

After Russia occupied the Danubian Principalities in 1769–1770, Frederick&#x27;s representative in Saint Petersburg, his brother Prince Henry, convinced Frederick and Maria Theresa that the balance of power would be maintained by a tripartite division of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth instead of Russia taking land from the Ottomans. They agreed to the First Partition of Poland in 1772 without war. Frederick acquired most of Royal Prussia, annexing and 600,000 inhabitants. Although Frederick&#x27;s share of the partition was the smallest of the partitioning powers, the lands he acquired had roughly the same economic value as the others and had great strategic value. The newly created province of West Prussia connected East Prussia and Farther Pomerania, granted Prussia control of the mouth of the Vistula River, and cut off Poland&#x27;s sea trade. Maria Theresa had only reluctantly agreed to the partition, to which Frederick sarcastically commented, &quot;she cries, but she takes&quot;.

Frederick undertook the exploitation of Polish territory under the pretext of an enlightened civilising mission that emphasised the supposed cultural superiority of Prussian ways. He saw Polish Prussia as barbaric and uncivilised, describing the inhabitants as &quot;slovenly Polish trash&quot;. His long-term goal was to remove the Poles through Germanisation, which included appropriating Polish Crown lands and monasteries, introducing a military draft, encouraging German settlement in the region, and implementing a tax policy that disproportionately impoverished Polish nobles.

=== War of the Bavarian Succession ===
Late in his life Frederick involved Prussia in the low-scale War of the Bavarian Succession in 1778, in which he stifled Austrian attempts to exchange the Austrian Netherlands for Bavaria. For their part, the Austrians tried to pressure the French to participate in the War of Bavarian Succession since there were guarantees under consideration related to the Peace of Westphalia, clauses which linked the Bourbon dynasty of France and the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty of Austria. Unfortunately for the Austrian Emperor Joseph II, the French court was unwilling to support him because they were already supporting the American revolutionaries in North America and the idea of an alliance with Austria had been unpopular in France since the end of the Seven Years&#x27; War. Frederick ended up as a beneficiary of the American Revolutionary War, as Austria was left more or less isolated.

Saxony and Russia, both of which had been Austria&#x27;s allies in the Seven Years&#x27; War, were now allied with Prussia. Although Frederick was weary of war in his old age, he was determined not to allow Austrian dominance in German affairs. Frederick and Prince Henry marched the Prussian army into Bohemia to confront Joseph&#x27;s army, but the two forces ultimately descended into a stalemate, largely living off the land and skirmishing. Frederick&#x27;s longtime rival Maria Theresa, who was Joseph&#x27;s mother and his co-ruler, did not want a new war with Prussia, and secretly sent messengers to Frederick to discuss peace negotiations. Finally, Catherine II of Russia threatened to enter the war on Frederick&#x27;s side if peace was not negotiated, and Joseph reluctantly dropped his claim to Bavaria. When Joseph tried the scheme again in 1784, Frederick created the (League of Princes), allowing himself to be seen as a defender of German liberties. To stop Joseph II&#x27;s attempts to acquire Bavaria, Frederick enlisted the help of the Electors of Hanover and Saxony along with several other minor German princes. Perhaps even more significantly, Frederick benefited from the defection of the senior prelate of the German Church, the Archbishop of Mainz, who was also the arch-chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire, which further strengthened Frederick and Prussia&#x27;s standing amid the German states.

== Policies ==
=== Administrative modernisation ===

In his earliest published work, the &quot;Anti-Machiavel&quot;, and his later (&quot;Political Testament&quot;), Frederick wrote that the sovereign was the first servant of the state. Frederick helped transform Prussia from a European backwater to an economically strong and politically reformed state. He protected his industries with high tariffs and minimal restrictions on domestic trade. He increased the freedom of speech in press and literature, abolished most uses of judicial torture, and limited which crimes could be punished by death. Working with his Grand Chancellor Samuel von Cocceji, he reformed the judicial system and made it more efficient. He also moved the courts toward greater legal equality of all citizens by removing special courts for special social classes. The reform was completed after Frederick&#x27;s death, resulting in the Prussian Law Code of 1794, which balanced absolutism with human rights and corporate privilege with equality before the law. Reception to the law code was mixed as it was often viewed as contradictory.

Frederick strove to put Prussia&#x27;s fiscal system in order. In January 1750, Johann Philipp Graumann was appointed as Frederick&#x27;s confidential adviser on finance, military affairs, and royal possessions, and the Director-General of all mint facilities. Graumann&#x27;s currency reform slightly lowered the silver content of Prussian thaler from Cologne mark of silver to , which brought the metal content of the thaler into alignment with its face value, and it standardised the Prussian coinage system. As a result, Prussian coins, which had been leaving the country nearly as fast as they were minted, remained in circulation in Prussia. Frederick estimated that he earned about one million thalers in profits on the seignorage. The coin eventually became universally accepted beyond Prussia and helped increase industry and trade. A gold coin, the Friedrich d&#x27;or, was also minted to oust the Dutch ducat from the Baltic trade. However, the fixed ratio between gold and silver led to the gold coins being perceived as more valuable, which caused them to leave circulation in Prussia. Unable to meet Frederick&#x27;s expectations for profit, Graumann was removed in 1754.

Although Frederick&#x27;s debasement of the coinage to fund the Seven Years&#x27; War left the Prussian monetary system in disarray, the Mint Edict of May 1763 brought it back to stability by fixing rates at which depreciated coins would be accepted and requiring tax payments in currency of prewar value. This resulted in a shortage of ready money, but Frederick controlled prices by releasing the grain stocks he held in reserve for military campaigns. Many other rulers soon followed the steps of Frederick in reforming their own currencies. The functionality and stability of the reform made the Prussian monetary system the standard in Northern Germany.

Around 1751, Frederick founded the Emden Company to promote trade with China. He introduced the lottery, fire insurance, and a giro discount and credit bank to stabilise the economy. One of Frederick&#x27;s achievements after the Seven Years&#x27; War included the control of grain prices, whereby government storehouses would enable the civilian population to survive in needy regions, where the harvest was poor. He commissioned Johann Ernst Gotzkowsky to promote the trade and – to take on the competition with France – put a silk factory where 1,500 people found employment. Frederick followed Gotzkowsky&#x27;s recommendations in the field of toll levies and import restrictions. When Gotzkowsky asked for a deferral during the Amsterdam banking crisis of 1763, Frederick took over his porcelain factory, now known as KPM.

Frederick modernised the Prussian civil service and promoted religious tolerance throughout his realm to attract more settlers in East Prussia. With the help of French experts, he organised a system of indirect taxation, which provided the state with more revenue than direct taxation; though French officials administering it may have pocketed some of the profit. He established new regulations for tax officials to reduce graft. In 1781, Frederick made coffee a royal monopoly and employed disabled soldiers, the coffee sniffers, to spy on citizens illegally roasting coffee, much to the annoyance of the general population.

Though Frederick started many reforms during his reign, his ability to see them to fulfillment was not as disciplined or thorough as his military successes.

=== Religion ===
In contrast to his devoutly Calvinist father, Frederick was a religious sceptic, and has been described as a deist. Frederick was pragmatic about religious faith. Three times during his life, he presented his own confession of Christian faith: during his imprisonment after Katte&#x27;s execution in 1730, after his conquest of Silesia in 1741, and just before the start of the Seven Years&#x27; War in 1756. In each case, these confessions also served personal or political goals.

He tolerated all faiths in his realm, but Protestantism remained the favoured religion, and Catholics were not chosen for higher state positions. Frederick wanted development throughout the country, adapted to the needs of each region. He was interested in attracting a diversity of skills, whether from Jesuit teachers, Huguenot citizens, or Jewish merchants and bankers. Frederick retained Jesuits as teachers in Silesia, Warmia, and the Netze District, recognising their educational activities as an asset for the nation. He continued to support them after their suppression by Pope Clement XIV. He befriended the Roman Catholic Prince-Bishop of Warmia, Ignacy Krasicki, whom he asked to consecrate St. Hedwig&#x27;s Cathedral in 1773. He accepted countless Protestant weavers from Bohemia, who were fleeing from the devoutly Catholic rule of Maria Theresa, granting them freedom from taxes and military service. Constantly looking for new colonists, he encouraged immigration by repeatedly emphasising that nationality and religion were of no concern to him. This policy allowed Prussia&#x27;s population to recover very quickly from its considerable losses during Frederick&#x27;s three wars.

Though Frederick was known to be more tolerant of Jews and Roman Catholics than many neighbouring German states, his practical-minded tolerance was not fully unprejudiced. Frederick wrote in his :

We have too many Jews in the towns. They are needed on the Polish border because in these areas Hebrews alone perform trade. As soon as you get away from the frontier, the Jews become a disadvantage, they form cliques, they deal in contraband and get up to all manner of rascally tricks which are detrimental to Christian burghers and merchants. I have never persecuted anyone from this or any other sect; I think, however, it would be prudent to pay attention, so that their numbers do not increase.

Frederick was less tolerant of Catholicism in his occupied territories. In Silesia, he disregarded canon law to install clergy who were loyal to him. In Polish Prussia, he confiscated the Roman Catholic Church&#x27;s goods and property, making clergy dependent on the government for their pay and defining how they were to perform their duties.

Like many leading Enlightenment figures, Frederick was a Freemason, having joined during a trip to Brunswick in 1738. His membership legitimised the group&#x27;s presence in Prussia and protected it against charges of subversion. In 1786, he became the First Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of the 33rd Degree; his double-headed eagle emblem was used for 32nd and 33rd degree Masons following the adoption of seven additional degrees to the Masonic Rite.

Frederick&#x27;s religious views resulted in his condemnation by the anti-revolutionary French Jesuit, Augustin Barruel. In his 1797 book, (&quot;Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism&quot;), Barruel described an influential conspiracy theory that accused King Frederick of taking part in a plot which led to the outbreak of the French Revolution and having been the secret &quot;protector and adviser&quot; of fellow-conspirators Voltaire, Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert, and Denis Diderot, who all sought &quot;to destroy Christianity&quot; and foment &quot;rebellion against Kings and Monarchs&quot;.

=== Environment and agriculture ===

Frederick was keenly interested in land use, especially draining swamps and opening new farmland for colonisers to increase the kingdom&#x27;s food supply. He called it (peopling policy). About 1,200 new villages were founded in his reign. He told Voltaire, &quot;Whoever improves the soil, cultivates land lying waste and drains swamps, is making conquests from barbarism&quot;. Using improved technology enabled him to create new farmland through a massive drainage programme in the country&#x27;s Oderbruch marshland. This programme created roughly of new farmland, but eliminated vast swaths of natural habitat, destroyed the region&#x27;s biodiversity, and displaced numerous native plant and animal communities. Frederick saw this project as the &quot;taming&quot; and &quot;conquering&quot; of nature, considering uncultivated land &quot;useless&quot;, an attitude that reflected his enlightenment era, rationalist sensibilities. He presided over the construction of canals for bringing crops to market, and introduced new crops, especially the potato and the turnip, to the country. For this, he was sometimes called &quot;Der Kartoffelkönig&quot; (the Potato King).

Frederick&#x27;s potato campaign demonstrated an enlightenment view of promoting scientific agriculture and challenging tradition for the benefit of the populace.

Frederick&#x27;s interest in land reclamation may have resulted from his upbringing. As a child, his father, Frederick William I, made young Frederick work in the region&#x27;s provinces, teaching the boy about the area&#x27;s agriculture and geography. This created an interest in cultivation and development that the boy retained when he became ruler.

Frederick founded the first veterinary school in Prussia. Unusually for the time and his aristocratic background, he criticised hunting as cruel, rough and uneducated. When someone once asked Frederick why he did not wear spurs on horseback, he replied, &quot;Try sticking a fork into your naked stomach, and you will soon see why.&quot; He loved dogs and his horse and wanted to be buried with his greyhounds. In 1752, he wrote to his sister Wilhelmine that people indifferent to loyal animals would not be devoted to their human comrades. He was also close to nature and issued decrees to protect plants.

=== Arts and education ===
Frederick was a patron of music. The court musicians he supported included C. P. E. Bach, Carl Heinrich Graun and Franz Benda. A meeting with Johann Sebastian Bach in 1747 in Potsdam led to Bach&#x27;s writing &quot;The Musical Offering&quot;. He was a talented musician and composer in his own right, playing the transverse flute, and composing 121 sonatas for flute and continuo, four concertos for flute and strings, four sinfonias, three military marches and seven arias. Additionally, the &quot;Hohenfriedberger Marsch&quot; was allegedly written by Frederick to commemorate his victory in the Battle of Hohenfriedberg. His flute sonatas were often composed in collaboration with Johann Joachim Quantz, who was Frederick&#x27;s occasional music tutor in his youth and joined his court as composer and flute maker in 1741. Frederick&#x27;s flute sonatas are written in the Baroque style in which flute plays the melody, sometimes imitating operatic vocal styles like the aria and recitative, while the accompaniment was usually played by just one instrument per part to highlight the delicate sound of the flute.

Frederick wrote sketches, outlines and libretti for opera that were included as part of the repertoire for the Berlin Opera House. These works, which were often completed in collaboration with Graun, included the operas &quot;Coriolano&quot; (1749), &quot;Silla&quot; (1753), &quot;Montezuma&quot; (1755), and &quot;Il tempio d&#x27;Amore&quot; (1756). Frederick saw opera as playing an important role in imparting enlightenment philosophy, using it to critique superstition and the Pietism that still held sway in Prussia. He attempted to broaden access to opera by making admission to it free.

Frederick also wrote philosophical works, publishing some of his writings under the title of &quot;The Works of a Sans-Souci Philosopher&quot;. Frederick corresponded with key French Enlightenment figures, including Voltaire, who at one point declared Frederick to be a philosopher-king, and the Marquis d&#x27;Argens, whom he appointed as Royal Chamberlain in 1742 and later as the Director of the Prussian Academy of Arts and Berlin State Opera. His openness to philosophy had its limits. He did not admire the &quot;encyclopédistes&quot; or the French intellectual avant-garde of his time, though he did shelter Rousseau from persecution for years. Once he ascended the Prussian throne, he found it increasingly difficult to apply the philosophical ideas of his youth to his role as king.

Like many European rulers of the time who were influenced by the prestige of Louis XIV of France and his court, Frederick adopted French tastes and manners, though in Frederick&#x27;s case, the extent of his Francophile tendencies might have been a reaction to the austerity of the family environment created by his father, who had a deep aversion for France and promoted an austere culture. He was educated by French tutors, and almost all the books in his library were written in French. French was Frederick&#x27;s preferred language for speaking and writing, though he had to rely on proofreaders to correct his difficulties with spelling.

Though Frederick used German as his working language with his administration and with the army, he claimed to have never learned it properly and never fully mastered speaking or writing it. He disliked the German language, thinking it inharmonious and awkward. In the essay &quot;De la littérature allemande&quot; (On German Literature, 1780), Frederick commented that German authors &quot;pile parenthesis upon parenthesis, and often you find only at the end of an entire page the verb on which depends the meaning of the whole sentence&quot;. He considered the German culture of his time, particularly literature and theatre, to be inferior to that of France, believing that it had been hindered by the devastation of the Thirty Years&#x27; War. He suggested that it could eventually equal its rivals, but this would require a complete codification of the German language, the emergence of talented German authors and extensive patronage of the arts by Germanic rulers, which he believed would take a century or more. Frederick&#x27;s love of French culture was not without limits: he disapproved of the luxury and extravagance of the French royal court, and ridiculed German princes, especially Augustus III, who imitated French sumptuousness. His own court remained quite Spartan, frugal and small and restricted to a limited circle of close friends, similar to his father&#x27;s court, though Frederick and his friends were far more culturally inclined.

Despite his distaste for the German language, Frederick sponsored the (Royal German Society), founded in 1741, the aim of which was to promote and develop the German language. He allowed the association to be titled &quot;royal&quot; and have its seat at the Königsberg Castle, but he does not seem to have taken much interest in its work. Frederick also promoted the use of German instead of Latin in law, as in the legal document (&quot;Project of the Frederician Body of Laws&quot;), which was written in German with the aim of being clear and easily understandable. It was under his reign that Berlin became an important centre of German enlightenment.

==== Architecture and the fine arts ====

Frederick had many famous buildings constructed in his capital, Berlin, most of which still stand today, such as the Berlin State Opera, the Royal Library (today the State Library Berlin), St. Hedwig&#x27;s Cathedral, and Prince Henry&#x27;s Palace (now the site of Humboldt University). A number of the buildings, including the Berlin State Opera House, a wing of Schloss Charlottenburg, and the renovation of Rheinsburg during Frederick&#x27;s residence were built in a unique Rococo style that Frederick developed in collaboration with Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff. This style became known as Frederician Rococo and is epitomised by Frederick&#x27;s summer palace, Sanssouci (French for &quot;carefree&quot; or &quot;without worry&quot;), his primary residence and private refuge.

As a great patron of the arts, Frederick was a collector of paintings and ancient sculptures; his favourite artist was Jean-Antoine Watteau. His sense of aesthetics can be seen in the picture gallery at Sanssouci, which presents architecture, painting, sculpture and the decorative arts as a unified whole. The gilded stucco decorations of the ceilings were created by Johann Michael Merck and Carl Joseph Sartori. 17th-century Flemish and Dutch paintings filled the western wing and the gallery&#x27;s central building, while Italian paintings from the High Renaissance and Baroque were exhibited in the eastern wing. Sculptures were arranged symmetrically or in rows in relation to the architecture.

==== Science and the Berlin Academy ====
When Frederick ascended the throne in 1740, he reinstituted the Prussian Academy of Sciences (Berlin Academy), which his father had closed down as an economy measure. Frederick&#x27;s goal was to make Berlin a European cultural centre that rivalled London and Paris. He invited intellectuals from across Europe to join the academy, made French the official language and made speculative philosophy the most important topic of study. The membership was strong in mathematics and philosophy and included Immanuel Kant, D&#x27;Alembert, Pierre Louis de Maupertuis, and Étienne de Condillac. However the academy was in a crisis for two decades at mid-century, due in part to scandals and internal rivalries such as the debates between Newtonianism and Leibnizian views, and the personality conflict between Voltaire and Maupertuis. At a higher level Maupertuis, director of the Berlin Academy from 1746 to 1759 and a monarchist, argued that the action of individuals was shaped by the character of the institution that contained them, and they worked for the glory of the state. By contrast, d&#x27;Alembert took a republican approach and emphasised the international Republic of Letters as the vehicle for scientific advance. By 1789, the academy had gained international repute while making major contributions to German culture and thought. For example, the mathematicians he recruited for the Berlin Academy – including Leonhard Euler, Joseph-Louis Lagrange, Johann Heinrich Lambert, and Johann Castillon – made it a world-class centre for mathematical research. Other intellectuals attracted to the philosopher&#x27;s kingdom were Francesco Algarotti, d&#x27;Argens, and Julien Offray de La Mettrie.

== Military theory ==

Contrary to his father&#x27;s fears, Frederick became a capable military commander. With the exception of his first battlefield experience at the Battle of Mollwitz, Frederick proved himself courageous in battle. He frequently led his military forces personally and had multiple horses shot from under him during battle. During his reign he commanded the Prussian Army at sixteen major battles and various sieges, skirmishes and other actions, ultimately obtaining almost all his political objectives. He is often admired for his tactical skills, especially his use of the oblique order of battle, an attack focused on one flank of the opposing line, allowing a local advantage even if his forces were outnumbered overall. Even more important were his operational successes, especially the use of interior lines to prevent the unification of numerically superior opposing armies and defend the Prussian core territory.

Napoleon Bonaparte saw the Prussian king as a military commander of the first rank; after Napoleon&#x27;s victory over the Fourth Coalition in 1807, he visited Frederick&#x27;s tomb in Potsdam and remarked to his officers, &quot;Gentlemen, if this man were still alive I would not be here&quot;. Napoleon frequently &quot;pored through Frederick&#x27;s campaign narratives and had a statuette of him placed in his personal cabinet&quot;.

Frederick&#x27;s most notable military victories on the battlefield were the Battle of Hohenfriedberg, a tactical victory, fought during the War of Austrian Succession in June 1745; the Battle of Rossbach, where Frederick defeated a combined Franco-Austrian army of 41,000 with only 21,000 soldiers (10,000 dead for the Franco-Austrian side with only 550 casualties for Prussia); and the Battle of Leuthen, in which Frederick&#x27;s 39,000 troops inflicted 22,000 casualties, including 12,000 prisoners, on Charles of Lorraine&#x27;s Austrian force of 65,000.

Frederick believed that creating alliances was necessary, as Prussia did not have the resources of nations like France or Austria. Though his reign was regularly involved in war, he did not advocate for protracted warfare. He stated that for Prussia, wars should be short and quick: long wars would destroy the army&#x27;s discipline, depopulate the country, and exhaust its resources.

Frederick was an influential military theorist whose analysis emerged from his extensive personal battlefield experience and covered issues of strategy, tactics, mobility and logistics. Emperor Joseph II wrote, &quot;When the King of Prussia speaks on problems connected with the art of war, which he has studied intensively and on which he has read every conceivable book, then everything is taut, solid and uncommonly instructive. There are no circumlocutions, he gives factual and historical proof of the assertions he makes, for he is well versed in history.&quot;

Robert Citino describes Frederick&#x27;s strategic approach:

In war ... he usually saw one path to victory, and that was fixing the enemy army in place, maneuvering near or even around it to give himself a favorable position for the attack, and then smashing it with an overwhelming blow from an unexpected direction. He was the most aggressive field commander of the century, perhaps of all time, and one who constantly pushed the limits of the possible.

The historian Dennis Showalter argues: &quot;The King was also more consistently willing than any of his contemporaries to seek decision through offensive operations.&quot; These offensive operations were not acts of blind aggression; Frederick considered foresight to be among the most important attributes when fighting.

Much of the structure of the modern German General Staff owed its existence and design to Frederick, along with the accompanying autonomy given to commanders in the field. According to Citino, &quot;When later generations of Prussian-German staff officers looked back to the age of Frederick, they saw a commander who repeatedly, even joyfully, risked everything on a single day&#x27;s battle – his army, his kingdom, often his very life.&quot;. As far as Frederick was concerned, there were two major battlefield considerations—speed of march and speed of fire. Confident in the performance of men he selected for command when compared to those of his enemy, Frederick once quipped that a general considered audacious in another country would be ordinary in Prussia because Prussian generals will dare anything that is possible for men to execute.

After the Seven Years&#x27; War, the Prussian military acquired a formidable reputation across Europe. Esteemed for efficiency and success in battle, it became a model emulated by other European powers, particularly Russia and France. Frederick continues to be held in high regard as a military theorist and has been described as representing the embodiment of the art of war.

== Later years and death ==
Near the end of his life, Frederick grew increasingly solitary. His circle of close friends at Sanssouci gradually died off with few replacements, and Frederick became increasingly critical and arbitrary, to the frustration of the civil service and officer corps. Frederick was immensely popular among the Prussian people because of his enlightened reforms and military glory; the citizens of Berlin always cheered him when he returned from administrative or military reviews. He was nicknamed (The Old Fritz) by the Prussian people, and this name became part of his legacy. Frederick derived little pleasure from his popularity, preferring instead the company of his pet Italian greyhounds, whom he referred to as his &quot;marquises de Pompadour&quot; as a jibe at the French royal mistress. Even in his late 60s and early 70s when he was increasingly crippled by asthma, gout and other ailments, he rose before dawn, drank six to eight cups of coffee a day, &quot;laced with mustard and peppercorns&quot;, and attended to state business with characteristic tenacity.

On the morning of 17 August 1786, Frederick died in an armchair in his study at Sanssouci, aged 74. He left instructions that he should be buried next to his greyhounds on the vineyard terrace of Sanssouci. His nephew and successor Frederick William II instead ordered he be entombed next to his father in the Potsdam Garrison Church. Near the end of World War II, German dictator Adolf Hitler ordered Frederick&#x27;s coffin to be hidden in a salt mine to protect it from destruction. The United States Army relocated the remains to Marburg in 1946; in 1953, the coffins of Frederick and his father were moved to Burg Hohenzollern.

On the 205th anniversary of his death, on 17 August 1991, Frederick&#x27;s coffin lay in state in the court of honour at Sanssouci, covered by a Prussian flag and escorted by a guard of honour. After nightfall, Frederick&#x27;s body was interred in the vineyard terrace—in the crypt he had built there—without pomp, in accordance with his will. Visitors to his grave often place potatoes on the gravestone in honour of his role in promoting the potato in Prussia.

== Historiography and legacy ==
Frederick&#x27;s legacy has been subject to a wide variety of interpretations. For instance, Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s &quot;History of Frederick the Great&quot; (8 vol. 1858–1865) emphasised the power of one great &quot;hero&quot;, in this case Frederick, to shape history. In German memory, Frederick became a great national icon and many Germans said he was the greatest monarch in modern history. These claims particularly were popular in the 19th century. For example, German historians often made him the romantic model of a glorified warrior, praising his leadership, administrative efficiency, devotion to duty and success in building up Prussia to a leading role in Europe. Frederick&#x27;s popularity as a heroic figure remained high in Germany even after World War I.

Between 1933 and 1945, the Nazis glorified Frederick as a precursor to Adolf Hitler. In an attempt to legitimise the Nazi regime, Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels commissioned artists to render fanciful images of Frederick, Bismarck, and Hitler together to create a sense of a historical continuum amongst them. Throughout World War II, Hitler often compared himself to Frederick, and he kept a copy of Anton Graff&#x27;s portrait of Frederick with him to the end in the &quot;Führerbunker&quot; in Berlin.

After the war, the role of Prussia in German history was minimised and Frederick&#x27;s reputation was downgraded in both East and West Germany, partly due to the Nazis&#x27; fascination with him and his connection with Prussian militarism. During the second half of the 20th century, political attitudes towards Frederick&#x27;s image were ambivalent, particularly in communist East Germany. For example, immediately after World War II images of Prussia were removed from public spaces, including Frederick&#x27;s equestrian statue on the Unter den Linden, but in 1980 his statue was re-erected. Since the end of the Cold War, Frederick&#x27;s reputation has continued to grow in reunified Germany.

In the 21st century, the view of Frederick as a capable and effective leader remains strong among military historians. However, the originality of his achievements is debated, as many were based on developments already underway. He has been studied as a model of servant leadership in management research and is held in high regard for his patronage of the arts. He has been seen as an exemplar of enlightened absolutism, though this label has been questioned in the 21st century as many enlightenment principles directly contrast with his military reputation.

== Bibliography ==
Selected works in English
* 
* 
* 

Collections
* (31 vols.)
* (46 vols.)

Editions of music

== See also ==
* André Noël (chef)

== References ==
=== Informational notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
==== Books ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==== Journal articles ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
==== Dissertations ====
* 
==== Online ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==== Audiovisual ====


==== Primary sources ====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* 
* &quot;Digital edition of Frederick the Great&#x27;s Works&quot; at the University of Trier 
* Free scores at the Mutopia Project
* &quot;History of Frederick II of Prussia&quot; by Thomas Carlyle at Project Gutenberg
* and Frederick the Great&quot; by Lytton Strachey at the Internet Archive
* Reading of a letter from Frederick the Great to the Vice Chancellor of Kiev Lord Tripolski, reassuring him of his good intentions towards Poland in July 1745; in Latin with English subtitles.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="0" end="12" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="66" end="73" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="125" end="137" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240735" start="159" end="174" title="King in Prussia" label="King in Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770786" start="206" end="221" title="King of Prussia" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="243" end="256" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="266" end="296" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q699849" start="377" end="390" title="Silesian Wars" label="Silesian wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="414" end="427" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="433" end="458" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="490" end="507" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="630" end="649" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="677" end="686" title="Frederick the Great" label="Old Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105013" start="828" end="858" title="Frederick William I of Prussia" label="Frederick William I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="932" end="940" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="953" end="960" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="1209" end="1231" title="enlightened absolutism" label="enlightened absolutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1629" end="1642" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1714" end="1718" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1723" end="1732" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1934" end="1944" title="Homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q106679655" start="1950" end="1963" title="Sexuality of Frederick the Great" label="his sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="2059" end="2079" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II"/>
<link wikidata="Q151330" start="2122" end="2131" title="Sanssouci" label="Sanssouci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="2135" end="2142" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2450" end="2461" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2471" end="2476" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2528" end="2540" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2626" end="2638" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="2974" end="2983" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q105013" start="3085" end="3113" title="Frederick William I of Prussia" label="Frederick William of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161131" start="3118" end="3144" title="Sophia Dorothea of Hanover" label="Sophia Dorothea of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="3207" end="3220" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q817716" start="3284" end="3308" title="Benjamin Ursinus von Bär" label="Benjamin Ursinus von Bär"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="3367" end="3378" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q237740" start="3655" end="3665" title="Wilhelmine of Bayreuth" label="Wilhelmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q213658" start="3737" end="3753" title="Prince Augustus William of Prussia" label="Augustus William"/>
<link wikidata="Q50993" start="3758" end="3763" title="Prince Henry of Prussia (1726–1802)" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555482" start="3890" end="3908" title="Madame de Rocoulle" label="Madame de Montbail"/>
<link wikidata="Q201622" start="4103" end="4117" title="Potsdam Giants" label="Potsdam Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q157367" start="4253" end="4272" title="Brandenburg-Prussia" label="Brandenburg-Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="4357" end="4391" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George Louis of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="4414" end="4428" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013" start="4843" end="4862" title="Königs Wusterhausen" label="Königs Wusterhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5009" end="5017" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540278" start="5018" end="5027" title="governess" label="governess"/>
<link wikidata="Q901222" start="5032" end="5037" title="Tutoring" label="tutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678151" start="5487" end="5500" title="Jacques Duhan de Jandun" label="Jacques Duhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5552" end="5557" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5562" end="5567" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="5668" end="5677" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="5694" end="5702" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523483" start="5767" end="5772" title="Unconditional election" label="elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="5909" end="5923" title="predestination" label="predestination"/>
<link wikidata="Q855855" start="6130" end="6134" title="Page (servant)" label="page"/>
<link wikidata="Q895641" start="6136" end="6166" title="Peter Karl Christoph von Keith" label="Peter Karl Christoph von Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="6835" end="6855" title="Arranged marriage" label="arrange the marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="6910" end="6924" title="George II of Great Britain" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q62393" start="6941" end="6947" title="Princess Amelia of Great Britain" label="Amelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="6952" end="6961" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="6967" end="6980" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="7022" end="7035" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215148" start="7055" end="7066" title="Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff" label="Seckendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="7072" end="7080" title="Habsburg Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="7095" end="7101" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72012" start="7158" end="7166" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Grumbkow" label="Grumbkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7199" end="7205" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q836937" start="7608" end="7614" title="Duchy of Jülich" label="Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="7615" end="7619" title="Berg (state)" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63509" start="7777" end="7799" title="Hans Hermann von Katte" label="Hans Hermann von Katte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="8080" end="8088" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="8096" end="8124" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electorate of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156837" start="8410" end="8417" title="Küstrin" label="Küstrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="8532" end="8539" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="8591" end="8600" title="execution" label="execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="8774" end="8787" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="8795" end="8812" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="8882" end="8891" title="decapitation" label="beheading"/>
<link wikidata="Q213797" start="9402" end="9411" title="Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q34762" start="9415" end="9423" title="Principality of Bayreuth" label="Bayreuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60262" start="9586" end="9625" title="Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Bevern" label="Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Bevern"/>
<link wikidata="Q159651" start="9730" end="9763" title="Anna Leopoldovna" label="Elisabeth of Mecklenburg-Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160165" start="9778" end="9800" title="Anna of Russia" label="Empress Anna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="9840" end="9862" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="9900" end="9924" title="Maria Theresa of Austria" label="Maria Theresa of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60262" start="10067" end="10086" title="Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel-Bevern" label="Elisabeth Christine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="10126" end="10135" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q530930" start="10545" end="10562" title="Kronprinzenpalais" label="Kronprinzenpalais"/>
<link wikidata="Q681355" start="10816" end="10834" title="Schönhausen Palace" label="Schönhausen Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="10857" end="10878" title="Berliner Stadtschloss" label="Berliner Stadtschloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="10929" end="10936" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="11458" end="11471" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q581994" start="11529" end="11534" title="Nauen" label="Nauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16085" start="11539" end="11548" title="Neuruppin" label="Neuruppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q520220" start="11606" end="11635" title="Army of the Holy Roman Empire" label="Army of the Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="11647" end="11675" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11752" end="11758" title="Kingdom of France#Dissent and revolution" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="11766" end="11771" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721681" start="11802" end="11815" title="Imperial Army of the Holy Roman Emperor" label="Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="11965" end="11969" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q317840" start="12014" end="12032" title="Schloss Rheinsberg" label="Schloss Rheinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q537268" start="12036" end="12046" title="Rheinsberg" label="Rheinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q554431" start="12310" end="12344" title="Heinrich August de la Motte Fouqué" label="Heinrich August de la Motte Fouqué"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="12485" end="12504" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131719" start="12520" end="12530" title="The Prince" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q577727" start="12645" end="12659" title="Anti-Machiavel" label="Anti-Machiavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="12808" end="12816" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13761" end="13767" title="Russian Empire#Eighteenth Century" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q947485" start="14244" end="14252" title="Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="14518" end="14529" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q641138" start="14673" end="14679" title="Duchy of Cleves" label="Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q700198" start="14681" end="14685" title="County of Mark" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q573290" start="14691" end="14701" title="County of Ravensberg" label="Ravensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="14740" end="14751" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150108" start="14753" end="14769" title="Vorpommern" label="Hither Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q262269" start="14775" end="14792" title="Farther Pomerania" label="Farther Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="14859" end="14875" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="14913" end="14943" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="15111" end="15136" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="15380" end="15388" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="15412" end="15430" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="15555" end="15581" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15703" end="15721" title="Emperor Charles VI" label="Emperor Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="15944" end="15951" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q559181" start="16042" end="16060" title="First Silesian War" label="First Silesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="16085" end="16115" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="16621" end="16631" title="Oder River" label="Oder River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16735" end="16747" title="Augustus III" label="Augustus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="16749" end="16763" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="16779" end="16785" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q663435" start="17074" end="17092" title="Battle of Mollwitz" label="Battle of Mollwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70874" start="17405" end="17418" title="Kurt Christoph Graf von Schwerin" label="Kurt Schwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="17632" end="17639" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="17771" end="17779" title="military doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="17874" end="17895" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Electorate of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="17968" end="17974" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18029" end="18050" title="Treaty of Nymphenburg#League of Nymphenburg" label="League of Nymphenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76736" start="18088" end="18106" title="Charles VII, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q688504" start="18518" end="18537" title="Battle of Chotusitz" label="Battle of Chotusitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700160" start="18865" end="18882" title="Treaty of Breslau" label="Treaty of Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="19008" end="19033" title="Czech Silesia" label="Austrian or Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="19284" end="19291" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233702" start="19322" end="19341" title="Second Silesian War" label="Second Silesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="20286" end="20305" title="Francis of Lorraine" label="Francis of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688448" start="20584" end="20608" title="Battle of Hohenfriedberg" label="Battle of Hohenfriedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q695314" start="20723" end="20737" title="Battle of Soor" label="Battle of Soor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="20768" end="20775" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q61695" start="20905" end="20929" title="Leopold I of Anhalt-Dessau" label="Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q695325" start="20965" end="20986" title="Battle of Kesselsdorf" label="Battle of Kesselsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q700716" start="21164" end="21181" title="Treaty of Dresden" label="Treaty of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q156086" start="21625" end="21650" title="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748)" label="Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763662" start="22190" end="22198" title="Anglo-Prussian Alliance (1756)" label="alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22219" end="22244" title="Diplomatic Revolution#Westminster Convention" label="Convention of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934777" start="22380" end="22401" title="Diplomatic Revolution" label="Diplomatic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="22432" end="22439" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37467350" start="22722" end="22740" title="Third Silesian War" label="Third Silesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="22756" end="22777" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q539707" start="22876" end="22881" title="Siege of Pirna" label="Pirna"/>
<link wikidata="Q694478" start="22988" end="23006" title="Battle of Lobositz" label="Battle of Lobositz"/>
<link wikidata="Q223622" start="23626" end="23642" title="Battle of Prague (1757)" label="Battle of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q127299" start="23815" end="23830" title="Battle of Kolín" label="Battle of Kolín"/>
<link wikidata="Q573972" start="24050" end="24068" title="Battle of Rossbach" label="Battle of Rossbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q313435" start="24102" end="24119" title="Battle of Leuthen" label="Battle of Leuthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="24527" end="24533" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q168651" start="24603" end="24608" title="Landgraviate of Hesse-Kassel" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q830084" start="24610" end="24619" title="Principality of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="24625" end="24632" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q508088" start="24723" end="24739" title="Siege of Olomouc" label="siege to Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q663405" start="24995" end="25013" title="Battle of Zorndorf" label="Battle of Zorndorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q695925" start="25173" end="25192" title="Battle of Hochkirch" label="Battle of Hochkirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170400" start="25577" end="25597" title="Battle of Kunersdorf" label="Battle of Kunersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q695296" start="25919" end="25954" title="Miracle of the House of Brandenburg" label="Miracle of the House of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q72350" start="26153" end="26179" title="Friedrich August von Finck" label="Friedrich August von Finck"/>
<link wikidata="Q699758" start="26195" end="26200" title="Battle of Maxen" label="Maxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q701139" start="26320" end="26338" title="Battle of Liegnitz (1760)" label="Battle of Liegnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q167143" start="26458" end="26472" title="Raid on Berlin" label="raiding Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q688802" start="26641" end="26657" title="Battle of Torgau" label="Battle of Torgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="27210" end="27219" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q72967" start="27386" end="27427" title="Count Karl-Wilhelm Finck von Finckenstein" label="Count Karl-Wilhelm Finck von Finckenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q130752" start="27622" end="27641" title="Elizabeth of Russia" label="Elizabeth of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151789" start="27699" end="27708" title="Peter III of Russia" label="Peter III"/>
<link wikidata="Q695919" start="27754" end="27770" title="Holstein-Gottorp" label="Holstein-Gottorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q698686" start="28613" end="28635" title="Treaty of Hubertusburg" label="Treaty of Hubertusburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="28901" end="28920" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763659" start="29132" end="29157" title="Anglo-Prussian Convention" label="Anglo-Prussian Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346850" start="29515" end="29528" title="Ephraimiten" label="debased coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463475" start="29568" end="29579" title="Münzmeister" label="mintmasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q88308" start="29581" end="29601" title="Veitel Heine Ephraim" label="Veitel Heine Ephraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q72600" start="29603" end="29615" title="Daniel Itzig" label="Daniel Itzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="29676" end="29682" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="30766" end="30780" title="Royal Prussia" label="Polish Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="31760" end="31766" title="thaler" label="thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q326582" start="31909" end="31921" title="Kwidzyn" label="Marienwerder"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="32920" end="32948" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q627527" start="33029" end="33052" title="Danubian Principalities" label="Danubian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="33361" end="33386" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="33711" end="33723" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="33734" end="33746" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="33814" end="33827" title="Vistula River" label="Vistula River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137265" start="34356" end="34369" title="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157548" start="34694" end="34724" title="War of the Bavarian Succession" label="War of the Bavarian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="34788" end="34808" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="34813" end="34820" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="34993" end="35012" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="35150" end="35159" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838107" start="35233" end="35243" title="Franco-American alliance" label="supporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="35248" end="35272" title="American Revolution" label="American revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="35447" end="35473" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="36178" end="36200" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Catherine II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="37481" end="37488" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q63573" start="37577" end="37595" title="Samuel von Cocceji" label="Samuel von Cocceji"/>
<link wikidata="Q647943" start="37855" end="37872" title="General State Laws for the Prussian States" label="Prussian Law Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440435" start="38138" end="38161" title="Johann Philipp Graumann" label="Johann Philipp Graumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="38302" end="38317" title="Mint (facility)" label="mint facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q898043" start="38390" end="38405" title="Prussian thaler" label="Prussian thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q478641" start="38785" end="38795" title="seignorage" label="seignorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q455052" start="38917" end="38936" title="Friedrich d&amp;#x27;or" label="Friedrich d&amp;#x27;or"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38966" end="38977" title="Ducat#Ducats of Netherlands" label="Dutch ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q462045" start="39940" end="39953" title="Emden Company" label="Emden Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q189409" start="40001" end="40008" title="lottery" label="lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868302" start="40010" end="40024" title="fire insurance" label="fire insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q79375" start="40032" end="40036" title="Giro (banking)" label="giro"/>
<link wikidata="Q214055" start="40336" end="40359" title="Johann Ernst Gotzkowsky" label="Johann Ernst Gotzkowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="40434" end="40438" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q885383" start="40618" end="40626" title="deferral" label="deferral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970819" start="40638" end="40670" title="Amsterdam banking crisis of 1763" label="Amsterdam banking crisis of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="40696" end="40705" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q516134" start="40728" end="40731" title="Royal Porcelain Factory, Berlin" label="KPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771708" start="40936" end="40953" title="indirect taxation" label="indirect taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721051" start="41249" end="41264" title="coffee sniffers" label="coffee sniffers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359185" start="41599" end="41616" title="Religious skepticism" label="religious sceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="41646" end="41651" title="Deism" label="deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="42412" end="42419" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="42444" end="42450" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q538187" start="42460" end="42474" title="Netze District" label="Netze District"/>
<link wikidata="Q131587" start="42601" end="42617" title="Pope Clement XIV" label="Pope Clement XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q380545" start="42677" end="42692" title="Ignacy Krasicki" label="Ignacy Krasicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="44018" end="44027" title="Canon law of the Catholic Church" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="44322" end="44331" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q622964" start="44597" end="44616" title="double-headed eagle" label="double-headed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q721700" start="44841" end="44857" title="Augustin Barruel" label="Augustin Barruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909640" start="44884" end="44930" title="Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism" label="Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="44972" end="44989" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="45076" end="45093" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="45222" end="45235" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="45443" end="45451" title="drainage" label="draining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="45475" end="45483" title="farmland" label="farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034420" start="45659" end="45676" title="soil quality" label="improves the soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216979" start="45689" end="45705" title="Barren vegetation" label="land lying waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q26577" start="45887" end="45896" title="Oderbruch" label="Oderbruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="45897" end="45902" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="45960" end="45970" title="habitat loss" label="eliminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="45986" end="46001" title="natural habitat" label="natural habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="46031" end="46043" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="46297" end="46308" title="rationalist" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="46439" end="46445" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916957" start="46454" end="46460" title="turnip" label="turnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="46756" end="46772" title="land reclamation" label="land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="47009" end="47020" title="agriculture" label="cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049213" start="47110" end="47127" title="veterinary school" label="veterinary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="47210" end="47217" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q740732" start="47304" end="47308" title="spur" label="spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q76428" start="47792" end="47805" title="Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach" label="C. P. E. Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q161208" start="47807" end="47826" title="Carl Heinrich Graun" label="Carl Heinrich Graun"/>
<link wikidata="Q161328" start="47831" end="47842" title="Franz Benda" label="Franz Benda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="47859" end="47880" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q693675" start="47933" end="47953" title="The Musical Offering" label="The Musical Offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q209554" start="48031" end="48047" title="Western concert flute" label="transverse flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q131269" start="48067" end="48073" title="sonata" label="sonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="48089" end="48097" title="Basso continuo" label="continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9748" start="48104" end="48112" title="concerto" label="concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090674" start="48128" end="48135" title="String orchestra" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q377141" start="48142" end="48150" title="sinfonia" label="sinfonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211025" start="48159" end="48175" title="March (music)" label="military marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q145533" start="48217" end="48240" title="Hohenfriedberger Marsch" label="Hohenfriedberger Marsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q77212" start="48402" end="48423" title="Johann Joachim Quantz" label="Johann Joachim Quantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="48594" end="48607" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque style"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="48692" end="48696" title="aria" label="aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="48701" end="48711" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q485135" start="49111" end="49132" title="Montezuma (Graun)" label="&amp;quot;Montezuma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="49318" end="49325" title="Pietism" label="Pietism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="49615" end="49628" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088191" start="49702" end="49718" title="Philosopher king" label="philosopher-king"/>
<link wikidata="Q705830" start="49728" end="49749" title="Jean-Baptiste de Boyer, Marquis d&amp;#x27;Argens" label="Marquis d&amp;#x27;Argens"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="49772" end="49789" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="Royal Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q514802" start="49831" end="49855" title="Prussian Academy of Arts" label="Prussian Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q312576" start="49860" end="49878" title="Berlin State Opera" label="Berlin State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q447" start="49945" end="49972" title="Encyclopédie" label="&amp;quot;encyclopédistes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="50047" end="50055" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="50302" end="50321" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445368" start="50433" end="50444" title="Francophile" label="Francophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="51594" end="51616" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q571409" start="52589" end="52606" title="Königsberg Castle" label="Königsberg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170109" start="53196" end="53216" title="Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin" label="State Library Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="53296" end="53315" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q154996" start="53395" end="53417" title="Schloss Charlottenburg" label="Schloss Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="53509" end="53515" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65901" start="53569" end="53602" title="Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff" label="Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="53631" end="53649" title="Frederician Rococo" label="Frederician Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183221" start="53939" end="53959" title="Jean-Antoine Watteau" label="Jean-Antoine Watteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="54628" end="54656" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="55066" end="55079" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q164374" start="55098" end="55124" title="Pierre Louis de Maupertuis" label="Pierre Louis de Maupertuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272119" start="55130" end="55150" title="Étienne de Condillac" label="Étienne de Condillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q449359" start="55728" end="55747" title="Republic of Letters" label="Republic of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="55984" end="55998" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="56000" end="56021" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="56023" end="56046" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371138" start="56052" end="56068" title="Giovanni Salvemini" label="Johann Castillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q439081" start="56196" end="56215" title="Francesco Algarotti" label="Francesco Algarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068" start="56236" end="56263" title="Julien Offray de La Mettrie" label="Julien Offray de La Mettrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="56819" end="56827" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q917047" start="56862" end="56875" title="oblique order" label="oblique order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884056" start="57086" end="57100" title="interior lines" label="interior lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="57209" end="57227" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="57332" end="57348" title="Fourth Coalition" label="Fourth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q688448" start="57725" end="57749" title="Battle of Hohenfriedberg" label="Battle of Hohenfriedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="57789" end="57815" title="War of Austrian Succession" label="War of Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q573972" start="57834" end="57852" title="Battle of Rossbach" label="Battle of Rossbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q313435" start="58036" end="58053" title="Battle of Leuthen" label="Battle of Leuthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347107" start="59166" end="59179" title="Robert M. Citino" label="Robert Citino"/>
<link wikidata="Q10572199" start="59984" end="60004" title="German General Staff" label="German General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q38503" start="61876" end="61893" title="Italian greyhound" label="Italian greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q188965" start="61929" end="61951" title="Madame de Pompadour" label="marquises de Pompadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="62070" end="62076" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="62078" end="62082" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q314088" start="62585" end="62608" title="Garrison Church (Potsdam)" label="Potsdam Garrison Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="62626" end="62638" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="62656" end="62668" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="62765" end="62783" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869" start="62809" end="62816" title="Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156457" start="62889" end="62906" title="Hohenzollern Castle" label="Burg Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="63499" end="63513" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864624" start="63527" end="63557" title="History of Friedrich II. of Prussia, Called Frederick the Great" label="History of Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="64168" end="64179" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="64332" end="64347" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="64409" end="64417" title="Otto Von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q310213" start="64588" end="64599" title="Anton Graff" label="Anton Graff"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="64662" end="64674" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="64815" end="64819" title="East Germany" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="64824" end="64836" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q881611" start="65191" end="65225" title="Equestrian statue of Frederick the Great" label="Frederick&amp;#x27;s equestrian statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q160899" start="65233" end="65249" title="Unter den Linden" label="Unter den Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="65311" end="65319" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912387" start="65657" end="65675" title="servant leadership" label="servant leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221840" start="66086" end="66103" title="André Noël (chef)" label="André Noël (chef)"/>
<link wikidata="Q702486" start="66640" end="66659" title="University of Trier" label="University of Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542831" start="66682" end="66697" title="Mutopia Project" label="Mutopia Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="66768" end="66785" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="66844" end="66860" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66863" end="66882" title=":File:Frederick_the_Great-_Letter_to_a_Polish_Official..webm" label="Reading of a letter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99614" wikidata="Q295830" url="?curid=99614" title="Paul Claudel">
<text>Paul Claudel (; 6 August 1868 – 23 February 1955) was a French poet, dramatist and diplomat, and the younger brother of the sculptor Camille Claudel. He was most famous for his verse dramas, which often convey his devout Catholicism.

==Early life==
He was born in Villeneuve-sur-Fère (Aisne), into a family of farmers and government officials. His father, Louis-Prosper, dealt in mortgages and bank transactions. His mother, the former Louise Cerveaux, came from a Champagne family of Catholic farmers and priests. Having spent his first years in Champagne, he studied at the &quot;lycée&quot; of Bar-le-Duc and at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in 1881, when his parents moved to Paris.

An unbeliever in his teenage years, Claudel experienced a conversion at age 18 on Christmas Day 1886 while listening to a choir sing Vespers in the cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris: &quot;In an instant, my heart was touched, and I believed.&quot; He remained an active Catholic for the rest of his life. In addition, he discovered Arthur Rimbaud&#x27;s book of poetry &quot;Illuminations&quot;. He worked towards &quot;the revelation through poetry, both lyrical and dramatic, of the grand design of creation&quot;.

Claudel studied at the Paris Institute of Political Studies.

==Diplomat==
The young Claudel considered entering a monastery, but instead had a career in the French diplomatic service, in which he served from 1893 to 1936.

Claudel was first vice-consul in New York (April 1893), and later in Boston (December 1893). He was French consul in China during the period 1895 to 1909, with time in Shanghai (June 1895). On a break in 1900, he spent time at Ligugé Abbey, but his proposed entry to the Benedictine Order was postponed. 

Claudel returned to China as vice-consul in Fuzhou (October 1900). He had a further break in France in 1905–6, when he married. He was one of a group of writers enjoying the support and patronage of Philippe Berthelot of the Foreign Ministry, who became a close friend; others were Jean Giraudoux, Paul Morand and Saint-John Perse. Because of his position in the Diplomatic Service, at the beginning of his career Claudel published either anonymously or under a pseudonym, &quot;since permission to publish was needed from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs&quot;.:11 

For that reason, Claudel remained rather obscure as an author to 1909, unwilling to ask permission to publish under his own name because the permission might not be granted.:11 In that year, the founding group of the &quot;Nouvelle Revue Française&quot; (NRF), and in particular his friend André Gide, were keen to recognise his work. Claudel sent them, for the first issue, the poem &quot;Hymne du Sacre-Sacrement&quot;, to fulsome praise from Gide, and it was published under his name. He had not sought permission to publish, and there was a furore in which he was criticised. Attacks based on his religious views were in February also affecting the production of one of his plays.:15–17 Berthelot&#x27;s advice was to ignore the critics.:18 note 42 The affair began a long collaboration of the NRF with Claudel.:12

Claudel also wrote extensively about China, with a definitive version of his &quot;Connaissance de l&#x27;Est&quot; published in 1914 by Georges Crès and Victor Segalen. In his final posting to China, he was consul in Tianjin (1906–1909).

In a series of European postings to the outbreak of World War I, Claudel was in Prague (December 1909), Frankfurt am Main (October 1911), and Hamburg (October 1913). At this period he was interested in the theatre festival at Hellerau, which put on one of his plays, and the ideas of Jacques Copeau.

Claudel was in Rome (1915–1916), &quot;ministre plénipotentiaire&quot; in Rio de Janeiro (1917–1918), Copenhagen (1920), ambassador in Tokyo (1921–1927), Washington, D.C. (1928–1933, Dean of the Diplomatic Corps in 1933) and Brussels (1933–1936). While he served in Brazil during World War I he supervised the continued provision of food supplies from South America to France. His secretaries during the Brazil mission included Darius Milhaud, who wrote incidental music to a number of Claudel&#x27;s plays.
==Later life==

In 1935 Claudel retired to Brangues in Dauphiné, where he had bought the château in 1927. He still spent winters in Paris.

During World War II Claudel made his way to Algeria in 1940, after the Battle of France, and offered to serve Free France. Not having a response to the offer, he returned to Brangues. He supported the Vichy regime, but disagreed with Cardinal Alfred Baudrillart&#x27;s policy of collaboration with Nazi Germany.

Close to home, Paul-Louis Weiller, married to Claudel&#x27;s daughter-in-law&#x27;s sister, was arrested by the Vichy government in October 1940. Claudel went to Vichy to intercede for him, to no avail; Weiller escaped (with Claudel&#x27;s assistance, the authorities suspected) and fled to New York. Claudel wrote in December 1941 to Isaïe Schwartz, expressing his opposition to the Statut des Juifs enacted by the regime. The Vichy authorities responded by having Claudel&#x27;s house searched and keeping him under observation. 

Claudel was elected to the Académie française on 4 April 1946, replacing Louis Gillet. It followed a rejection in 1935, considered somewhat scandalous, when Claude Farrère was preferred. He was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in six different years.

==Work==

Claudel often referred to Stéphane Mallarmé as his teacher. His poetic has been seen as Mallarmé&#x27;s, with the addition of the idea of the world as a revelatory religious text. He rejected traditional prosody, developing the &quot;verset claudelien&quot;, his own form of free verse. It was within the orbit of experimentation by followers of Walt Whitman, impressive for Claudel, of whom Charles Péguy and André Spire were two others working on a form of &quot;verset&quot;. The influence of the Latin Vulgate has been disputed by Jean Grosjean.

The best known of his plays are &quot;Le Partage de Midi&quot; (&quot;The Break of Noon&quot;, 1906), &quot;L&#x27;Annonce faite à Marie&quot; (&quot;The Tidings Brought to Mary&quot;, 1910) focusing on the themes of sacrifice, oblation and sanctification through the tale of a young medieval French peasant woman who contracts leprosy, and &quot;Le Soulier de Satin&quot; (&quot;The Satin Slipper&quot;, 1931). The last is an exploration of human and divine love and longing, set in the Spanish Empire of the siglo de oro. It was staged at the Comédie-Française in 1943. &quot;Jeanne d&#x27;Arc au Bûcher&quot; (&quot;Joan of Arc at the Stake&quot;, 1939) was an oratorio with music by Arthur Honegger. The settings of his plays tended to be romantically distant, medieval France or sixteenth-century Spanish South America. He used scenes of passionate, obsessive human love. The complexity, structure and scale of the plays meant that a positive reception of Claudel&#x27;s drama by audiences was long delayed. His final dramatic work, &quot;L&#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara&quot;, was first produced by Jean Vilar for the Festival d&#x27;Avignon in 1947.

As well as his verse dramas, Claudel also wrote lyric poetry. A major example is the &quot;Cinq Grandes Odes&quot; (Five Great Odes, 1907).
Boštjan Marko Turk&#x27;s doctoral thesis examined the influence of medieval philosophy on Paul Claudel&#x27;s poetic work, particularly &quot;Les Cinq Grandes Odes&quot;. He summarized his findings in the monograph &quot;Paul Claudel et l&#x27;Actualité de l&#x27;être&quot; (2011), which was
recognized by , his doctoral advisor, for its contribution to understanding Claudel&#x27;s work in the French-speaking world.
==Views and reputation==
Claudel was a conservative of the old school, sharing the antisemitism of conservative France. He addressed a poem (&quot;Paroles au Maréchal,&quot; &quot;Words to the Marshal&quot;) after the defeat of France in 1940, commending Marshal Pétain for picking up and salvaging France&#x27;s broken, wounded body. As a Catholic, he could not avoid a sense of satisfaction at the fall of the anti-clerical French Third Republic.

His diaries make clear his consistent contempt for Nazism (condemning it as early as 1930 as &quot;demonic&quot; and &quot;wedded to Satan,&quot; and referring to communism and Nazism as &quot;Gog and Magog&quot;). He wrote an open letter to the World Jewish Conference in 1935, condemning the Nuremberg Laws as &quot;abominable and stupid.&quot; His support for Charles de Gaulle and the Free French forces culminated in his victory ode addressed to de Gaulle when Paris was liberated in 1944.

The British poet W. H. Auden acknowledged the importance of Paul Claudel in his poem &quot;In Memory of W. B. Yeats&quot; (1939). Writing about Yeats, Auden says in lines 52–55 (from the originally published version, then excised by Auden in a later revision):

George Steiner, in &quot;The Death of Tragedy&quot;, called Claudel one of the three &quot;masters of drama&quot; in the 20th century, with Henry de Montherlant and Bertolt Brecht.

==Family==
While in China, Claudel had a long affair with Rosalie Vetch née Ścibor-Rylska (1871–1951), wife of Francis Vetch (1862–1944) and granddaughter of Hamilton Vetch. Claudel knew Francis Vetch through his diplomatic work, and had met Rosalie on a sea voyage out from Marseille to Hong Kong in 1900. She had four children, and was pregnant with Claudel&#x27;s child when the affair ended in February 1905. Francis Vetch and Claudel had caught up with Rosalie at a railway station on the German border in 1905, a meeting at which Rosalie signalled that her relationship with Claudel was over. She married in 1907 Jan Willem Lintner. Louise Marie Agnes Vetch (1905–1996), born in Brussels, was Claudel&#x27;s daughter by Rosalie.

Claudel married on 15 March 1906 Reine Sainte-Marie Perrin (1880–1973). She was the daughter of (1835–1917), an architect from Lyon known for completing the Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière. They had two sons and three daughters.

===Treatment of his sister Camille===

Claudel committed his sister Camille to a psychiatric hospital in March 1913, where she remained for the last 30 years of her life, visiting her seven times in those 30 years. Records show that while she did have mental lapses, she was clear-headed while working on her art. Doctors tried to convince the family that she need not be in the institution, but still they kept her there. 

The story forms the subject of a 2004 novel by Michèle Desbordes, &quot;La Robe bleue&quot;, &quot;The Blue Dress&quot;. Jean-Charles de Castelbajac wrote a song &quot;La soeur de Paul&quot; for Mareva Galanter, 2010.

==See also==
* &quot;Camille Claudel&quot;, 1988 film
* &quot;Camille Claudel 1915&quot;, 2013 film
* &quot;L&#x27;Annonce faite à Marie&quot;, film adaptation
* &quot;L&#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara&quot;
* Lycée Claudel, a French language high school in Ottawa, Canada, named after him
==References==
==Sources==
* Thody, P.M.W. &quot;Paul Claudel&quot;, in &quot;The Fontana Biographical Companion to Modern Thought&quot;, eds. Bullock, Alan and Woodings, R.B., Oxford, 1983.
* Ayral-Clause, Odile, &quot;Camille Claudel, A Life&quot;, 2002.
* Ashley, Tim: &quot;Evil Genius&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 14 August 2004.
* Price-Jones, David, &quot;Jews, Arabs and French Diplomacy: A Special Report&quot;, &quot;Commentary&quot;, 22 May 2005, https://web.archive.org/web/20051218141558/http://www.benadorassociates.com/article/15043
* &quot;Album Claudel&quot;. Iconographie choisie et annotée par Guy Goffette. Bibliothèque de la Pléiade. Éditions Gallimard, 2011. . (Illustrated biography.)

==External links==
* 
* Paul-claudel.net (in French)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295830" start="0" end="12" title="Paul Claudel" label="Paul Claudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q120582" start="133" end="148" title="Camille Claudel" label="Camille Claudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370860" start="177" end="188" title="verse drama" label="verse drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="221" end="232" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q995372" start="265" end="284" title="Villeneuve-sur-Fère" label="Villeneuve-sur-Fère"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093" start="286" end="291" title="Aisne" label="Aisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="548" end="557" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869819" start="583" end="588" title="lycée" label="lycée"/>
<link wikidata="Q185721" start="598" end="608" title="Bar-le-Duc" label="Bar-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="620" end="640" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="Lycée Louis-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q827135" start="817" end="824" title="Vespers" label="Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="845" end="864" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="1015" end="1029" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q859363" start="1224" end="1260" title="Sciences Po" label="Paris Institute of Political Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="1494" end="1500" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="1532" end="1538" title="Consulate general" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="1593" end="1601" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q334162" start="1652" end="1664" title="Ligugé Abbey" label="Ligugé Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1696" end="1713" title="Benedictine Order" label="Benedictine Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="1775" end="1781" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069858" start="1930" end="1948" title="Philippe Berthelot" label="Philippe Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q309974" start="2013" end="2027" title="Jean Giraudoux" label="Jean Giraudoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q272" start="2029" end="2040" title="Paul Morand" label="Paul Morand"/>
<link wikidata="Q132684" start="2045" end="2061" title="Saint-John Perse" label="Saint-John Perse"/>
<link wikidata="Q616067" start="2521" end="2545" title="Nouvelle Revue Française" label="Nouvelle Revue Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="2588" end="2598" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102532" start="3255" end="3267" title="Georges Crès" label="Georges Crès"/>
<link wikidata="Q462604" start="3272" end="3286" title="Victor Segalen" label="Victor Segalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="3336" end="3343" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3410" end="3421" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="3438" end="3444" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="3462" end="3479" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3500" end="3507" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8920" start="3584" end="3592" title="Hellerau" label="Hellerau"/>
<link wikidata="Q369758" start="3642" end="3656" title="Jacques Copeau" label="Jacques Copeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="3733" end="3747" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="3761" end="3771" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3884" end="3892" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3939" end="3950" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="4087" end="4101" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="4113" end="4129" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002989" start="4210" end="4218" title="Brangues" label="Brangues"/>
<link wikidata="Q151999" start="4222" end="4230" title="Dauphiné" label="Dauphiné"/>
<link wikidata="Q751876" start="4256" end="4263" title="château" label="château"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4314" end="4326" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="4351" end="4358" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="4378" end="4394" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="4417" end="4428" title="Free France" label="Free France"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="4508" end="4520" title="Vichy regime" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q666551" start="4550" end="4568" title="Alfred Baudrillart" label="Alfred Baudrillart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4605" end="4617" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370342" start="4635" end="4653" title="Paul-Louis Weiller" label="Paul-Louis Weiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155154" start="4955" end="4969" title="Isaïe Schwartz" label="Isaïe Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407986" start="5004" end="5020" title="Statut des Juifs" label="Statut des Juifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="5180" end="5198" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262035" start="5226" end="5238" title="Louis Gillet" label="Louis Gillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341186" start="5310" end="5324" title="Claude Farrère" label="Claude Farrère"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="5365" end="5390" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="5452" end="5469" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="5590" end="5604" title="religious text" label="religious text"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="5630" end="5637" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q141126" start="5701" end="5711" title="free verse" label="free verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="5772" end="5784" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q334965" start="5818" end="5831" title="Charles Péguy" label="Charles Péguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848670" start="5836" end="5847" title="André Spire" label="André Spire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="5932" end="5939" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172404" start="5961" end="5974" title="Jean Grosjean" label="Jean Grosjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="6305" end="6312" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227347" start="6357" end="6374" title="The Satin Slipper" label="The Satin Slipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6465" end="6479" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="6487" end="6499" title="siglo de oro" label="siglo de oro"/>
<link wikidata="Q61460498" start="6522" end="6539" title="Comédie-Française" label="Comédie-Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686033" start="6555" end="6582" title="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc au Bûcher" label="Jeanne d&amp;#x27;Arc au Bûcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="6641" end="6649" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q123164" start="6664" end="6679" title="Arthur Honegger" label="Arthur Honegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203532" start="7021" end="7056" title="L&amp;#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara" label="L&amp;#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q952945" start="7086" end="7096" title="Jean Vilar" label="Jean Vilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q473423" start="7105" end="7128" title="Festival d&amp;#x27;Avignon" label="Festival d&amp;#x27;Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="7187" end="7199" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65643725" start="7279" end="7297" title="Boštjan Marko Turk" label="Boštjan Marko Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="7782" end="7794" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="7954" end="7968" title="Marshal Pétain" label="Marshal Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="8111" end="8124" title="anti-clerical" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="8125" end="8146" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="8312" end="8321" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8326" end="8332" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q629060" start="8342" end="8355" title="Gog and Magog" label="Gog and Magog"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="8443" end="8457" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="8512" end="8529" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="8662" end="8673" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q453288" start="8907" end="8921" title="George Steiner" label="George Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q379956" start="9047" end="9067" title="Henry de Montherlant" label="Henry de Montherlant"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="9072" end="9086" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q114608340" start="9247" end="9261" title="Hamilton Vetch" label="Hamilton Vetch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="9364" end="9373" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="9377" end="9386" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="9952" end="9956" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516" start="9982" end="10017" title="Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière" label="Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière"/>
<link wikidata="Q120582" start="10127" end="10134" title="Camille Claudel" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376012" start="10531" end="10548" title="Michèle Desbordes" label="Michèle Desbordes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393509" start="10605" end="10632" title="Jean-Charles de Castelbajac" label="Jean-Charles de Castelbajac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290437" start="10679" end="10694" title="Mareva Galanter" label="Mareva Galanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029155" start="10718" end="10745" title="Camille Claudel (film)" label="&amp;quot;Camille Claudel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348385" start="10765" end="10785" title="Camille Claudel 1915" label="Camille Claudel 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202062" start="10811" end="10839" title="L&amp;#x27;Annonce faite à Marie" label="L&amp;#x27;Annonce faite à Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203532" start="10871" end="10906" title="L&amp;#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara" label="L&amp;#x27;Histoire de Tobie et de Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268630" start="10915" end="10928" title="Lycée Claudel" label="Lycée Claudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="10963" end="10969" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99615" wikidata="Q5602284" url="?curid=99615" title="Green Anarchist">
<text>The Green Anarchist, established in 1984 in the UK, was a magazine advocating green anarchism.

==Early years==
Founded after the 1984 Stop the City protests, the magazine was launched in the summer of that year by an editorial collective consisting of Alan Albon, Richard Hunt and Marcus Christo. Albon had been an editor of &quot;Freedom&quot; whilst Hunt had become frustrated with the more mainstream green magazine &quot;Green Line&quot; for which he had been writing. The younger Christo had come from a more anarcho-punk background – he was also a member of Green CND, and had been involved in the blockade of Ronald Reagan&#x27;s car at the 1984 Lancaster House summit meeting.

Early issues featured a range of broadly anarchist and ecological ideas, bringing together groups and individuals as varied as Class War, veteran anarchist writer Colin Ward, anarcho-punk band Crass, as well as the Peace Convoy, anti-nuclear campaigners, animal rights activists and so on. However the diversity that many saw as the publication&#x27;s greatest strength quickly led to irreconcilable arguments between the essentially pacifist approach of Albon and Christo, and the advocacy of violent confrontation with the State favoured by Hunt.

Albon and Christo left &quot;Green Anarchist&quot; shortly afterwards, and the magazine saw a succession of editorial collectives, although Hunt remained in overall control. During this period he published articles which were increasingly alienating much of the magazine&#x27;s readership. Matters came to a head after Hunt wrote an editorial which expressed support for British troops in the Gulf War and extolled the virtues of patriotism. Hunt has stated that the rest of the editorial collective wished to bring to &quot;Green Anarchist&quot; a more left-wing political approach, while Hunt wanted it to remain non-aligned. Shortly afterwards he left to start another magazine &quot;Alternative Green&quot;, which continued to promote his own particular view of green anarchism, and eventually became closely linked to the National-Anarchist movement from the mid-90s onwards.

==The Nineties==
During the 1990s &quot;Green Anarchist&quot; came under the helm of an editorial collective that included Paul Rogers, Steve Booth and others, during which period the publication became increasingly aligned with primitivism, an anti-civilization philosophy advocated by writers such as John Zerzan, Bob Black and Fredy Perlman.

During this period the magazine expressed sympathy for the criminal activities of Ted Kaczynski and published a notorious article entitled &quot;The Irrationalists&quot; that supported actions like the Oklahoma City bombing and the sarin gas attacks carried out by the Tokyo based Aum cult. This once again alienated much of the UK anarchist movement, and led to strong criticism of the magazine by Stewart Home, Counter Information, the Anarchist Communist Federation and others. Steven Booth, the writer of the article, has since renounced the views expressed in it, as well as the primitivist movement altogether.

==The GANDALF trial==

Starting in 1995, Hampshire Police began a series of at least 56 raids, code named &#x27;Operation Washington&#x27;, that eventually resulted in the August to November 1997 Portsmouth trial of Green Anarchist editors Booth, Saxon Wood, Noel Molland and Paul Rogers, as well as Animal Liberation Front (ALF) Press Officer Robin Webb and Animal Liberation Front Supporters Group (ALFSG) newsletter editor Simon Russell. The defendants organised the GANDALF Defence campaign. Three of the editors of Green Anarchist, Noel Molland, Saxon Wood and Booth were jailed for &#x27;conspiracy to incite&#x27;. However, all three were shortly afterwards released on appeal.

==Booth and Rogers&#x27; &quot;Green Anarchists&quot;==
In the late 1990s there was a further split amongst the GA collective, leading to the existence of two entirely separate magazines using the Green Anarchist title. These were respectively published by an editorial team that includes Paul Rogers and &#x27;John Connor&#x27; (who subtitled their version of the paper as &quot;the original and best&quot;), and Steve Booth, who has publicly renounced some of his earlier published views and expressed a wish to &#x27;return to the magazine&#x27;s roots&#x27;. Both versions ceased publication in the 2000s.

==See also==
* &quot;Green Anarchy&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Archived
* Critical articles about Green Anarchist at Libcom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q294864" start="78" end="93" title="green anarchism" label="green anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619800" start="135" end="148" title="Stop the City" label="Stop the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706060" start="253" end="263" title="Alan Albon" label="Alan Albon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326613" start="265" end="277" title="Richard Hunt (editor)" label="Richard Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="282" end="296" title="Marcus Christo" label="Marcus Christo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379710" start="332" end="339" title="Freedom (British newspaper)" label="Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="405" end="410" title="Green movement" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="426" end="436" title="Green Line (magazine)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q486365" start="515" end="527" title="anarcho-punk" label="anarcho-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="571" end="574" title="CND" label="CND"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="617" end="630" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146311" start="654" end="669" title="Lancaster House" label="Lancaster House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128007" start="814" end="823" title="Class War" label="Class War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108751" start="850" end="860" title="Colin Ward" label="Colin Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q842336" start="880" end="885" title="Crass" label="Crass"/>
<link wikidata="Q949318" start="902" end="914" title="Peace Convoy" label="Peace Convoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="942" end="955" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="1121" end="1129" title="pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1630" end="1638" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="1667" end="1677" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326613" start="1924" end="1941" title="Alternative Green" label="Alternative Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q648045" start="2064" end="2082" title="National-Anarchist" label="National-Anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2242" end="2253" title="Paul Rogers (Green Anarchist)" label="Paul Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2255" end="2266" title="Steve Booth" label="Steve Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q667672" start="2348" end="2359" title="anarcho-primitivism" label="primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q454268" start="2422" end="2433" title="John Zerzan" label="John Zerzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082980" start="2435" end="2444" title="The Abolition of Work" label="Bob Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458048" start="2449" end="2462" title="Fredy Perlman" label="Fredy Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="2547" end="2560" title="Ted Kaczynski" label="Ted Kaczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="2667" end="2688" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146739" start="2697" end="2714" title="Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway" label="sarin gas attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2734" end="2739" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217408" start="2746" end="2754" title="Aum cult" label="Aum cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422563" start="2864" end="2876" title="Stewart Home" label="Stewart Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406821" start="2878" end="2897" title="Counter information" label="Counter Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q516853" start="2903" end="2933" title="Anarchist Federation (British Isles)" label="Anarchist Communist Federation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2946" end="2958" title="Steven Booth" label="Steven Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="3124" end="3133" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q590490" start="3178" end="3187" title="code name" label="code name"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="3279" end="3289" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3330" end="3340" title="Saxon Wood" label="Saxon Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3354" title="Noel Molland" label="Noel Molland"/>
<link wikidata="Q547410" start="3383" end="3406" title="Animal Liberation Front" label="Animal Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352862" start="3427" end="3437" title="Robin Webb" label="Robin Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q547410" start="3442" end="3482" title="Animal Liberation Front Supporters Group" label="Animal Liberation Front Supporters Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512861" start="3553" end="3577" title="GANDALF Defence campaign" label="GANDALF Defence campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q667672" start="4401" end="4414" title="Green Anarchy" label="Green Anarchy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99619" wikidata="Q374709" url="?curid=99619" title="List of chess openings">
<text>This is a list of chess openings, organised by the &quot;Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings&quot; (&quot;ECO&quot;) code classification system. The chess openings are categorised into five broad areas (&quot;A&quot; through &quot;E&quot;), with each of those broken up into one hundred subcategories (&quot;00&quot; through &quot;99&quot;). The openings were published in five volumes of &quot;ECO&quot;, with volumes labeled &quot;A&quot; through &quot;E&quot;. 


==A – Flank openings==
* White first moves other than 1.e4, 1.d4 (A00–A39)
* 1.d4 without 1...d5, 1...Nf6 or 1...f5: Atypical replies to 1.d4 (A40–A44)
* 1.d4 Nf6 without 2.c4: Atypical replies to 1...Nf6 (A45–A49)
* 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 without 2...e6 or 2...g6: Atypical Indian systems (A50–A79)
* 1.d4 f5: Dutch Defence (A80–A99)

===A00–A09===
White first moves other than 1.e4, 1.d4, 1.c4: 

==== A00 Irregular Openings ====
*Anderssen&#x27;s Opening: 1. a3
*Anderssen&#x27;s Opening: Polish Gambit: 1. a3 a5 2. b4
*Formation: Hippopotamus Attack: 1. a3 e5 2. b3 d5 3. c3 Nf6 4. d3 Nc6 5. e3 Bd6 6. f3 0-0 7. g3
*Formation: Shy Attack: 1. a3 e5 2. g3 d5 3. Bg2 Nf6 4. d3 Nc6 5. Nd2 Bd6 6. e3 0-0 7. h3
*Van Geet Opening: Reversed Nimzowitsch, Battambang Variation: 1. a3 e5 2. Nc3
*Ware Opening: 1. a4
*Ware Opening: Symmetric Variation: 1. a4 a5
*Ware Opening: Wing Gambit: 1. a4 b5 2. axb5 Bb7
*Ware Opening: Cologne Gambit: 1. a4 b6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nd7
*Ware Opening: Ware Gambit: 1. a4 e5 2. a5 d5 3. e3 f5 4. a6
*Ware Opening: Crab Variation: 1. a4 e5 2. h4
*Ware Opening: Meadow Hay Trap: 1. a4 e5 2. Ra3
*Polish Opening: 1. b4
*Polish Opening: Symmetrical Variation: 1. b4 b5
*Polish Opening: Birmingham Gambit: 1. b4 c5
*Polish Opening: Outflank Variation: 1. b4 c6
*Polish Opening: Outflank, Schuehler Gambit: 1. b4 c6 2. Bb2 a5 3. b5 cxb5 4. e4
*Polish Opening: Baltic Defense: 1. b4 d5 2. Bb2 Bf5
*Polish Opening: Myers Variation: 1. b4 d5 2. Bb2 c6 3. a4
*Polish Opening: German Defense: 1. b4 d5 2. Bb2 Qd6
*Polish Opening: Bugayev Attack: 1. b4 e5 2. a3
*Polish Opening: Wolferts Gambit: 1. b4 e5 2. Bb2 c5
*Polish Opening: Czech Defense: 1. b4 e5 2. Bb2 d6
*Polish Opening: Bugayev Advance Variation: 1. b4 e5 2. Bb2 f6 3. b5
*Polish Opening: Tartakower Gambit: 1. b4 e5 2. Bb2 f6 3. e4
*Polish Opening: Queenside Defense: 1. b4 e6 2. Bb2 Nf6 3. b5 a6
*Polish Opening: Queenside Defense, Rooks Exchange Line: 1. b4 e6 2. Bb2 Nf6 3. b5 a6 4. a4 axb5 5. axb5 Rxa1 6. Bxa1
*Polish Opening: Queen&#x27;s Indian Variation: 1. b4 e6 2. Bb2 Nf6 3. b5 b6
*Polish Opening: Schiffler-Sokolsky Variation: 1. b4 e6 2. Bb2 Nf6 3. b5 d5 4. e3
*Polish Opening: Dutch Defense: 1. b4 f5
*Polish Opening: Grigorian Variation: 1. b4 Nc6
*Polish Opening: King&#x27;s Indian Variation: 1. b4 Nf6 2. Bb2 g6
*Polish Opening: King&#x27;s Indian Variation, Sokolsky Attack: 1. b4 Nf6 2. Bb2 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. e3 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. d4
*Polish Opening: King&#x27;s Indian Variation, Schiffler Attack: 1. b4 Nf6 2. Bb2 g6 3. e4
*Polish Opening: Karniewski Variation: 1. b4 Nh6
*Saragossa Opening: 1. c3
*Mieses Opening: 1. d3
*Mieses Opening: Venezolana Variation: 1. d3 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3
*Mieses Opening: Reversed Rat: 1. d3 e5
*Valencia Opening: 1. d3 e5 2. Nd2
*Mieses Opening: Myers Spike Attack: 1. d3 g6 2. g4
*Van&#x27;t Kruijs Opening: 1. e3
*Van&#x27;t Kruijs Opening: Bouncing Bishop Variation: 1. e3 e5 2. Bc4 b5 3. Bb3
*Amsterdam Attack: 1. e3 e5 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. b3 Nf6
*Van&#x27;t Kruijs Opening: Keoni-Hiva Gambit, Ekolu Variation: 1. e3 e5 2. Nc3 d5 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3
*Van&#x27;t Kruijs Opening: Keoni-Hiva Gambit, Alua Variation: 1. e3 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3
*Van&#x27;t Kruijs Opening: Keoni-Hiva Gambit, Akahi Variation: 1. e3 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3
*Barnes Opening: 1. f3
*Barnes Opening: Gedult Gambit: 1. f3 d5 2. e4 g6 3. d4 dxe4 4. c3
*Barnes Opening: Fool&#x27;s Mate: 1. f3 e5 2. g4 Qh4#
*Barnes Opening: Hammerschlag: 1. f3 e5 2. Kf2
*Barnes Opening: Gedult Gambit: 1. f3 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3
*Hungarian Opening: 1. g3
*Hungarian Opening: Sicilian Invitation: 1. g3 c5
*Hungarian Opening: Reversed Modern Defense: 1. g3 d5 2. Bg2 c5
*Hungarian Opening: Slav Formation: 1. g3 d5 2. Bg2 c6
*Hungarian Opening: Bücker Gambit: 1. g3 d5 2. Bg2 e5 3. b4
*Hungarian Opening: Winterberg Gambit: 1. g3 d5 2. Bg2 e5 3. c4 dxc4 4. b3
*Hungarian Opening: Catalan Formation: 1. g3 d5 2. Bg2 e6
*Hungarian Opening: Burk Gambit: 1. g3 e5 2. a3 d5 3. Nf3 e4 4. Nh4 Be7 5. d3
*Hungarian Opening: Reversed Alekhine: 1. g3 e5 2. Nf3
*Hungarian Opening: Reversed Brooklyn Defense, Brooklyn Benko Gambit: 1. g3 e5 2. Nf3 e4 3. Ng1 Nf6 4. b4
*Hungarian Opening: Reversed Norwegian Defense: 1. g3 e5 2. Nf3 e4 3. Nh4
*Hungarian Opening: Paris Gambit: 1. g3 e5 2. Nh3 d5 3. f4 Bxh3 4. Bxh3 exf4 5. 0-0
*Hungarian Opening: Dutch Defense: 1. g3 f5
*Hungarian Opening: Pachman Gambit: 1. g3 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Qh5+ g6
*Hungarian Opening: Myers Defense: 1. g3 g5
*Hungarian Opening: Symmetrical Variation: 1. g3 g6
*Lasker Simul Special: 1. g3 h5
*Hungarian Opening: Van Kuijk Gambit: 1. g3 h5 2. Nf3 h4
*Hungarian Opening: Asten Gambit: 1. g3 Nc6 2. Nc3 d5 3. d4 e5 4. dxe5 d4 5. Ne4 f5
*Hungarian Opening: Indian Defense: 1. g3 Nf6
*Grob Opening: 1. g4
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit, Fritz Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 Bxg4 3. c4
*Grob Opening: Romford Countergambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 Bxg4 3. c4 d4
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit, Fritz Gambit, Romford Countergambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 Bxg4 3. c4 d4 4. Bxb7 Nd7 5. Bxa8 Qxa8
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit Declined: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 c6
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit, Richter-Grob Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 c6 3. c4 dxc4 4. b3
*Grob Opening: Spike Attack: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 c6 3. g5
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit, Keres Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 e5 3. d4 exd4 4. c3
*Grob Opening: Grob Gambit, Basman Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. Bg2 h5 3. gxh5
*Grob Opening: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3
*Grob Opening: Zilbermints Gambit, Zilbermints-Hartlaub Gambit: 1. g4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. d3
*Grob Opening: Zilbermints Gambit, Schiller Defense: 1. g4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 h5
*Grob Opening: Keene Defense: 1. g4 d5 2. h3 e5 3. Bg2 c6
*Grob Opening: Keene Defense, Main Line: 1. g4 d5 2. h3 e5 3. Bg2 c6 4. d4 e4 5. c4 Bd6 6. Nc3 Ne7
*Grob Opening: Spike, Hurst Attack: 1. g4 e5 2. Bg2 d5 3. c4
*Grob Opening: London Defense: 1. g4 e5 2. h3 Nc6
*Grob Opening: Alessi Gambit: 1. g4 f5
*Grob Opening: Double Grob: 1. g4 g5
*Grob Opening: Double Grob, Coca-Cola Gambit: 1. g4 g5 2. f4
*Clemenz Opening: 1. h3
*Creepy Crawly Formation: Classical Defense: 1. h3 d5 2. a3 e5
*Global Opening: 1. h3 e5 2. a3
*Clemenz Opening: Spike Lee Gambit: 1. h3 h5 2. g4
*Kádas Opening: 1. h4
*Kádas Opening: Koola-Koola Variation: 1. h4 a5
*Kádas Opening: Kádas Gambit: 1. h4 c5 2. b4
*Kádas Opening: Myers Variation: 1. h4 d5 2. d4 c5 3. e4
*Kádas Opening: Kádas Gambit: 1. h4 d5 2. d4 c5 3. Nf3 cxd4 4. c3
*Kádas Opening: Beginner&#x27;s Trap: 1. h4 d5 2. Rh3
*Kádas Opening: Kádas Gambit: 1. h4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3
*Kádas Opening: Steinbok Gambit: 1. h4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. d3
*Kádas Opening: Schneider Gambit: 1. h4 g5
*Sodium Attack: 1. Na3
*Sodium Attack: Celadon Variation: 1. Na3 e5 2. d3 Bxa3 3. bxa3 d5 4. e3 c5 5. Rb1
*Sodium Attack: Durkin Gambit: 1. Na3 e5 2. Nc4 Nc6 3. e4 f5
*Sodium Attack: Chenoboskion Variation: 1. Na3 g6 2. g4
*Van Geet Opening: 1. Nc3
*Van Geet Opening: Laroche Gambit: 1. Nc3 b5
*Van Geet Opening: Düsseldorf Gambit: 1. Nc3 c5 2. b4
*Van Geet Opening: Novosibirsk Variation: 1. Nc3 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qh4
*Van Geet Opening: Sicilian Two Knights: 1. Nc3 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4
*Van Geet Opening: Twyble Attack: 1. Nc3 c5 2. Rb1
*Van Geet Opening: Venezolana Variation: 1. Nc3 d5 2. d3 Nf6 3. g3
*Van Geet Opening: Sleipnir Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. e3 e5 3. d4 Bb4
*Van Geet Opening: Hector Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Bc4
*Van Geet Opening: Dunst-Perrenet Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. d3
*Van Geet Opening: Dougherty Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. f3
*Van Geet Opening: Melleby Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 d4 3. Ne4 c5
*Van Geet Opening: Pfeiffer Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 d4 3. Ne4 e5
*Van Geet Opening: Pfeiffer Gambit, Sleipnir Countergambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 d4 3. Ne4 e5 4. Nf3
*Van Geet Opening: Jendrossek Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 d4 3. Ne4 f5 4. Nf2 Nf6 5. Nf3 c5 6. b4
*Van Geet Opening: Damhaug Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 e5
*Van Geet Opening: Warsteiner Gambit: 1. Nc3 d5 2. f4 g5
*Van Geet Opening: Hergert Gambit: 1. Nc3 d6 2. f4 e5 3. fxe5 Nc6
*Van Geet Opening: Reversed Nimzowitsch: 1. Nc3 e5
*Van Geet Opening: Gladbacher Gambit: 1. Nc3 e5 2. b3 d5 3. e4 dxe4 4. d3
*Van Geet Opening: Reversed Scandinavian: 1. Nc3 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qa4
*Van Geet Opening: Hulsemann Gambit: 1. Nc3 e5 2. e3 d5 3. Qh5 Be6
*Van Geet Opening: Liebig Gambit: 1. Nc3 e5 2. e3 d5 3. Qh5 Nf6
*Van Geet Opening: Nowokunski Gambit: 1. Nc3 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. e4
*Van Geet Opening: Billockus-Johansen Gambit: 1. Nc3 e5 2. Nf3 Bc5
*Van Geet Opening: Napoleon Attack: 1. Nc3 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4
*Van Geet Opening: Kluever Gambit: 1. Nc3 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. d3
*Van Geet Opening: Myers Attack: 1. Nc3 g6 2. h4
*Van Geet Opening: Tübingen Gambit: 1. Nc3 Nf6 2. g4
*Amar Opening: 1. Nh3
*Amar Opening: Paris Gambit: 1. Nh3 d5 2. g3 e5 3. f4
*Amar Opening: Paris Gambit, Gent Gambit: 1. Nh3 d5 2. g3 e5 3. f4 Bxh3 4. Bxh3 exf4 5. 0-0 fxg3 6. hxg3

==== A01 Larsen&#x27;s Opening: 1.b3 ====
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: 1. b3
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Polish Variation: 1. b3 b5
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Symmetrical Variation: 1. b3 b6
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: English Variation: 1. b3 c5
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Classical Variation: 1. b3 d5
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Graz Attack: 1. b3 d5 2. Ba3
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Modern Variation: 1. b3 e5
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Modern Variation: 1. b3 e5 2. Bb2 Nc6
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Modern Variation: 1. b3 e5 2. Bb2 Nc6 3. c4 Nf6
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Modern Variation: 1. b3 e5 2. Bb2 Nc6 3. e3
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Pachman Gambit: 1. b3 e5 2. Bb2 Nc6 3. f4
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Dutch Variation: 1. b3 f5
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Ringelbach Gambit: 1. b3 f5 2. Bb2 e6 3. e4
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Indian Variation: 1. b3 Nf6
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Spike Variation: 1. b3 Nf6 2. Bb2 g6 3. g4

==== A02–A03 Bird&#x27;s Opening ====
A02
*Bird Opening: 1. f4
*Bird Opening: Myers Defense: 1. f4 b5
*Bird Opening: From&#x27;s Gambit: 1. f4 e5
*Bird Opening: Siegener Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3 c5 4. c3
*Bird Opening: From&#x27;s Gambit, Lasker Variation: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 d6 3. exd6 Bxd6 4. Nf3 g5
*Bird Opening: From&#x27;s Gambit, Lipke Variation: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 d6 3. exd6 Bxd6 4. Nf3 Nh6 5. d4
*Bird Opening: From&#x27;s Gambit, Langheld Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 d6 3. exd6 Nf6
*Bird Opening: Lasker Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 f6
*Bird Opening: Schlechter Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 Nc6
*Bird Opening: Platz Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. fxe5 Ne7
*Bird Opening: From&#x27;s Gambit, Bahr Gambit: 1. f4 e5 2. Nc3
*Bird Opening: Double Duck Formation: 1. f4 f5 2. d4 d5
*Bird Opening: Wagner-Zwitersch Gambit: 1. f4 f5 2. e4
*Bird Opening: Swiss Gambit: 1. f4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. g4
*Bird Opening: Hobbs Gambit: 1. f4 g5
*Bird Opening: Hobbs-Zilbermints Gambit: 1. f4 h6 2. Nf3 g5
*Bird Opening: Mujannah: 1. f4 Nf6 2. c4
*Bird Opening: Batavo-Polish Attack: 1. f4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. b4
*Bird Opening: Horsefly Defense: 1. f4 Nh6

A03 Bird&#x27;s Opening, Dutch Variation: 
*Bird Opening: Dutch Variation: 1. f4 d5
*Bird Opening: Thomas Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. b3 Nf6 3. Bb2 d4 4. Nf3 c5 5. e3
*Bird Opening: Sturm Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. c4
*Bird Opening: Williams Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. e4
*Bird Opening: Williams-Zilbermints Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nge2
*Bird Opening: Williams Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Qe2
*Bird Opening: Dutch Variation, Dudweiler Gambit: 1. f4 d5 2. g4
*Bird Opening: Lasker Variation: 1. f4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 c5

==== A04–A09 Réti Opening or Zukertort Opening ====
A04
*Zukertort Opening: 1. Nf3
*Zukertort Opening: Ware Defense: 1. Nf3 a5
*Zukertort Opening: St. George Defense: 1. Nf3 a6
*Zukertort Opening: Polish Defense: 1. Nf3 b5
*Zukertort Opening: Queenside Fianchetto Variation: 1. Nf3 b6
*Zukertort Opening: Sicilian Invitation: 1. Nf3 c5
*Modern Defense: Semi-Averbakh Variation, Pterodactyl Variation: 1. Nf3 c5 2. c4 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. e4 Qa5+
*Modern Defense: Semi-Averbakh Variation, Polish Variation: 1. Nf3 c5 2. c4 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. e4 Qb6
*Zukertort Opening: Speelsmet Gambit: 1. Nf3 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. e3
*Colle System: Rhamphorhynchus Variation: 1. Nf3 c5 2. e3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. dxc5 Qa5+
*Zukertort Opening: Slav Invitation: 1. Nf3 c6
*Zukertort Opening: Pirc Invitation: 1. Nf3 d6
*Zukertort Opening: Vos Gambit: 1. Nf3 d6 2. d4 e5
*Zukertort Opening: Wade Defense: 1. Nf3 d6 2. e4 Bg4
*Zukertort Opening: Ross Gambit: 1. Nf3 e5
*Zukertort Opening: The Walrus: 1. Nf3 e5 2. Nxe5 Nc6 3. Nxc6 dxc6
*Zukertort Opening: Queen&#x27;s Gambit Invitation: 1. Nf3 e6
*Zukertort Opening: Shabalov Gambit: 1. Nf3 e6 2. c4 a6 3. Nc3 c5 4. g3 b5
*Zukertort Opening: Dutch Variation: 1. Nf3 f5
*Zukertort Opening: Lisitsyn Gambit Deferred: 1. Nf3 f5 2. d3 Nf6 3. e4
*Zukertort Opening: Lisitsyn Gambit: 1. Nf3 f5 2. e4
*Zukertort Opening: Arctic Defense: 1. Nf3 f6
*Zukertort Opening: Arctic Defense, Drunken Knight Variation: 1. Nf3 f6 2. e4 Nh6 3. d4 Nf7
*Zukertort Opening: Herrstrom Gambit: 1. Nf3 g5
*Zukertort Opening: Kingside Fianchetto: 1. Nf3 g6
*Modern Defense: Semi-Averbakh Variation, Pterodactyl Variation Accepted: 1. Nf3 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. e4 d6 4. c4 c5 5. dxc5 Qa5+
*Zukertort Opening: Basman Defense: 1. Nf3 h6
*Zukertort Defense: Sicilian Knight Variation: 1. Nf3 Na6 2. e4 c5
*Zukertort Opening: Drunken Cavalry Variation: 1. Nf3 Na6 2. e4 Nh6
*Zukertort Opening: Black Mustang Defense: 1. Nf3 Nc6
*Zukertort Defense: Kingside Variation: 1. Nf3 Nh6 2. d4 g6

A05 Réti Opening: 1...Nf6

*Zukertort Opening: 1. Nf3 Nf6
*Zukertort Opening: Myers Polish Attack: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. a4 g6 3. b4
*Zukertort Opening: Nimzo-Larsen Variation: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. b3
*Polish Opening: Zukertort System: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. b4
*Zukertort Opening: Quiet System: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. e3
*Zukertort Opening: Lemberger Gambit: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. e4
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Spassky Variation: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 b5
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 d5
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Symmetrical Defense: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 g6
*Zukertort Opening: Double Fianchetto Attack: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 g6 3. b3 Bg7 4. Bb2 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Smyslov Variation: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 g6 3. b4
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Wahls Defense: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 g6 3. Bg2 Bg7 4. 0-0 0-0 5. d3 d5
*Zukertort Opening: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. Nc3 Nc6

A06 Réti Opening: 1...d5
*Zukertort Opening: Santasiere&#x27;s Folly: 1. b4 d5 2. Nf3
*Zukertort Opening: Tennison Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. Nf3
*Zukertort Opening: 1. Nf3 d5
*Zukertort Opening: The Potato: 1. Nf3 d5 2. a4
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Classical Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. b3
*Zukertort Opening: Regina-Nu Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. b3 c5 3. c4 dxc4 4. Nc3
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Norfolk Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. b3 c5 3. e4
*Nimzo-Larsen Attack: Norfolk Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. b3 Nf6 3. Bb2 c5 4. e4
*Zukertort Opening: Old Indian Attack: 1. Nf3 d5 2. d3
*Zukertort Opening: Pachman Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. e3 c5 3. c4 dxc4 4. b3
*Zukertort Opening: Reversed Mexican Defense: 1. Nf3 d5 2. Nc3
*Zukertort Opening: Ampel Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. Rg1

A07 Réti Opening, King&#x27;s Indian Attack (Barcza System):
*Hungarian Opening: Wiedenhagen-Beta Gambit: 1. g3 d5 2. Nf3 g5
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Keres Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 Bg4
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Keres Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 Bg4 3. Bg2 Nd7
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Sicilian Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Omega-Delta Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 e5
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Double Fianchetto: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 g6
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Pachman System: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 g6 3. Bg2 Bg7 4. 0-0 e5 5. d3 Ne7
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Yugoslav Variation: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. g3 d5 3. Bg2 c6 4. 0-0 Bg4

A08 Réti Opening, King&#x27;s Indian Attack: 
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Sicilian Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d3 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. Ngf3 c5 5. g3 Nc6 6. Bg2 Be7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Re1
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Sicilian Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: French Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nc6
*Zukertort Opening: Reversed Grünfeld: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nc6 4. d4
*Zukertort Opening: Reversed Grünfeld: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nc6 4. d4 e6 5. 0-0
*Zukertort Opening: Reversed Grünfeld: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nc6 4. d4 Nf6
*Zukertort Opening: Reversed Grünfeld: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nc6 4. d4 Nf6 5. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Attack: Sicilian Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. g3 c5 3. Bg2 Nf6 4. 0-0 e6 5. d3

A09 Réti Opening:
*Réti Opening: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4
*Réti Opening: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 b5
*Réti Opening: Advance Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 d4
*Réti Opening: Advance Variation, Michel Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 d4 3. b4 c5
*Réti Opening: Reversed Blumenfeld Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 d4 3. e3 c5 4. b4
*Réti Opening: Penguin Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 d4 3. Rg1
*Réti Opening: Réti Gambit: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 dxc4
*Réti Opening: Réti Gambit, Keres Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 Be6

===A10–A39===
1.c4: English Opening 

A10: 1.c4 (without: 1...g6 2.d4, 1...f5 2.d4, 1...b6 2.d4, 1...d6 2.e4, 1...d6 2.d4, 1...Nc6 2.d4) 
*English Opening: 1. c4
*English Opening: Jaenisch Gambit: 1. c4 b5
*English Opening: Anglo-Scandinavian Defense: 1. c4 d5
*English Opening: Anglo-Scandinavian Defense, Löhn Gambit: 1. c4 d5 2. cxd5 e6
*English Opening: Anglo-Scandinavian Defense, Schulz Gambit: 1. c4 d5 2. cxd5 Nf6
*English Opening: Anglo-Scandinavian Defense, Malvinas Variation: 1. c4 d5 2. cxd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5
*English Opening: Anglo-Dutch Defense: 1. c4 f5
*English Opening: Anglo-Dutch Defense, Hickmann Gambit: 1. c4 f5 2. e4
*English Opening: Wade Gambit: 1. c4 f5 2. g4
*English Opening: Anglo-Dutch Variation, Ferenc Gambit: 1. c4 f5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4
*English Opening: Porcupine Variation: 1. c4 f5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4 fxe4 4. g4
*English Opening: Anglo-Dutch Variation, Chabanon Gambit: 1. c4 f5 2. Nf3 d6 3. e4
*English Opening: Myers Defense: 1. c4 g5
*English Opening: Myers Gambit: 1. c4 g5 2. d4 Bg7
*English Opening: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. c4 g5 2. d4 e5
*English Opening: Great Snake Variation: 1. c4 g6
*English Opening: Adorjan Defense: 1. c4 g6 2. e4 e5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Botvinnik System, Prickly Pawn Pass System: 1. c4 g6 2. Nc3 Bg7 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 0-0 5. e4 d6 6. Nge2 e5 7. 0-0 c6 8. d3 a6
*English Opening: Anglo-Lithuanian Variation: 1. c4 Nc6
*English Opening: Achilles-Omega Gambit: 1. c4 Nf6 2. e4

A11 English, Caro–Kann defensive system, 1...c6 (without: 2.e4, 2.d4)
*English Opening: Caro-Kann Defensive System: 1. c4 c6

A12 English, Caro–Kann defensive system: 2.Nf3 d5 3.b3 
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, London Defensive System: 1. c4 Nf6 2. g3 c6 3. Nf3 d5 4. b3 Bf5
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Torre System: 1. c4 Nf6 2. g3 c6 3. Nf3 d5 4. b3 Bg4
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Capablanca Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c6 3. b3 d5 4. Bb2 Bg4
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Bled Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. b3 Nf6 3. Bb2 g6 4. c4 c6
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 c6 3. b3
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 c6 3. b3 Bg4
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. c4 c6 3. b3 d5 4. Bb2
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, New York System: 1. Nf3 Nf6 2. c4 c6 3. b3 d5 4. Bb2 Bf5

A13 English Opening: 1...e6 (without 2.e4 or 2.d4)
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense: 1. c4 e6
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Catalan Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 b6 4. Bg2 Bb7 5. 0-0
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Catalan Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 c5
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Kurajica Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 c6
*English Opening: Neo-Catalan: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Bogoljubow Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Bd6
*English Opening: Neo-Catalan Declined: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Be7
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Tarrasch Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 c5 5. b3 Nc6 6. 0-0 Be7
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Wimpy System: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. b3 d5 4. Bb2 c5 5. e3
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Catalan Defense, Semi-Slav Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 c6
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Catalan Defense Accepted: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4
*English Opening: Romanishin Gambit: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. g3 a6 4. Bg2 b5

A14 English, Neo-Catalan Declined: 2.Nf3 d5 3.g3 Nf6 4.Bg2 Be7
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Neo-Catalan Declined: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. 0-0
*English Opening: Agincourt Defense, Keres Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. 0-0 c5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Nc3 Nc6
*Réti Opening: Anglo-Slav Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Stonewall Line: 1. Nf3 d5 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. 0-0 0-0 6. b3 c6 7. Bb2

A15 English, Anglo-Indian Defence: 1...Nf6 (without: 2.d4, 2.g3 c6, 2.g3 e5, 2.Nf3 c5, 2.Nf3 e6, 2.Nf3 c6)
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Romanishin Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. g3 a6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Queen&#x27;s Indian Formation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. g3 b6 4. Bg2 Bb7
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense: 1. c4 Nf6
*English Orangutan: 1. c4 Nf6 2. b4
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Anti-Anti-Grünfeld: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. e4
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, King&#x27;s Knight Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Queen&#x27;s Indian Formation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Scandinavian Defense: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d5
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Scandinavian Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Old Indian Formation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, King&#x27;s Indian Formation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, King&#x27;s Indian Formation, Double Fianchetto: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 b6 4. Bg2 Bb7
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Slav Formation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 c6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Grünfeld Formation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 d5

A16 English Opening, Anglo-Indian Defence: 2.Nc3 (without: 2...c5, 2...e5, 2...e6)
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Queen&#x27;s Knight Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3
*English Opening: Anglo-Grünfeld Defense: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Anglo-Grünfeld Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. g3 g6 5. Bg2 Nb6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Anglo-Grünfeld Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. g3 g6 5. Bg2 Nxc3
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Anglo-Grünfeld Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. Nf3
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Anglo-Grünfeld Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. Nf3 g6
*English Opening: Anglo-Grünfeld Defense, Korchnoi Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. cxd5 Nxd5 4. Nf3 g6 5. g3 Bg7 6. Bg2 e5

A17 English Opening, Hedgehog Defence: 2...e6 (without: 3.d4, 3.Nf3 c5, 3...d5 4.d4, 3...b5 4.d4, 3...Bb4 4.d4)
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Queen&#x27;s Indian Formation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 b6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Queen&#x27;s Indian Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 b6 4. e4 Bb7 5. Bd3
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Zvjaginsev-Krasenkow Attack: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Bb4 4. g4
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Hedgehog System: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 e6
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Nimzo-English: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4

A18 English, Mikenas–Carls Variation: 3.e4 (without: 3...c5)
*English Opening: Mikenas-Carls Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4
*English Opening: Mikenas-Carls Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4 d5 4. e5
*English Opening: Mikenas-Carls Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4 Nc6

A19 English, Mikenas–Carls, Sicilian Variation: 3...c5
*English Opening: Mikenas-Carls, Sicilian: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4 c5
*English Opening: Anglo-Indian Defense, Flohr-Mikenas-Carls Variation, Nei Gambit: 1. c4 e6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. e4 c5 4. e5 Ng8

A20 English Opening: 1...e5 (without: 2.e4, 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Nc3, 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.Nc3, 2.Nf3 d6 3.Nc3)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation: 1. c4 e5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Kahiko-Hula Gambit: 1. c4 e5 2. e3 Nf6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3
*English Opening: Drill Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. g3 h5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nf3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Nimzowitsch-Flohr Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nf3 e4

A21 English Opening: 2.Nc3 (without: 2...Nf6, 2...Nc6, 2...Bb4 3.g3 Nf6, 2...Bb4 3.Nf3 Nc6 2...Bb4 3.e3 Nf6)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Reversed Sicilian: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Kramnik-Shirov Counterattack: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Bb4
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Keres Defense: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 d6 3. g3 c6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 d6 3. Nf3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Smyslov Defense: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 d6 3. Nf3 Bg4
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Troger Defense: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 d6 4. Bg2 Be6

A22 English Opening: 2...Nf6 (without: 3.Nf3 Nc6, 3.e3 Nc6, 3.g3 Nc6, 3.g3 c6, 3.g3 g6, 3.e4 Nc6 4.Nf3)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English, Mazedonisch: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4
*English Opening: Carls-Bremen System: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation, Smyslov System: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 Bb4
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation, Reversed Dragon: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 d5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Bellon Gambit: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 e4 4. Ng5 b5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Adhiban Gambit: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 e4 4. Ng5 c6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English, Erbenheimer Gambit: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 e4 4. Ng5 Ng4

A23 English Opening, Bremen System, Keres Variation: 3.g3 c6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation, Keres Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 Bc5 4. Bg2 c6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation, Keres Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 c6

A24 English Opening, Bremen System with 1...e5 2.Nc3 Nf6 3.g3 g6 (without: 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.d3 d6): 3.g3 g6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Two Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 g6

A25 English Opening, Sicilian Reversed: 2...Nc6 (without 3.e3 Nf6 4.Nf3)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Reversed Closed Sicilian: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Taimanov Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Closed System: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Bremen-Hort Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. e3 d6 6. Nge2 Be6
*English Opening: Closed, Taimanov Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. e3 d6 6. Nge2 Nh6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Hungarian Attack: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. Rb1
*English Opening: Closed, Taimanov Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Rb1 Nh6 5. Bg2 Bg7

A26 English Opening, Closed System: 3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.d3 d6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Closed System, Full Symmetry: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Botvinnik System: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. e4

A27 English Opening, Three Knights System: 3.Nf3 (without: 3...Nf6)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Three Knights System: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Nf3

A28 English Opening, Four Knights System: 3...Nf6 (without 4.g3)
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Korchnoi Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. a3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Flexible Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. d3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Bradley Beach Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. d4 e4
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nxd4 Bb4 6. Bg5 h6 7. Bh4 Bxc3+ 8. bxc3 Ne5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Quiet Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. e3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Quiet Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. e3 Bb4 5. Qc2 Bxc3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Quiet Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. e3 Bb4 5. Qc2 0-0 6. Nd5 Re8 7. Qf5
*English Opening: Four Knights System, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. e4

A29 English Opening, Four Knights, Kingside Fianchetto: 4.g3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line: 1. c4 e5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. Nf3 Nc6
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line: 1. c4 e5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. d3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line: 1. c4 e5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. d3 Be7 7. 0-0 0-0
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. g3
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line, with Bc5: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. g3 d5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. Bg2 Bc5
*English Opening: King&#x27;s English Variation, Four Knights Variation, Fianchetto Line, with Nb6: 1. c4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. g3 d5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. Bg2 Nb6

A30 English Opening, Symmetrical Defence: 1...c5 (without: 2.e4, 2.g3 g6 3.Nc3, 2.g3 Nc6 3.Nc3, 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Nc3, 2.e3 Nf6 4.d4)
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation: 1. c4 c5
*English Opening: Wing Gambit: 1. c4 c5 2. b4
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nf3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Napolitano Gambit: 1. c4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. b4
*English Opening: Symmetrical, Hedgehog, Flexible Formation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 c5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. g3 b6 5. Bg2 Bb7 6. 0-0 Be7 7. d4 cxd4 8. Qxd4 d6 9. Rd1 a6 10. b3 Nbd7
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Hedgehog Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 c5 4. g3 b6 5. Bg2 Bb7 6. 0-0 Be7

A31 English Opening, Symmetrical, Benoni formation: 2.Nf3 Nf6 3.d4 (without: 3...cxd4 4.Nxd4 e6, 3...cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6 5.Nc3 e6, 3...cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nc6 5.Nc3 e6)
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Anti-Benoni Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. d4 c5 3. Nf3

A32 English Opening, Symmetrical: 3...cxd4 4.Nxd4 e6 
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Anti-Benoni Variation, Spielmann Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. d4 c5 3. Nf3 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6

A33 English Opening, Symmetrical: 5.Nc3 Nc6 
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Anti-Benoni Variation, Spielmann Defense: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 c5 4. d4 cxd4 5. Nxd4 Nc6
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Anti-Benoni Variation, Geller Variation: 1. c4 e6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 c5 4. d4 Nc6 5. g3 cxd4 6. Nxd4 Qb6

A34 English Opening, Symmetrical: 2.Nc3 (without 2...Nc6, 2...Nf6 3.Nf3 Nc6, 2...Nf6 3.e4 e6, 2...e6 3.Nf3 Nf6, 4.g3 Nc6)
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Normal Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Three Knights Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Nf3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 c5 3. g3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nc3 c5 3. g3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. Bg2 Nc7

A35 English Opening, Symmetrical: 2...Nc6 (without 3.g3, 3.e4, 3.Nf3 Nf6, 4.g3 e6, 3.Nf3 Nf6 4.d4 cxd4 5.Nxd4, 3.Nf3 e5 4.g3 g6 5.Bg2 Bg7)
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Two Knights Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Four Knights Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. Nc3 Nc6

A36 English Opening, Symmetrical: 3.g3 
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Botvinnik System: 1. c4 c5 2. e4 Nc6 3. Nc3 g6 4. g3 Bg7 5. Bg2
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Ultra-Symmetrical Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. g3 g6 3. Bg2 Bg7 4. Nc3 Nc6
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Two Knights, Fianchetto Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Botvinnik System Reversed, with e3: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. e3 e5

A37 English Opening, Symmetrical: 3...g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.Nf3 
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Three Knights, Fianchetto Variation: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. Nf3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Botvinnik System Reversed, with Nf3: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. Nf3 e5

A38 English Opening, Symmetrical: 5...Nf6 
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Double Fianchetto: 1. c4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. Nf3 Nf6 6. 0-0 0-0 7. b3
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Full Symmetry Line: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. g3 g6 5. Bg2 Bg7
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Duchamp Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. 0-0 c5 6. Nc3 Nc6 7. d3

A39 English, symmetrical, main line with d4: 6.0-0 0-0 7.d4 or 6.d4 cxd4 7.Nxd4 0-0 8.0-0
*English Opening: Symmetrical Variation, Mecking Variation: 1. c4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. g3 g6 5. Bg2 Bg7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. d4

===A40–A44===
1.d4 without 1...d5, 1...Nf6 or 1...f5: Atypical replies to 1.d4 
A40 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game
*English Defense: Hartlaub Gambit Declined: 1. c4 e6 2. d4 b6 3. Nc3 Bb7 4. e4 f5 5. d5
*English Defense: Hartlaub Gambit Accepted: 1. c4 e6 2. d4 b6 3. Nc3 Bb7 4. e4 f5 5. exf5 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4
*Polish Defense: 1. d4 b5
*Polish Defense: Spassky Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 b5 2. e4 Bb7 3. Bxb5
*English Defense: 1. d4 b6
*English Defense: Eastbourne Gambit: 1. d4 b6 2. c4 Bb7 3. Nc3 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Anglo-Slav Opening: 1. d4 c6 2. c4 d6
*Slav Indian: Kudischewitsch Gambit: 1. d4 c6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 b5
*Englund Gambit: 1. d4 e5
*Englund Gambit Declined: 1. d4 e5 2. d5
*Englund Gambit Declined: Diemer Counterattack: 1. d4 e5 2. d5 Bc5 3. e4 Qh4
*Englund Gambit: Hartlaub-Charlick Gambit: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 d6
*Englund Gambit: Soller Gambit: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 f6
*Englund Gambit: Felbecker Gambit: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Nc6 3. Nf3 Bc5
*Englund Gambit: Soller Gambit Deferred: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Nc6 3. Nf3 f6
*Englund Gambit: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Nc6 3. Nf3 Nge7
*Englund Gambit: Main Line: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Nc6 3. Nf3 Qe7
*Englund Gambit: Stockholm Variation: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Nc6 3. Nf3 Qe7 4. Qd5
*Englund Gambit: Mosquito Gambit: 1. d4 e5 2. dxe5 Qh4
*Englund Gambit Declined: Reversed French: 1. d4 e5 2. e3
*Englund Gambit Declined: Reversed Alekhine: 1. d4 e5 2. Nf3
*Englund Gambit Declined: Reversed Krebs: 1. d4 e5 2. Nf3 e4
*Englund Gambit Declined: Reversed Mokele Mbembe: 1. d4 e5 2. Nf3 e4 3. Ne5
*Englund Gambit Declined: Reversed Brooklyn: 1. d4 e5 2. Nf3 e4 3. Ng1
*Horwitz Defense: 1. d4 e6
*English Defense: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 b6
*English Defense: Perrin Variation: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 b6 3. e4 Bb7 4. Bd3 Nc6
*English Defense: Poli Gambit: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 b6 3. e4 Bb7 4. f3 f5 5. exf5 Nh6
*Kangaroo Defense: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 Bb4+
*Kangaroo Defense: Keres Defense, Transpositional Variation: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 Bb4+ 3. Nc3
*Benoni Defense: Franco-Sicilian Hybrid: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 exd5 4. cxd5 d6 5. Nc3 g6 6. e4 Bg7 7. Nf3 Ne7
*Horwitz Defense: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 e5
*Borg Defense: Borg Gambit: 1. d4 g5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Modern Defense: 1. d4 g6
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Benoni Pterodactyl: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. e4 c5 4. d5 Qa5+
*Modern Defense: Beefeater Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 f5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Fianchetto, Queen Pteranodon: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Benoni Beefeater Pterodactyl: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5 d6 5. e4 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Fianchetto, Queen Benoni Pterodactyl: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Queen Pterodactyl, Quiet Line: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. e3
*Modern Defense: Lizard Defense, Pirc-Diemer Gambit: 1. d4 g6 2. h4 Nf6 3. h5
*Colle System: Siroccopteryx Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 cxd4 5. Nxd4 Qa5+
*Colle System: Pterodactyl Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 Qa5+
*Pterodactyl Defense: Fianchetto, Queen Pterodactyl: 1. d4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. g3 c5 4. Bg2 Qa5+
*Australian Defense: 1. d4 Na6
*Mikenas Defense: 1. d4 Nc6
*Mikenas Defense: Lithuanian Variation: 1. d4 Nc6 2. c4 e5 3. d5 Nce7
*Mikenas Defense: Cannstatter Variation: 1. d4 Nc6 2. c4 e5 3. d5 Nd4
*Mikenas Defense: Pozarek Gambit: 1. d4 Nc6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Nxe5 4. Nc3 Nxc4
*Montevideo Defense: 1. d4 Nc6 2. d5 Nb8
*Zaire Defense: 1. d4 Nc6 2. d5 Nb8 3. e4 Nf6 4. e5 Ng8

A41 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1...d6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4 d6
*Old Indian Defense: 1. d4 d6 2. c4
*Rat Defense: English Rat: 1. d4 d6 2. c4 e5
*Rat Defense: English Rat, Pounds Gambit: 1. d4 d6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Be6
*Rat Defense: English Rat, Lisbon Gambit: 1. d4 d6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Nc6
*Wade Defense: 1. d4 d6 2. Nf3 Bg4
*Zukertort Opening: Wade Defense, Chigorin Plan: 1. d4 d6 2. Nf3 Bg4 3. c4 Nd7 4. Qb3 Rb8
*Robatsch Defense: 1. d4 d6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. e4 Bg4
*Modern Defense: Neo-Modern Defense: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. e4 e5
*Modern Defense: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6

A42 Modern Defence, Averbakh System, also Wade Defence: 2.c4 g6 3.Nc3 Bg7 4.e4
*Modern Defense: Averbakh Variation, Pseudo-Sämisch: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. e4 d6 4. Be3 Nf6 5. f3
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Bogolubovia: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. e4 d6 4. Nc3 c5 5. Nge2 Qa5
*Modern Defense: Averbakh System: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. e4
*Modern Defense: Randspringer Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. e4 f5
*Modern Defense: Kotov Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. c4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. e4 Nc6
*Pterodactyl Defense: 1. Nf3 c5 2. c4 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. e4 Qa5+ 5. Nc3 d6

A43 Old Benoni Defence: 1...c5
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni: 1. d4 c5
*Benoni Defense: Zilbermints-Benoni Gambit: 1. d4 c5 2. b4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Liedmann Gambit: 1. d4 c5 2. c4 cxd4 3. e3
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni: 1. d4 c5 2. d5
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 d6
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni, Schmid Variation: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 d6 3. Nc3 g6
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni, Mujannah Formation: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 f5
*Benoni Defense: Benoni-Staunton Gambit: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 f5 3. e4
*Benoni Defense: Snail Variation: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 Na6
*Benoni Defense: Benoni-Indian Defense: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 Nf6
*Benoni Defense: Woozle: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 Nf6 3. Nc3 Qa5
*Benoni Defense: Benoni Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 c5 2. dxc5
*Benoni Defense: Cormorant Gambit: 1. d4 c5 2. dxc5 b6
*Benoni Defense: Benoni Gambit, Schlenker Defense: 1. d4 c5 2. dxc5 Na6
*Benoni Defense: Zilbermints-Benoni Gambit: 1. d4 c5 2. Nf3 cxd4 3. b4
*Benoni Defense: Zilbermints-Benoni Gambit, Tamarkin Countergambit: 1. d4 c5 2. Nf3 cxd4 3. b4 e5
*Benoni Defense: Benoni-Indian Defense, Kingside Move Order: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. d5
*Indian Defense: Pseudo-Benko: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. d5 b5
*Benoni Defense: Hawk Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5 3. d5 c4
*Benoni Defense: French Benoni: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 c5 3. d5

A44 Old Benoni Defence: 2.d5 e5
*Benoni Defense: Old Benoni: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 e5
*Benoni Defense: Semi-Benoni: 1. d4 c5 2. d5 e5 3. e4 d6

===A45–A49===
1.d4 Nf6 without 2.c4: Atypical replies to 1...Nf6 
A45 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game, Trompowsky Attack: 1.d4 Nf6 (without 2.Nf3)
*Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6
*Trompowsky Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5
*Trompowsky Attack: Poisoned Pawn Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 c5 3. d5 Qb6 4. Nc3
*Trompowsky Attack: Classical Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 e6
*Trompowsky Attack: Classical Defense, Big Center Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 e6 3. e4
*Trompowsky Attack: Borg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. Bf4 g5
*Trompowsky Attack: Edge Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. Bh4
*Trompowsky Attack: Edge Variation, Hergert Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. Bh4 c6 4. Nd2 Qa5 5. c3 Nxd2 6. Qxd2 d5 7. e4
*Trompowsky Attack: Edge Variation, Hergert Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. Bh4 d5 4. f3 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bf5 6. e4
*Trompowsky Attack: Raptor Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. h4
*Trompowsky Attack: Raptor Variation, Hergert Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Bg5 Ne4 3. h4 Nxg5 4. hxg5 e5
*Indian Defense: Pawn Push Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. d5
*Indian Defense: Omega Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. e4
*Indian Defense: Omega Gambit, Arafat Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. e4 Nxe4 3. Bd3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*Paleface Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. f3
*Indian Defense: Paleface Attack, Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Deferred: 1. d4 Nf6 2. f3 d5 3. e4
*Indian Defense: Gedult Attack, Gedult Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. f3 d5 3. g4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Veresov, Richter Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. f3 d5 3. Nc3
*Canard Opening: 1. d4 Nf6 2. f4
*Indian Defense: Tartakower Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g3
*Indian Defense: Gibbins-Weidenhagen Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g4
*Indian Defense: Gibbins-Weidenhagen Gambit, Oshima Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g4 e5
*Indian Defense: Gibbins-Weidenhagen Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g4 Nxg4
*Indian Defense: Gibbins-Weidenhagen Gambit, Stummer Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g4 Nxg4 3. e4 d6 4. Be2 Nf6 5. Nc3
*Indian Defense: Gibbins-Weidenhagen Gambit, Maltese Falcon: 1. d4 Nf6 2. g4 Nxg4 3. f3 Nf6 4. e4
*Indian Defense: Reversed Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5
*Amazon Attack: Siberian Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Qd3
*Indian Defense: Maddigan Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 e5
*Indian Defense: Lazard Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nd2 e5

A46 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game, Torre Attack: 2.Nf3
*Indian Defense: Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3
*Indian Defense: Knights Variation, Alburt-Miles Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 a6
*Indian Defense: Polish Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b5
*Indian Defense: Spielmann-Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c5
*Indian Defense: Czech-Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 c6
*Indian Defense: Wade-Tartakower Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d6
*Indian Defense: London System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bf4
*Torre Attack: Classical Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bg5
*Torre Attack: Classical Defense, Petrosian Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bg5 c5 4. e3 b6 5. d5
*Torre Attack: Wagner Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bg5 c5 4. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Torre Attack, Breyer Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bg5 d5 4. e3 c5 5. c3 Qb6
*Torre Attack: Classical Defense, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bg5 h6
*Yusupov-Rubinstein System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Veresov Attack, Classical Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5
*Döry Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 Ne4

A47 Queen&#x27;s Indian Defence: 2...b6
*Pseudo Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b6
*Indian Defense: Schnepper Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b6 3. c3 e5
*Marienbad System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b6 3. g3 Bb7 4. Bg2 c5
*Marienbad System: Berg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 b6 3. g3 Bb7 4. Bg2 c5 5. c4 cxd4 6. Qxd4

A48 King&#x27;s Indian, East Indian Defence: 2...g6
*East Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6
*London System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Bf4
*Torre Attack: Fianchetto Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Bg5
*Torre Attack: Fianchetto Defense, Euwe Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Bg5 Bg7 4. Nbd2 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Torre Attack, Grünfeld Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Bg5 Bg7 4. Nbd2 d5 5. e3 0-0
*Indian Defense: Colle System, King&#x27;s Indian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. e3 Bg7 4. Bd3 d6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Barry Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Barry Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Barry Attack, Grünfeld Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Be2
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Barry Attack, Tarzan Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. Qd2

A49 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto without c4: 3.g3
*Indian Defense: Przepiorka Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3

===A50–A55===
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 without 2...e6 or 2...g6: Atypical Indian systems 
A50 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4 Nf6 2.c4 (without 2...d6 2...e5, 2...e6, 2...g6 or 2...c5)
*Indian Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4
*Indian Defense: Pyrenees Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Accelerated: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 b6
*Slav Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c6
*Indian Defense: Medusa Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g5
*Mexican Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 Nc6
*Mexican Defense: Horsefly Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 Nc6 3. d5 Ne5 4. f4

A51 Budapest Gambit Declined: 2...e5
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Fajarowicz Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ne4
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Fajarowicz Defense, Bonsdorf Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ne4 4. a3 b6
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Fajarowicz-Steiner Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ne4 4. Qc2

A52 Budapest Gambit: 3.dxe5 Ng4
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4 4. Bf4
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4 4. e4
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Alekhine Variation, Tartakower Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4 4. e4 d6
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Alekhine Variation, Abonyi Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4 4. e4 Nxe5 5. f4 Nec6
*Indian Defense: Budapest Defense, Adler Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 Ng4 4. Nf3

A53 Old Indian Defence: 2...d6
*Old Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6
*Old Indian Defense: Aged Gibbon Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. g4
*Old Indian Defense: Janowski Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Bf5
*Old Indian Defense: Janowski Variation, Grinberg Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Bf5 4. e4
*Old Indian Defense: Janowski Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Bf5 4. f3
*Old Indian Defense: Janowski Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Bf5 4. g3
*Old Indian Defense: Czech Variation, with Nc3: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 c6
*Old Indian Defense: Czech Variation, with Nf3: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nf3 c6

A54 Old Indian, Ukrainian Variation: 3.Nc3 e5
*Old Indian Defense: Ukrainian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 e5
*Old Indian Defense: Duz-Khotimirsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 e5 4. e3 Nbd7 5. Bd3
*Old Indian Defense: Two Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 e5 4. Nf3
*Old Indian Defense: Tartakower-Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nf3 Bg4

A55 Old Indian, Main line: 4.Nf3 Nbd7 5.e4
*Old Indian Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. e4 e5 5. Nf3

=== A56–A79 ===
Benoni Defence (and Benko Gambit): 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 

A56 Benoni Defence: 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 c5 
*Benoni Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5
*Benoni Defense: Hromádka System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 d6
*Benoni Defense: Czech Benoni Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e5
*Benoni Defense: King&#x27;s Indian System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e5 4. Nc3 d6 5. e4 g6
*Vulture Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 Ne4
*Benoni Defense: Weenink Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. dxc5 e6
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Burille Variation, Reversed Tarrasch: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. e3 g6 4. Nc3 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 cxd4 7. exd4 d5 8. 0-0 Nc6

A57 Benko Gambit: 3.d5 b5 
*Benko Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5
*Benko Gambit Declined: Sosonko Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. a4
*Benko Gambit Declined: Bishop Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. Bg5
*Benko Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Pawn Return Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. b6
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Modern Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. e3
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Dlugy Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. f3
*Benko Gambit: Zaitsev System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. Nc3
*Benko Gambit: Zaitsev Variation, Nescafe Frappe Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. Nc3 axb5 6. e4 b4 7. Nb5
*Benko Gambit: Nescafe Frappe Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. Nc3 axb5 6. e4 b4 7. Nb5 d6 8. Bc4
*Benko Gambit Declined: Hjørring Countergambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. e4
*Benko Gambit Declined: Pseudo-Sämisch: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. f3
*Benko Gambit: Mutkin Countergambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. g4
*Benko Gambit Declined: Quiet Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. Nd2
*Benko Gambit Declined: Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. Nf3

A58 Benko Gambit Accepted: 4.cxb5 a6 5.bxa6 
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Fully Accepted Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6
*Benko Gambit: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 Bxa6 6. Nc3 d6 7. Nf3 g6 8. g3
*Benko Gambit: Nd2 Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 Bxa6 6. Nc3 d6 7. Nf3 g6 8. Nd2
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Central Storming Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 g6 6. Nc3 Bxa6 7. f4
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 g6 6. Nc3 Bxa6 7. g3 d6 8. Bg2 Bg7 9. Nf3

A59 Benko Gambit, 7.e4: 5...Bxa6 6.Nc3 d6 7.e4
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Yugoslav: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 Bxa6 6. Nc3 d6 7. e4
*Benko Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 g6 6. Nc3 Bxa6 7. e4 Bxf1 8. Kxf1 d6 9. g3
*Benko Gambit Accepted: Yugoslav: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 g6 6. Nc3 Bxa6 7. e4 Bxf1 8. Kxf1 d6 9. Nge2
*Benko Gambit Accepted: King Walk Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 b5 4. cxb5 a6 5. bxa6 g6 6. Nc3 Bxa6 7. Nf3 d6 8. e4 Bxf1 9. Kxf1 Bg7 10. g3 0-0 11. Kg2

A60 Benoni Defence: 3.d5 e6
*Benoni Defense: Modern Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6
*Benoni Defense: Modern Variation, Snake Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 Bd6

A61 Benoni Defence: 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.Nf3 g6
*Benoni Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6
*Benoni Defense: Uhlmann Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Bg5
*Benoni Defense: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. g3
*Benoni Defense: Knight&#x27;s Tour Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Nd2

A62 Benoni, Fianchetto Variation without 9...Nbd7: 7.g3 Bg7 8.Bg2 0-0
*Benoni Defense: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Bg2 Bg7 8. Nf3 0-0

A63 Benoni, Fianchetto Variation, 9...Nbd7: 9.Nbd7
*Benoni Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Hastings Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Bg2 Bg7 8. Nf3 0-0 9. 0-0 Nbd7

A64 Benoni, Fianchetto Variation, 11...Re8: 9...Nbd7: 10.Nd2 a6 11.a4 Re8 
*Benoni Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Hastings Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Bg2 Bg7 8. Nf3 0-0 9. 0-0 a6 10. a4 Nbd7 11. Nd2 Re8

A65 Benoni, 6.e4: 4.Nc3 exd5 5.cxd5 d6 6.e4
*Benoni Defense: King&#x27;s Pawn Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4

A66 Benoni, Pawn Storm Variation: 6...g6 7.f4
*Benoni Defense: Pawn Storm Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. f4
*Benoni Defense: Mikenas Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. f4 Bg7 8. e5

A67 Benoni, Taimanov Variation: 7...Bg7 8.Bb5+
*Benoni Defense: Taimanov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. f4 Bg7 8. Bb5+

A68 Benoni, Four Pawns Attack: 7...Bg7 8.Nf3 0-0
*Benoni Defense: Four Pawns Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. f4 Bg7 8. Nf3 0-0

A69 Benoni, Four Pawns Attack, Main line: 9.Be2 Re8
*Benoni Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. d5 e6 8. Be2 exd5 9. cxd5 Re8

A70 Benoni, Classical with e4 and Nf3: 6...g6 7.Nf3
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Traditional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4 Bg7 8. Be2
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, New York Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4 Bg7 8. h3

A71 Benoni, Classical, 8.Bg5: 7... Bg7 8.Bg5
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Averbakh-Grivas Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4 Bg7 8. Bg5

A72 Benoni, Classical without 9.0-0: 7...Bg7 8.Be2 0-0
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0

A73 Benoni, Classical, 9.0-0: 9.0-0
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0

A74 Benoni, Classical, 9...a6, 10.a4: 9...a6 10.a4
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Full Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 a6 10. a4

A75 Benoni, Classical with 9...a6 and 10...Bg4: 9...a6 10.a4 Bg4
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Argentine Counterattack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 a6 10. a4 Bg4

A76 Benoni, Classical, 9...Re8: 9...Re8
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Czerniak Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 Re8

A77 Benoni, Classical, 9...Re8, 10.Nd2: 10.Nd2
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Czerniak Defense, Tal Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 Re8 10. Nd2

A78 Benoni, Classical with 9...Re8 and 10...Na6: 10...Na6
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Czerniak Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. Nc3 g6 7. e4 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 Re8 10. Nd2 Na6

A79 Benoni, Classical, 11.f3: 11.f3
*Benoni Defense: Classical Variation, Czerniak Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 c5 3. d5 e6 4. Nc3 exd5 5. cxd5 d6 6. e4 g6 7. Nf3 Bg7 8. Be2 0-0 9. 0-0 Re8 10. Nd2 Na6 11. f3

===A80–A99===
Dutch Defence: 1.d4 f5 
A80 Dutch Defence: 1.d4 f5
*Dutch Defense: 1. d4 f5
*Dutch Defense: Senechaud Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. Bf4 e6 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Hopton Attack: 1. d4 f5 2. Bg5
*Dutch Defense: Krejcik Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. g4
*Dutch Defense: Hevendehl Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. g4 e5
*Dutch Defense: Krejcik Gambit, Tate Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. g4 fxg4 3. e4 d5 4. Nc3
*Dutch Defense: Korchnoi Attack: 1. d4 f5 2. h3
*Dutch Defense: Janzen-Korchnoi Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. h3 Nf6 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Raphael Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Veresov Attack, Dutch System: 1. d4 f5 2. Nc3 d5
*Dutch Defense: Kingfisher Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. Nc3 d5 3. e4
*Dutch Defense: Spielmann Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Omega-Isis Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. Nf3 e5
*Dutch Defense: Alapin Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. Qd3
*Dutch Defense: Manhattan Gambit, Anti-Stonewall: 1. d4 f5 2. Qd3 d5 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Manhattan Gambit, Anti-Modern: 1. d4 f5 2. Qd3 d6 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Manhattan Gambit, Anti-Classical Line: 1. d4 f5 2. Qd3 e6 3. g4
*Dutch Defense: Manhattan Gambit, Anti-Leningrad: 1. d4 f5 2. Qd3 g6 3. g4

A81 Dutch Defence: 2.g3
*Dutch Defense: Fianchetto Attack: 1. d4 f5 2. g3
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad, Basman System: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 c6 3. Bg2 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. 0-0 Nh6
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad Variation, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 g6 3. Bg2 Bg7 4. Nh3
*Dutch Defense: Blackburne Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 e6 4. Nh3
*Dutch Defense: Semi-Leningrad Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 g6

A82 Dutch, Staunton Gambit 2.e4 
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. e4
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4
*Dutch Defense: Blackmar&#x27;s Second Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, Tartakower Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. g4
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, American Attack: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nd2
*Rat Defense: Balogh Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 f5

A83 Dutch, Staunton Gambit, Staunton&#x27;s line 2.e4 fxe4 3.Nc3 Nf6 4.Bg5
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 b6
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, Chigorin Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c6
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, Lasker Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 g6 5. f3
*Dutch Defense: Staunton Gambit, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. e4 fxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 g6 5. h4

A84 Dutch Defence 2.c4: 2.c4
*Dutch Defense: 1. d4 f5 2. c4
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 e6
*Dutch Defense: Bellon Gambit: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 e6 3. e4
*Dutch Defense: Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3
*Dutch Defense: Bladel Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Nh6
*Dutch Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6
*Dutch Defense: Krause Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. Nc3 d6 4. Nf3 Nc6

A85 Dutch with 2.c4 Nf6 3.Nc3: 2... Nf6 3.Nc3
*Dutch Defense: Queen&#x27;s Knight Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. Nc3

A86 Dutch with 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3: 2... Nf6 3.g3
*Dutch Defense: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3
*Dutch Defense: Hort-Antoshin System: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 d6 4. Bg2 c6 5. Nc3 Qc7
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 g6

A87 Dutch, Leningrad, Main Variation: 3...g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.Nf3
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. Nf3

A88 Dutch, Leningrad, Main Variation with 5...0-0 6.0-0 d6 7.Nc3 c6: 5...0-0 6.0-0 d6 7.Nc3 c6 
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad Variation, Warsaw Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. 0-0 0-0 6. c4 d6 7. Nc3 c6

A89 Dutch, Leningrad, Main Variation with 5...0-0 6.0-0 d6 7.Nc3 Nc6: 5...0-0 6.0-0 d6 7.Nc3 Nc6
*Dutch Defense: Leningrad Variation, Matulovic Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. g3 Nf6 3. Bg2 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. 0-0 0-0 6. c4 d6 7. Nc3 Nc6

A90 Dutch Defence 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3 e6 4.Bg2: 3...e6 4.Bg2
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation, Modern Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. g3 c6 5. Bg2 d5 6. 0-0 Bd6
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2
*Dutch Defense: Nimzo-Dutch Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Bb4+
*Dutch Defense: Nimzo-Dutch Variation, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Bb4+ 5. Bd2 Be7
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 d5 5. Nf3

A91 Dutch Defence 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3 e6 4.Bg2 Be7: 4...Be7
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Blackburne Attack: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nh3

A92 Dutch Defence 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3 e6 4.Bg2 Be7 5.Nf3 0-0: 5.Nf3 0-0
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5 7. Nc3
*Dutch Defense: Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Ne4

A93 Dutch, Stonewall, Botvinnik Variation 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3 e6 4.Bg2 Be7 5.Nf3 0-0 6.0-0 d5 7. b3: 6.0-0 d5 7. b3
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5 7. b3

A94 Dutch, Stonewall with 6.0-0 d5.7.b3 c6 8.Ba3: 7... c6 8.Ba3
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5 7. b3 c6 8. Ba3

A95 Dutch, Stonewall with 6.0-0 d5.7.Nc3 c6: 6.0-0 d5 7.Nc3 c6
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5 7. Nc3 c6
*Dutch Defense: Stonewall Variation, Chekhover Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d5 7. Nc3 c6 8. Qc2 Qe8 9. Bg5

A96 Dutch, Classical Variation 2.c4 Nf6 3.g3 e6 4.Bg2 Be7 5.Nf3 0-0 6.0-0 d6: 6.0-0 d6
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Buenos Aires Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 a5
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Huisl Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 Ne4

A97 Dutch, Ilyin–Genevsky Variation 7.Nc3 Qe8: 7.Nc3 Qe8
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 Qe8
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation, Winter Variation: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 Qe8 8. Re1

A98 Dutch, Ilyin–Genevsky Variation with 7.Nc3 Qe8 8.Qc2: 8.Qc2
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation, Alatortsev-Lisitsyn Line: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 Qe8 8. Qc2

A99 Dutch, Ilyin–Genevsky Variation with 7.Nc3 Qe8 8.b3: 8.b3
*Dutch Defense: Classical Variation, Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation, Modern Main Line: 1. d4 f5 2. c4 Nf6 3. g3 e6 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 d6 7. Nc3 Qe8 8. b3

==B – Semi-Open Games other than the French Defence==
* 1.e4 without 1...c5, 1...e6 or 1...e5 (B00–B19)
* 1.e4 c5: Sicilian Defence (B20–B99)

===B00–B19===
1.e4 without 1...c5, 1...e6 or 1...e5 
B00 King&#x27;s Pawn Opening without 1...e5, 1...e6, 1...d5, 1...Nf6, 1...g6, 1...d6, 1...c6, 1...c5.
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. e4
*Ware Defense: 1. e4 a5
*Ware Defense: Snagglepuss Defense: 1. e4 a5 2. d4 Nc6
*St. George Defense: 1. e4 a6
*St. George Defense: San Jorge Variation: 1. e4 a6 2. d4 b5 3. Nf3 Bb7 4. Bd3 d6 5. 0-0 g6 6. c3 Bg7
*St. George Defense: Polish Variation: 1. e4 a6 2. d4 b5 3. Nf3 Bb7 4. Bd3 e6
*St. George Defense: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 a6 2. d4 e5
*Owen Defense: 1. e4 b6
*Guatemala Defense: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 Ba6
*Owen Defense: Matovinsky Gambit: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 Bb7 3. Bd3 f5 4. exf5 Bxg2 5. Qh5+ g6
*Owen Defense: Naselwaus Gambit: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 Bb7 3. Bg5
*Owen Defense: Wind Gambit: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 Bb7 3. f3 e5
*Owen Defense: Smith Gambit: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 Bb7 3. Nf3
*Owen Defense: Hekili-Loa Gambit: 1. e4 b6 2. d4 c5 3. dxc5 Nc6
*Pirc Defense: 1. e4 d6
*Pirc Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4
*Rat Defense: Antal Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nd7
*Pirc Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6
*Lion Defense: Lion&#x27;s Jaw: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. f3
*Pirc Defense: Roscher Gambit: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nf3
*Rat Defense: Harmonist: 1. e4 d6 2. f4
*Rat Defense: Fuller Gambit: 1. e4 d6 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 Nf6
*Rat Defense: Spike Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. g4
*Rat Defense: Petruccioli Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. h4
*Duras Gambit: 1. e4 f5
*Barnes Defense: 1. e4 f6
*Owen Defense: Unicorn Variation: 1. e4 f6 2. d4 b6 3. c4 Bb7
*Fried Fox Defense: 1. e4 f6 2. d4 Kf7
*Borg Defense: 1. e4 g5
*Borg Defense: Borg Gambit: 1. e4 g5 2. d4 Bg7
*Borg Defense: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 g5 2. d4 e5
*Borg Defense: Troon Gambit: 1. e4 g5 2. d4 h6 3. h4 g4
*Goldsmith Defense: 1. e4 h5
*Goldsmith Defense: Picklepuss Defense: 1. e4 h5 2. d4 Nf6
*Carr Defense: 1. e4 h6
*Carr Defense: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 h6 2. d4 e5
*Lemming Defense: 1. e4 Na6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: 1. e4 Nc6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Wheeler Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. b4
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Pseudo-Spanish Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Bb5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Woodchuck Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 a6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Hornung Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Be3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. e5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Aachen Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 Nb4
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Exchange Variation, Marshall Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5 4. Nc3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Brandics Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 a6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4
*Van Geet Opening: Berlin Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. d5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Richter Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. d5 Nb8 5. f3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Nimzowitsch Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. d5 Ne5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Heinola-Deppe Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 e5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Erben Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 g6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Vehre Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Mikenas Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 d6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Linksspringer Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. d5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Bielefelder Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Bc5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, de Smet Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 d6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Hammer Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 f6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Riemann Defense: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Nxe5 4. f4 Nc6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Nxe5 4. f4 Ng6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Keres Attack: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Nxe5 4. Nc3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Nxe5 4. Nf3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Kennedy Variation, Herford Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 e5 3. dxe5 Qh4
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Neo-Mongoloid Defense: 1. e4 Nc6 2. d4 f6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: French Connection: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nc3 e6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Pirc Connection: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nc3 g6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Breyer Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. d4 e5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Declined Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Williams Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 d6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Franco-Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 e6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Colorado Countergambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 f5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: Colorado Countergambit Accepted: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 f5 3. exf5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: El Columpio Defense: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Ng4
*Nimzowitsch Defense: El Columpio Defense, Pin Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Ng4 4. d4 d6 5. h3 Nh6 6. Bb5
*Nimzowitsch Defense: El Columpio Defense, El Columpio Gambit: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Ng4 4. d4 d6 5. h3 Nh6 6. e6
*Nimzowitsch Defense: El Columpio Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 Nc6 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Ng4 4. d4 d6 5. h3 Nh6 6. exd6
*Hippopotamus Defense: 1. e4 Nh6
*Hippopotamus Defense: 1. e4 Nh6 2. d4 g6 3. c4 f6

B01 Scandinavian Defence (Center Counter Defence): 1...d5 (without 2.Nf3 (Tennison Gambit, A06))
*Scandinavian Defense: 1. e4 d5
*Scandinavian Defense: 1. e4 d5 2. b3
*Scandinavian Defense: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. b4
*Scandinavian Defense: Blackburne-Kloosterboer Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 c6
*Scandinavian Defense: Kloosterboer Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 c6 3. dxc6 e5
*Scandinavian Defense: Blackburne Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 c6 3. dxc6 Nxc6
*Scandinavian Defense: Boehnke Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 e5 3. dxe6 Bxe6
*Scandinavian Defense: Modern Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6
*Scandinavian Defense: Panov Transfer: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. c4 c6
*Scandinavian Defense: Icelandic-Palme Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. c4 e6
*Scandinavian Defense: Modern Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Elbow Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. Bb5+ c6
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Lusophobe Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. Bb5+ Nbd7 5. Be2
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Wuss Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. Be2
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Jadoul Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. f3 Bf5 5. Bb5+ Nbd7 6. c4
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Melbourne Shuffle Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. f3 Bf5 5. Bb5+ Nbd7 6. Nc3
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Banker Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. f3 Bf5 5. c4
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Correspondence Refutation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. f3 Bf5 5. g4
*Scandinavian Defense: Portuguese Gambit, Classical Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Bg4 4. Nf3
*Scandinavian Defense: Kádas Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 c6 4. dxc6 e5
*Scandinavian Defense: Richter Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 g6
*Scandinavian Defense: Modern Variation, Wing Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 g6 4. c4 b5
*Scandinavian Defense: Marshall Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Nxd5
*Scandinavian Defense: Kiel Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Nxd5 4. c4 Nb4
*Scandinavian Defense: Modern Variation, Gipslis Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Nxd5 4. Nf3 Bg4
*Scandinavian Defense: Richter Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Nf6 3. d4 Nxd5 4. Nf3 g6
*Scandinavian Defense: Mieses-Kotroc Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5
*Scandinavian Defense: Main Line: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5
*Scandinavian Defense: Main Line, Leonhardt Gambit: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. b4
*Scandinavian Defense: Anderssen Counterattack: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 e5
*Scandinavian Defense: Anderssen Counterattack, Orthodox Attack: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 e5 5. dxe5 Nc6 6. Nf3 Bb4 7. Bd2
*Scandinavian Defense: Anderssen Counterattack, Goteborg System: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 e5 5. Nf3
*Scandinavian Defense: Anderssen Counterattack, Collijn Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 e5 5. Nf3 Bg4
*Scandinavian Defense: Main Line, Mieses Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 Nf6
*Scandinavian Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 Bf5
*Scandinavian Defense: Grünfeld Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 Bf5 6. Ne5 c6 7. g4
*Scandinavian Defense: Lasker Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qa5 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 Bg4 6. h3
*Scandinavian Defense: Gubinsky-Melts Defense: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd6
*Scandinavian Defense: Schiller-Pytel Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd6 4. d4 c6
*Scandinavian Defense: Schiller-Pytel Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd6 4. d4 Nf6 5. Bc4 c6 6. Nge2 Bf5 7. Bf4 Qb4
*Scandinavian Defense: Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd6 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 a6
*Scandinavian Defense: Valencian Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd8
*Scandinavian Defense: Valencian Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd8 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 Bg4
*Scandinavian Defense: Valencian Variation, Ilundain Variation: 1. e4 d5 2. exd5 Qxd5 3. Nc3 Qd8 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 c6
*Van Geet Opening: Grünfeld Defense: 1. e4 d5 2. Nc3 dxe4 3. Nxe4 e5

B02 Alekhine&#x27;s Defence: 1.e4 Nf6
*Alekhine Defense: 1. e4 Nf6
*Alekhine Defense: Krejcik Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Bc4
*Alekhine Defense: Krejcik Variation, Krejcik Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Bc4 Nxe4 3. Bxf7+
*Alekhine Defense: Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. d3
*Alekhine Defense: Normal Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5
*Alekhine Defense: Welling Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. b3
*Alekhine Defense: Kmoch Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. Bc4 Nb6 4. Bb3 c5 5. d3
*Alekhine Defense: Two Pawns Attack: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4
*Alekhine Defense: Two Pawns Attack, Tate Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. a4
*Alekhine Defense: Steiner Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. b3
*Alekhine Defense: Two Pawns Attack, Lasker Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. c5
*Alekhine Defense: Hunt Variation, Lasker Simul Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. c5 Nd5 5. Bc4 e6 6. Nc3
*Alekhine Defense: Two Pawns Attack, Mikenas Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. c5 Nd5 5. Bc4 e6 6. Nc3 d6
*Alekhine Defense: Hunt Variation, Mikenas Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. c5 Nd5 5. Bc4 e6 6. Nc3 d6 7. Nxd5 exd5 8. Bxd5
*Alekhine Defense: Hunt Variation, Matsukevich Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nb6 4. c5 Nd5 5. Nc3 Nxc3 6. dxc3 d6 7. Bg5
*Alekhine Defense: The Squirrel: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. c4 Nf4
*Alekhine Defense: Buckley Attack: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. Na3
*Alekhine Defense: Sämisch Attack: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. Nc3
*Alekhine Defense: Mokele Mbembe: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Ne4
*Alekhine Defense: Mokele Mbembe, Vavra Defense: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Ne4 3. d4 e6
*Alekhine Defense: Mokele Mbembe, Modern Line: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Ne4 3. d4 f6
*Alekhine Defense: Brooklyn Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Ng8
*Alekhine Defense: Brooklyn Variation, Everglades Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Ng8 3. d4 f5
*Alekhine Defense: Scandinavian Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5
*Alekhine Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Myers Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. d3 dxe4 4. Bg5
*Alekhine Defense: Spielmann Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. e5 Nfd7 4. e6
*Alekhine Defense: Scandinavian Variation, Geschev Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. exd5 c6

B03: 1.e4 Nf6 2.e5 Nd5 3.d4 (including the Exchange Variation and Four Pawns Attack)
*Alekhine Defense: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4
*Alekhine Defense: O&#x27;Sullivan Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 b5
*Alekhine Defense: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6
*Alekhine Defense: Balogh Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Bc4
*Alekhine Defense: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4
*Alekhine Defense: Hunt Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. c5
*Alekhine Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. exd6
*Alekhine Defense: Exchange Variation, Voronezh Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. exd6 cxd6 6. Nc3 g6 7. Be3 Bg7 8. Rc1 0-0 9. b3
*Alekhine Defense: Exchange Variation, Karpov Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. exd6 cxd6 6. Nc3 g6 7. h3 Bg7 8. Nf3 0-0 9. Be2 Nc6 10. 0-0 Bf5 11. Bf4
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Trifunovic Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 Bf5
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Korchnoi Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 dxe5 6. fxe5 Bf5 7. Nc3 e6 8. Nf3 Be7 9. Be2 0-0 10. 0-0 f6
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 dxe5 6. fxe5 Nc6 7. Be3
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 dxe5 6. fxe5 Nc6 7. Be3 Bf5 8. Nc3 e6 9. Nf3 Qd7 10. Be2 0-0-0 11. 0-0 Be7
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Ilyin-Zhenevsky Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 dxe5 6. fxe5 Nc6 7. Nf3 Bg4 8. e6 fxe6 9. c5
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Cambridge Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 g5
*Alekhine Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. f4 g6
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Alekhine Gambit: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. c4 Nb6 5. Nf3 Bg4 6. Be2

B04: 1.e4 Nf6 2.e5 Nd5 3.d4 d6 4.Nf3 (Modern Variation without 4...Bg4)
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Larsen Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 dxe5
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Alburt Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 g6
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Keres Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 g6 5. Bc4 Nb6 6. Bb3 Bg7 7. a4
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Schmid Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Nb6
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Larsen-Haakert Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Nc6

B05: 1.e4 Nf6 2.e5 Nd5 3.d4 d6 4.Nf3 Bg4 (Modern Variation with 4...Bg4)
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Bg4
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Flohr Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Bg4 5. Be2 c6
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Alekhine Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Bg4 5. c4
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Vitolins Attack: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Bg4 5. c4 Nb6 6. d5
*Alekhine Defense: Modern Variation, Panov Variation: 1. e4 Nf6 2. e5 Nd5 3. d4 d6 4. Nf3 Bg4 5. h3

B06 Robatsch (Modern) Defence, including Monkey&#x27;s Bum
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Benoni: 1. d4 g6 2. e4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Benoni Pterodactyl: 1. d4 g6 2. Nc3 Bg7 3. e4 c5 4. d5 Qa5
*Modern Defense: 1. e4 g6
*Modern Defense: Bishop Attack, Monkey&#x27;s Bum: 1. e4 g6 2. Bc4 Bg7 3. Qf3 e6 4. d4 Bxd4
*Modern Defense: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7
*Modern Defense: Bishop Attack: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Bc4
*Modern Defense: Bishop Attack, Bücker Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Bc4 b5
*Modern Defense: Westermann Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Bd2
*Modern Defense: Wind Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Bd3
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Benoni Quetzalcoatlus: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. c4 c5 4. d5 d6 5. Nc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Anhanguera: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. c4 c5 4. Nc3 d6 5. Be3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Central, Quetzalcoatlus Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. c4 c5 4. Nc3 d6 5. dxc5 Qa5
*Modern Defense: Semi-Averbakh Variation, Pterodactyl Variation Declined: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. c4 c5 4. Nf3 d6 5. Be2 Qa5+
*Modern Defense: Dunworthy Variation: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. c4 d5 4. exd5 c6 5. dxc6 Bxd4
*Modern Defense: Three Pawns Attack: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. f4
*Pterodactyl Defense: Austrian, Pteranodon: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. f4 c5 4. c3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Austrian, Austriadactylus Western: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. f4 c5 4. Nf3 Qa5+
*Pterodactyl Defense: Fianchetto, Rhamphorhynchus: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. g3 c5 4. dxc5 Qa5+
*Pterodactyl Defense: Fianchetto, King Pterodactyl: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. g3 c5 4. Nf3 Qa5+
*Modern Defense: Standard Line: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3
*Modern Defense: Mongredien Defense, with Nc3: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 b6
*Modern Defense: Modern Pterodactyl: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Anhanguera: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. Be3
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Benoni Pteranodon: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. d5 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Rhamphorhynchus: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. dxc5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Pteranodon: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. dxc5 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Eastern, Pterodactyl: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. dxc5 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Siroccopteryx: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. Nf3 Qa5 5. Bc4
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Quetzalcoatlus: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c5 4. Nf3 Qa5 5. Be2 d6
*Modern Defense: Anti-Modern: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c6 4. Bc4 d6 5. Qe2
*Modern Defense: Gurgenidze Defense: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c6 4. f4 d5 5. e5 h5
*Modern Defense: Two Knights Variation, Suttles Variation: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 d6
*Modern Defense: Lizard Defense, Mittenberger Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d5
*Modern Defense: Standard Defense: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6
*Modern Defense: Pseudo-Austrian Attack: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. f4
*Modern Defense: Two Knights Variation: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. Nf3
*Modern Defense: Two Knights Variation, Suttles Variation, Tal Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nc3 d6 4. Nf3 c6 5. Bg5 Qb6 6. Qd2 Qxb2
*Modern Defense: Mongredien Defense, with Nf3: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nf3 b6
*Pterodactyl Defense: Western, Anhanguera: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nf3 c5 4. Be3 Qa5+
*Rat Defense: Accelerated Gurgenidze: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 d6 3. Nc3 c6
*Modern Defense: Fianchetto Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 f5
*Modern Defense: Norwegian Defense: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Nf6
*Modern Defense: Norwegian Defense, Norwegian Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Nf6 3. e5 Nh5 4. Be2 d6
*Modern Defense: Masur Gambit: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Nh6 3. Nc3 f5 4. Bxh6 Bxh6 5. exf5 0-0
*Pterodactyl Defense: Austrian, Grand Prix Pterodactyl: 1. e4 g6 2. Nc3 Bg7 3. f4 c5 4. Nf3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Western, Siroccopteryx: 1. e4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. d4 c5 4. Bc4 cxd4 5. Nxd4 Qa5+

B07 Pirc Defence
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Maróczy Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 e5
*Czech Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 c6
*Pirc Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6
*Pirc Defense: Kholmov System: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Bc4
*Pirc Defense: Chinese Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Be2 Bg7 5. g4
*Pirc Defense: Bayonet Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Be2 Bg7 5. h4
*Pirc Defense: 150 Attack, Sveshnikov-Janša Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Be3 c6 5. h3
*Pirc Defense: 150 Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Be3 c6 5. Qd2
*Pirc Defense: 150 Attack, Inner Doll Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Be3 c6 5. Qd2 Bg4
*Pirc Defense: Byrne Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Bg5
*Pirc Defense: Sveshnikov System: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. g3
*Lion Defense: Anti-Philidor: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. f4
*Lion Defense: Anti-Philidor, Lion&#x27;s Cave: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. f4 e5
*Lion Defense: Anti-Philidor, Lion&#x27;s Cave, Lion Claw Gambit: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. f4 e5 5. Nf3 exd4 6. Qxd4 c6 7. Bc4 d5
*Lion Defense: Bayonet Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. g4
*Modern Defense: Geller&#x27;s System: 1. e4 g6 2. d4 Bg7 3. Nf3 d6 4. c3

B08 Pirc, Classical (Two Knights) System
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation, Quiet System: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Be2
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation, Quiet System, Parma Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Be2 0-0 6. 0-0 Bg4
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation, Quiet System, Czech Defense: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Be2 0-0 6. 0-0 c6
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation, Quiet System, Chigorin Line: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Be2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nc6
*Pirc Defense: Classical Variation, Schlechter Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. h3

B09 Pirc, Austrian Attack
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Ljubojevic Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Bc4
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Dragon Formation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 c5
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Weiss Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Bd3
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Kurajica Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be3
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Unzicker Attack: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. e5
*Pirc Defense: Austrian Attack, Unzicker Attack, Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 g6 4. f4 Bg7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. e5 Nfd7 7. h4

B10 Caro–Kann Defence
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Euwe Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. b3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Labahn Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. b4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Labahn Attack, Double Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. b4 d5 3. b5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Labahn Attack, Polish Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. b4 e5 3. Bb2
*Caro-Kann Defense: Hillbilly Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. Bc4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Hillbilly Attack, Schaeffer Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. Bc4 d5 3. Bb3 dxe4 4. Qh5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. c4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 d5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack, Van Weersel Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 d5 3. cxd5 cxd5 4. Qb3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Toikkanen Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 d5 3. e5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. cxd5 Nf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack, Pseudo-Scandinavian: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Accelerated Panov Attack, Open Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. c4 e5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Breyer Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Breyer Variation, Stein Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d3 d5 3. Nd2 g6 4. Ngf3 Bg7 5. g3 e5 6. Bg2 Ne7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. b4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Spike Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. g4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Spike Variation, Scorpion-Grob Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. g4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. d3
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Scorpion-Horus Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. d3 dxe4 4. Bg5
*Caro-Kann Defense: St. Patrick&#x27;s Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. h3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Two Knights Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Nf3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Hector Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Nf3 dxe4 4. Ng5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Goldman Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Qf3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Endgame Offer: 1. e4 c6 2. Nf3 d5 3. d3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Endgame Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. Nf3 d5 3. d3 dxe4 4. dxe4 Qxd1+ 5. Kxd1
*Caro-Kann Defense: Apocalypse Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. Nf3 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. Ne5

B11 Caro–Kann, Two knights, 3...Bg4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Two Knights Attack, Mindeno Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Nf3 Bg4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Two Knights Attack, Mindeno Variation, Retreat Line: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Nf3 Bg4 4. h3 Bh5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Two Knights Attack, Mindeno Variation, Exchange Line: 1. e4 c6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Nf3 Bg4 4. h3 Bxf3

B12 Caro–Kann Defence
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Mieses Attack, Landau Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Bd3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. e6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Mieses Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Be3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Prins Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. b4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance, Short Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. c3 e6 5. Be2
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Bayonet Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. g4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Tal Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. h4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Van der Wiel Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. Nc3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Van der Wiel Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. Nc3 e6 5. g4 Bg6 6. Nge2 c5 7. h4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Van der Wiel Attack, Dreyev Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. Nc3 Qb6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. Ne2
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Short Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. Nf3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Advance Variation, Botvinnik-Carls Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. f3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Maróczy Variation, Maróczy Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. f3 dxe4 4. fxe4 e5 5. Nf3 exd4 6. Bc4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Modern Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2
*Caro-Kann Defense: Edinburgh Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Qb6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Ulysses Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nf3 dxe4 4. Ng5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Massachusetts Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 f5
*Caro-Kann Defense: De Bruycker Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 Na6
*Caro-Kann Defense: De Bruycker Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 Na6 3. Nc3 Nc7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Masi Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 Nf6

B13 Caro–Kann, Exchange Variation
*Caro-Kann Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Exchange Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. Bd3 Nc6 5. c3 Nf6 6. Bf4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Gunderam Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. c5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Modern Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov-Botvinnik, Herzog Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 dxc4 7. d5 Na5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Modern Defense, Carlsbad Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Modern Defense, Czerniak Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 Qa5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Modern Defense, Reifir-Spielmann Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 Qb6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Modern Defense, Mieses Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Nf3 Bg4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Exchange Variation, Bulla Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. g4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. Nf3 Nc6

B14 Caro–Kann, Panov–Botvinnik Attack, 5...e6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e6 6. Nf3 Bb4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Fianchetto Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Panov Attack, Fianchetto Defense, Fianchetto Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 cxd5 4. c4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. cxd5 Bg7

B15 Caro–Kann Defence
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Gurgenidze Counterattack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 b5
*Caro-Kann Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4
*Caro-Kann Defense: von Hennig Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Bc4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Rasa-Studier Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. f3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Alekhine Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Bd3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Alien Gambit: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Nxf6+ exf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Forgacs Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Nxf6+ exf6 6. Bc4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Gurgenidze System: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 g6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Campomanes Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Main Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4

B16 Caro–Kann, Bronstein–Larsen Variation
*Caro-Kann Defense: Bronstein-Larsen Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nf6 5. Nxf6+ gxf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Finnish Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 h6

B17 Caro–Kann, Steinitz Variation, Smyslov Systems
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Modern Variation, Kasparov Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Nf3 Ngf6 6. Ng3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Smyslov Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Bc4 Ngf6 6. Ng5 e6 7. Qe2 Nb6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Smyslov Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Bc4 Ngf6 6. Ng5 e6 7. Qe2 Nb6 8. Bb3
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Tiviakov-Fischer Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Bc4 Ngf6 6. Nxf6+ Nxf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Ng5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Modern Variation, Ivanchuk Defense: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Ng5 Ndf6
*Caro-Kann Defense: Karpov Variation, Modern Main Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Ng5 Ngf6 6. Bd3 e6 7. N1f3 Bd6 8. Qe2 h6 9. Ne4 Nxe4 10. Qxe4

B18 Caro–Kann, Classical Variation
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Maróczy Attack: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. f4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. h4
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Flohr Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. Nh3

B19 Caro–Kann, Classical, 7...Nd7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. h4 h6 7. Nf3 Nd7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Spassky Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. h4 h6 7. Nf3 Nd7 8. h5
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Lobron System: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. h4 h6 7. Nf3 Nd7 8. h5 Bh7 9. Bd3 Bxd3 10. Qxd3 e6 11. Bd2 Ngf6 12. 0-0-0 Be7
*Caro-Kann Defense: Classical Variation, Seirawan Variation: 1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bf5 5. Ng3 Bg6 6. h4 h6 7. Nf3 Nd7 8. h5 Bh7 9. Bd3 Bxd3 10. Qxd3 Ngf6 11. Bd2 e6 12. 0-0-0 Bd6

===B20–B99===
1.e4 c5: Sicilian Defence

*B20 Sicilian Defence, (any move for white without 2.Nc3 (B23–B26), 2.c3 (B22), 2.f4 (B21) and 2.Nf3 (B27–B99))
*Sicilian Defense: 1. e4 c5
*Sicilian Defense: Mengarini Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. a3
*Sicilian Defense: Myers Attack, with a4: 1. e4 c5 2. a4
*Sicilian Defense: Snyder Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b3
*Sicilian Defense: Snyder Variation, Queen Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b3 b6
*Sicilian Defense: Euwe Attack, Prins Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. b3 d5 3. Bb2
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. b4
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Marshall Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. a3
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Carlsbad Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. a3 bxa3
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Marienbad Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. a3 d5 4. exd5 Qxd5 5. Bb2
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Romanian Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. a3 d5 4. exd5 Qxd5 5. Nf3 e5 6. Bb2 Nc6 7. c4 Qe6
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Nanu Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. a3 d5 4. exd5 Qxd5 5. Nf3 e5 6. c4 Qe6 7. Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Abrahams Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. Bb2
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Santasiere Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. b4 cxb4 3. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Bowdler Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Staunton-Cochrane Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Gloria Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. g3 h5
*Sicilian Defense: Big Clamp Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d3 Nc6 3. c3 d6 4. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Dunne Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. g3
*Sicilian Defense: Grob Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. g4
*Sicilian Defense: Myers Attack, with h4: 1. e4 c5 2. h4
*Sicilian Defense: King David&#x27;s Opening: 1. e4 c5 2. Ke2
*Sicilian Defense: Kronberger Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Na3
*Sicilian Defense: Kronberger Variation, Nemeth Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Na3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Keres Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Ne2
*Sicilian Defense: Brick Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nh3
*Sicilian Defense: Amazon Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Qg4

*B21 Sicilian, Grand Prix Attack, 2.f4 (without 2...e5 (C30))
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Push Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 d3
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Dubois Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 d3 4. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Scandinavian Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 d5
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit, Danish Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nf3
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Chicago Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 d6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Nf6 7. 0-0 a6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Taimanov Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 e6 5. Bc4 a6 6. Nf3 Ne7
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Kan Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 e6 5. Nf3 a6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Finegold Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 e6 5. Nf3 d6 6. Bc4 a6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. Qe2 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Sozin Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Bc4 e6 6. Nf3 d6 7. 0-0 a6 8. Qe2 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit, Chicago Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Bc4 e6 6. Nf3 d6 7. 0-0 a6 8. Qe2 b5 9. Bb3 Ra7
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Classical Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 d6 6. Bc4 a6 7. 0-0 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Scheveningen Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 d6 6. Bc4 e6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Paulsen Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 a6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Morphy Defense Deferred: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 a6 7. 0-0 b5 8. Bb3 Bc5
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Pin Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Bb4
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Morphy Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Bc5
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Siberian Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Qc7
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Larsen Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Qc7 7. Qe2 a6 8. 0-0 Bd6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Siberian Variation, Siberian Trap: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 e6 6. Bc4 Qc7 7. Qe2 Nf6 8. 0-0 Ng4
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Accepted, Fianchetto Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Nxc3 Nc6 5. Nf3 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Center Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Alapin Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Declined, Wing Formation: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. c3 Qa5
*Sicilian Defense: Halasz Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Morphy Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. Nf3
*Sicilian Defense: Morphy Gambit, Andreaschek Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. Nf3 e5 4. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Coles Sicilian Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. d4 cxd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qd1 Nf6 5. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: McDonnell Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. f4
*Sicilian Defense: McDonnell Attack, Tal Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 Nf6
*Bird Opening: Dutch Variation, Batavo Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. f4 d5 3. Nf3 dxe4

*B22 Sicilian, Alapin Variation, 2.c3 (without 2...d6 3.Nf3 (C50), 2...e6 3.Nf3 d5 (B40), 2...e6 3.d4 d5 4.e5 (C02), 2...g6 3.Nf3 (B27))
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Barmen Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Barmen Defense, Central Exchange: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5 4. d4 cxd4 5. cxd4 Nc6 6. Nf3 Bg4
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Barmen Defense, Endgame Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5 4. d4 cxd4 5. cxd4 Nc6 6. Nf3 Bg4 7. Nc3 Bxf3 8. gxf3 Qxd4 9. Qxd4 Nxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Barmen Defense, Milner-Barry Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5 4. d4 Nc6 5. Nf3 cxd4 6. cxd4 e5 7. Nc3 Bb4 8. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Barmen Defense, Modern Line: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 d5 3. exd5 Qxd5 4. d4 Nf6 5. Nf3 Bg4
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Smith-Morra Declined: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. d4 cxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Stoltz Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Bc4 Nb6 6. Bb3
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Stoltz Attack, Ivanchuk Line: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Bc4 Nb6 6. Bb3 c4 7. Bc2 Qc7 8. Qe2 g5
*Sicilian Defense: Heidenfeld Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. c3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Na3

*B23 Sicilian, Closed, 2.Nc3 (without 2...a6 3.Nf3 (B28), 2...d6 3.Nf3 (B50), 2...Nc6 3.g3 (B24–B26))
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 e6
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 e6 3. g3
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Korchnoi Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 e6 3. g3 d5
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Traditional: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Grand Prix Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Grand Prix Attack, Schofman Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 g6 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Bc4 e6 6. f5
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Grob Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g4
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Chameleon Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Nge2

*B24 Sicilian, Closed, 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3 (without 3...g6 (B25–B26))
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Smyslov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 e6 6. Be3 Nd4 7. Nce2

*B25 Sicilian, Closed, 2.Nc3 Nc6 3.g3 g6 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.d3 d6 (without 6.Be3 (B26))
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Botvinnik Defense, with f4: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. f4 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Botvinnik Defense, Edge Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. f4 e5 7. Nh3 Nge7
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Botvinnik Defense, with Nge2: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. Nge2 e5

*B26 Sicilian, Closed, 6.Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Closed: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 g6 4. Bg2 Bg7 5. d3 d6 6. Be3

*B27 Sicilian Defence, 2.Nf3 (without 2...a6 (B28), 2...Nc6 (B30), 2...d6 (B50), 2...e6 (B40), 2...Nf6 (B29))
*Sicilian Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3
*Sicilian Defense: Polish Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Katalimov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 b6
*Sicilian Defense: Jalalabad Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Brussels Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 f5
*Sicilian Defense: Double-Dutch Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 f5 3. exf5 Nh6
*Sicilian Defense: Hyperaccelerated Dragon: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6
*Pterodactyl Defense: Western, Pterodactyl: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. c3 Bg7 4. d4 Qa5
*Sicilian Defense: Acton Extension: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bh6
*Sicilian Defense: Hyperaccelerated Fianchetto: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4
*Sicilian Defense: Hyperaccelerated Pterodactyl: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7
*Pterodactyl Defense: Western, Rhamphorhynchus: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. dxc5 Qa5+
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Rhamphorhynchus: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. dxc5 Qa5+ 5. Nc3
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Pteranodon: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. dxc5 Qa5+ 5. Nc3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3
*Sicilian Defense: Hyperaccelerated Pterodactyl, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. dxc5 Qa5+ 5. Nc3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Qxc3+
*Modern Defense: Pterodactyl Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. Nc3 Qa5
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Unpin: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. Nc3 Qa5 5. Bd2
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Anhanguera: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. Nc3 Qa5 5. Be3
*Pterodactyl Defense: Sicilian, Benoni Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 Bg7 4. Nc3 Qa5 5. d5
*Sicilian Defense: Frederico Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 f5
*Sicilian Defense: Bücker Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 h6
*Sicilian Defense: Mongoose Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Qa5
*Sicilian Defense: Quinteros Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Qc7

*B28 Sicilian, O&#x27;Kelly Variation, 2.Nf3 a6 (without 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 e6 (B41, B43))
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Kieseritzky System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. b3
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Wing Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. b4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Aronin System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Venice System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c3
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Venice System, Ljubojevic Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c3 b5
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Venice System, Gambit Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c3 d5 4. exd5 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Venice System, Steiner Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c3 d6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Venice System, Barcza Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c3 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Maróczy Bind: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Maróczy Bind, Robatsch Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c4 d6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Maróczy Bind, Paulsen Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. c4 e6
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Quiet System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d3
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Normal System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Normal System, Cortlever Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Normal System, Smith-Morra Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d4 cxd4 4. c3
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Normal System, Taimanov Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 e5
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Normal System, Zagorovsky Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Qxd4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Réti System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. g3
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Yerevan System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6 3. Nc3

*B29 Sicilian, Nimzovich–Rubinstein Variation, 2.Nf3 Nf6 (without 3.e5 Nd5 4.c3 (B22), 3.Nc3 Nc6 (B30), 3.Nc3 d6 (B50), 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 d6 (B54, B56, B94–B99))
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. Nc3 e6 5. Nxd5 exd5 6. d4 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e5 Nd5 4. Nc3 Nxc3
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Closed Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3

*B30 Sicilian Defence, 2.Nf3 Nc6 (without 3.Bb5 g6 (B31) 3.Bb5 d6 (B51))
** Sicilian, Rossolimo Variation, 3.Bb5
*Sicilian Defense: Old Sicilian: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Portsmouth Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. b4
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, San Francisco Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Na5 4. b4
*Sicilian Defense: Rossolimo Variation, Brooklyn Retreat Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nb8
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Anti-Sveshnikov Variation, with d6: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 e5 4. Bc4 Be7 5. d3 d6
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Anti-Sveshnikov Variation, Kharlov-Kramnik Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 e5 4. Bc4 Be7 5. d3 d6 6. Nd2 Bg5
*Sicilian Defense: Closed, Anti-Sveshnikov Variation, with Nf6: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 e5 4. Bc4 Be7 5. d3 Nf6

*B31 Sicilian, Nimzovich–Rossolimo Attack, 3.Bb5 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, Fianchetto Variation, Gufeld Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. 0-0 Bg7 5. c3 e5 6. d4
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, Fianchetto Variation, Lutikov Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. 0-0 Bg7 5. c3 Nf6 6. d4
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, Fianchetto Variation, Totsky Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. 0-0 Bg7 5. c3 Nf6 6. Qa4
*Sicilian Defense: Nyezhmetdinov-Rossolimo Attack, Gurgenidze Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. 0-0 Bg7 5. Re1 e5 6. b4

*B32 Sicilian Defence, 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 (without 3...cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 (B33), 4...e6 (B44–B47) 4...g6 (B34))
*Sicilian Defense: Open: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4
*Sicilian Defense: Open: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Open: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4
*Sicilian Defense: O&#x27;Kelly Variation, Maróczy Bind, Geller Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. c4 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Nimzo-American Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 d5
*Sicilian Defense: Löwenthal Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Kalashnikov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 e5 5. Nb5 d6
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Godiva Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Qb6
*Sicilian Defense: Flohr Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Qc7
*Sicilian Defense: Franco-Sicilian Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 e6

*B33 Sicilian, Sveshnikov (Lasker–Pelikan) Variation, 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nf6 (without 5.Nc3 e6 (B45) 5...g6 (B34) 5...d6 (B56))
*Sicilian Defense: Open: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Schlechter Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Nb3
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Sveshnikov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Sveshnikov Variation, Novosibirsk Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 b5 9. Bxf6 gxf6 10. Nd5 Bg7
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Sveshnikov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 b5 9. Bxf6 gxf6 10. Nd5 f5
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Sveshnikov Variation, Peresypkin&#x27;s Sacrifice: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 b5 9. Bxf6 gxf6 10. Nd5 f5 11. Bxb5
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Sveshnikov Variation, Chelyabinsk Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 b5 9. Nd5
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Bird Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Ndb5 d6 7. Bg5 a6 8. Na3 Be6
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Retreat Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Nf3
*Sicilian Defense: Lasker-Pelikan Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Nxc6
*Sicilian Defense: Four Knights Variation, Cobra Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e6 6. Ndb5 Bc5

*B34 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Exchange Variation, 2.Nf3 Nc6 3 d4.cxd4 4.Nxd4 g6 (without 5.c4 (B36), 5.Nc3 Bg7 6.Be3 Nf6 7.Bc4 (B35))
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nxc6

*B35 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Modern Variation with 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 g6 5.Nc3 Bg7 6.Be3 Nf6 7.Bc4 (without 7...b6 (B72, B75))
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Modern Bc4 Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. Be3 Nf6 7. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Modern Bc4 Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. Be3 Nf6 7. Bc4 d6

*B36 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Maroczy bind 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 g6 5.c4 (without 5...Bg7 (B37–B39))
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Maróczy Bind: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Maróczy Bind, Gurgenidze Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4 Nf6 6. Nc3 Nxd4 7. Qxd4 d6

*B37 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Maroczy bind, 5...Bg7 (without 6.Be3 (B38))
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Maróczy Bind: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4 Bg7
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Simagin Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4 Bg7 6. Nc2 d6 7. Be2 Nh6

*B38 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Maroczy bind, 5...Bg7 6.Be3 (without 6...Nf6 7.Nc3 Ng4 (B39))
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Maróczy Bind: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4 Bg7 6. Be3

*B39 Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto, Breyer Variation, 5...Bg7 6.Be3 Nf6 7.Nc3 Ng4
*Sicilian Defense: Accelerated Dragon, Maróczy Bind, Breyer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. c4 Bg7 6. Be3 Nf6 7. Nc3 Ng4

*B40 Sicilian Defence, 2.Nf3 e6
*Sicilian Defense: French Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6
*Sicilian Defense: French Variation, Westerinen Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. b3
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit Deferred: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. b4
*Sicilian Defense: Delayed Alapin Variation, with e6: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Alapin Variation, Sherzer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. c3 Nf6 4. e5 Nd5 5. d4 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Kramnik Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Drazic Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 a6
*Sicilian Defense: French Variation, Open: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Smith-Morra Gambit Deferred: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Paulsen-Basman Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5
*Sicilian Defense: French Variation, Normal: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Pin Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bb4
*Sicilian Defense: Pin Variation, Jaffe Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bb4 6. Bd3 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Pin Variation, Koch Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bb4 6. e5
*Sicilian Defense: Four Knights Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Four Knights Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Nxc6
*Sicilian Defense: Gaw-Paw Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Qb6
*Sicilian Defense: Kveinis Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Qb6
*Sicilian Defense: Marshall Counterattack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 d5
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Wing Attack, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. Nc3 a6 4. g3 b5 5. d4 cxd4 6. Nxd4

*B41 Sicilian, Kan Variation, 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 a6 (without 5.Bd3 (B42), 5.Nc3 (B43), 5.Be2 Nf6 6.Nc3 Qc7 (B43))
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Maróczy Bind, Réti Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Maróczy Bind, Hedgehog Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. c4 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Maróczy Bind, Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. c4 Nf6 6. Nc3 Bb4 7. Bd3 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Maróczy Bind, Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. c4 Nf6 6. Nc3 Bb4 7. Bd3 Nc6 8. Bc2

*B42 Sicilian, Kan, 5.Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Polugaevsky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Bd3 Bc5
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Swiss Cheese Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Bd3 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Gipslis Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Bd3 Nf6 6. 0-0 d6 7. c4 g6

*B43 Sicilian, Kan, 5.Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Knight Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Wing Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Nc3 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Wing Attack, Christiansen&#x27;s Dream: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Nc3 b5 6. Bd3 Qb6 7. Be3 Bc5 8. Qg4
*Sicilian Defense: Kan Variation, Wing Attack, Spraggett Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 a6 5. Nc3 b5 6. Bd3 Qb6 7. Nf3

*B44 Sicilian Defence, 2.Nf3 e6 3.d4 cxd4 4.Nxd4 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Szén Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nb5
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Modern Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nb5 d6 6. c4 Nf6 7. N1c3 a6 8. Na3 Be7 9. Be2 0-0 10. 0-0 b6
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Gary Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nb5 d6 6. c4 Nf6 7. N1c3 a6 8. Na3 d5

*B45 Sicilian, Taimanov Variation, 5.Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Normal Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, American Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Nf6 6. Ndb5 Bb4 7. Nd6+

*B46 Sicilian, Taimanov Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 a6

*B47 Sicilian, Taimanov (Bastrikov) Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Bastrikov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Bastrikov Variation, Ponomariov Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Ndb5 Qb8 7. Be3 a6 8. Bb6

*B48 Sicilian, Taimanov Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Bastrikov Variation, English Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Be3

*B49 Sicilian, Taimanov Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Taimanov Variation, Bastrikov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Be3 a6 7. Be2

*B50 Sicilian Defence
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6
*Sicilian Defense: Wing Gambit, Deferred Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. b4
*Sicilian Defense: Kopec System: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Delayed Alapin Variation, with d6: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Delayed Alapin Variation, Basman-Palatnik Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. c3 Nf6 4. Be2 Nc6 5. d4 cxd4 6. cxd4 Nxe4
*Sicilian Defense: Delayed Alapin Variation, Basman-Palatnik Double Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. c3 Nf6 4. Be2 Nc6 5. d4 cxd4 6. cxd4 Nxe4 7. d5 Qa5+ 8. Nc3 Nxc3 9. bxc3
*Sicilian Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4
*Sicilian Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations, Tartakower: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. c3
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations, Anti-Qxd4 Move Order: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations, Anti-Qxd4 Move Order Accepted: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. dxc5 Nxe4
*Sicilian Defense: Kotov Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. g3 b5

*B51 Sicilian, Canal–Sokolsky Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation, Moscow Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Nc6 4. 0-0 Bd7 5. c3 Nf6 6. Re1 a6 7. Bxc6 Bxc6 8. d4 Bxe4 9. Bg5
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation, Dorfman Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Nc6 4. 0-0 Bd7 5. Qe2 g6 6. e5

*B52 Sicilian, Canal–Sokolsky Attack, 3...Bd7
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Bd7
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation, Sokolsky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Bd7 4. Bxd7+ Qxd7 5. c4
*Sicilian Defense: Moscow Variation, Haag Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Bd7 4. Bxd7+ Qxd7 5. 0-0 Nc6 6. c3 Nf6 7. d4

*B53 Sicilian, Chekhover Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Chekhover Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Qxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Chekhover Variation, Zaitsev Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Qxd4 Nc6 5. Bb5 Qd7

*B54 Sicilian
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Accelerated Dragon: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Modern Variations, Ginsberg Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Prins Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. f3

*B55 Sicilian, Prins Variation, Venice Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Prins Variation, Venice Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. f3 e5 6. Bb5+

*B56 Sicilian
*Sicilian Defense: Kupreichik Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bd7
*Sicilian Defense: Venice Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 e5 6. Bb5+
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. g3
*Sicilian Defense: Yates Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Spielmann Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Nde2

*B57 Sicilian, Sozin (not Scheveningen) including Magnus Smith Trap
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation, Sozin Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Magnus Smith Trap: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 g6 7. Nxc6 bxc6 8. e5
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation, Anti-Sozin Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 Qb6

*B58 Sicilian, Classical
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Boleslavsky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Be2 e5
*Sicilian Defense: Classical Variation, Dragon Transfer: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Be2 Nxd4 7. Qxd4 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Boleslavsky Variation, Louma Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 e5 7. Nxc6

*B59 Sicilian, Boleslavsky Variation, 7.Nb3
*Sicilian Defense: Boleslavsky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 e5 7. Nb3

*B60 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 Bd7
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Dragon Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 g6

*B61 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Larsen Variation, 7.Qd2
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 Bd7 7. Qd2

*B62 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, 6...e6
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Vitolins Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Bb5
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Nxc6
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd3
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Podebrady Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Nb3

*B63 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Traditional Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Classical Variation, Kantscher Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7 8. 0-0-0 Nxd4 9. Qxd4 a6 10. f4 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Ivanov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Qb6

*B64 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...Be7 defence, 9.f4
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7 8. 0-0-0 0-0 9. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7 8. 0-0-0 0-0 9. f4 e5

*B65 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...Be7 defence, 9...Nxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Rauzer Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7 8. 0-0-0 0-0 9. f4 Nxd4
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 Be7 8. 0-0-0 0-0 9. f4 Nxd4 10. Qxd4

*B66 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...a6
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Neo-Modern Variation, Early Deviations: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 a6

*B67 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...a6 defence, 8...Bd7
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Neo-Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 a6 8. 0-0-0 Bd7

*B68 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...a6 defence, 9...Be7
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Neo-Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 a6 8. 0-0-0 Bd7 9. f4 Be7

*B69 Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer, Rauzer Attack, 7...a6 defence, 11.Bxf6
*Sicilian Defense: Richter-Rauzer Variation, Neo-Modern Variation, Nyezhmetdinov Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5 e6 7. Qd2 a6 8. 0-0-0 Bd7 9. f4 Be7 10. Nf3 b5 11. Bxf6

*B70 Sicilian, Dragon Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. g3

*B71 Sicilian, Dragon, Levenfish Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Levenfish Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Levenfish Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. f4 Nbd7

*B72 Sicilian, Dragon, 6.Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. Be2 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. Be2 Nc6 8. Nb3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Amsterdam Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 g6 7. Be3 Bg7 8. Qd2
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Grigoriev Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 g6 7. Be3 Bg7 8. Qd2 0-0 9. 0-0-0

*B73 Sicilian, Dragon, Classical, 8.0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Battery Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Be3 Nc6 9. Qd2
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Zollner Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Be3 Bg7 6. Be2 Nf6 7. Nc3 0-0 8. 0-0 d6 9. f4 Qb6 10. e5

*B74 Sicilian, Dragon, Classical, 9.Nb3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Stockholm Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 d6 3. f4 Nc6 4. Nf3 g6 5. d4 cxd4 6. Nxd4 Bg7 7. Be3 Nf6 8. Be2 0-0 9. Nb3 Be6 10. 0-0 Na5 11. f5 Bc4 12. Nxa5 Bxe2 13. Qxe2 Qxa5 14. g4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Normal Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Be3 Nc6 9. Nb3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Maróczy Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Be3 Nc6 9. Nb3 Be6 10. f4 Na5
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Tartakower Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Be3 Nc6 9. Nb3 Be6 10. f4 Qc8
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Bernard Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 g6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Be3 Nc6 9. Nb3 Be6 10. f4 Na5 11. f5 Bc4 12. Bd3 Bxd3 13. cxd3 d5
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Spielmann Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. Be3 Nf6 7. Be2 0-0 8. Nb3 d6 9. 0-0 Be6 10. f4 Na5 11. f5 Bc4 12. Bd3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Classical Variation, Alekhine Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 g6 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. Be3 Nf6 7. Be2 0-0 8. 0-0 d6 9. Nb3 a5

*B75 Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Early Deviations: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Belezky Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 Nc6

*B76 Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 7...0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Modern Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 Nc6 8. Qd2 0-0 9. 0-0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Panov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. g4

*B77 Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 9.Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Sosonko Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 Nc6 8. Qd2 0-0 9. Bc4 Nd7
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Czerniak Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 Nc6 8. Qd2 0-0 9. Bc4 Nxd4 10. Bxd4 Be6
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Byrne Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 a5
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 Bd7

*B78 Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 10.0-0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 Bd7 10. 0-0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Old Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 Bd7 10. 0-0-0 Rc8

*B79 Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 12.h4
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 Bd7 10. h4 Qa5 11. 0-0-0 Rfc8 12. Bb3
*Sicilian Defense: Dragon Variation, Yugoslav Attack, Soltis Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3 0-0 8. Qd2 Nc6 9. Bc4 Bd7 10. 0-0-0 Qa5 11. h4 Rfc8 12. Bb3 h5

*B80 Sicilian, Scheveningen Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, English Attack, with Qd2: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3 e6 7. Qd2
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Vitolins Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bb5+
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. g3

*B81 Sicilian, Scheveningen, Keres Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Keres Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. g4

*B82 Sicilian, Scheveningen, 6.f4
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Matanovic Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Tal Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. f4 Nc6 7. Be3 Be7 8. Qf3

*B83 Sicilian, Scheveningen, 6.Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 Nf6
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 Be7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. f4 Nc6 9. Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Modern Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Be2 Be7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. f4 Nc6 9. Be3 Bd7 10. Nb3

*B84 Sicilian, Scheveningen (Paulsen), Classical Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2 e6
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Scheveningen Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2 e6 7. 0-0 Nbd7
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2 e6 7. 0-0 Qc7

*B85 Sicilian, Scheveningen, Classical Variation with ...Qc7 and ...Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. f4 e6 7. Be2 Qc7 8. 0-0 Nc6
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Be2 a6 7. 0-0 Nf6 8. Be3 Be7 9. f4 d6 10. Qe1 0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Be2 a6 7. 0-0 Nf6 8. Be3 d6 9. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Classical Variation, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nc6 5. Nc3 Qc7 6. Be2 a6 7. 0-0 Nf6 8. Kh1 Be7 9. f4 d6 10. a4

*B86 Sicilian, Sozin Attack
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 e6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4

*B87 Sicilian, Sozin with ...a6 and ...b5
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack, Flank Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bc4 e6 7. Bb3 b5

*B88 Sicilian, Sozin, Leonhardt Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack, Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 e6
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack, Fischer Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 e6 7. Bb3 Be7 8. Be3 0-0 9. f4

*B89 Sicilian, Sozin, 7.Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack, Main Line, Sherbakov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bc4 e6 7. Be3 Be7 8. Bb3 0-0 9. 0-0 Na5 10. f4 b6
*Sicilian Defense: Sozin Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 e6 7. Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Velimirovic Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bc4 e6 7. Be3 Be7 8. Qe2

*B90 Sicilian, Najdorf
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Lipnitsky Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bc4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, English Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, English Attack, with f3: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3 e6 7. f3
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Delayed Keres Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3 e6 7. g4
*Sicilian Defense: Scheveningen Variation, Delayed Keres Attack, Perenyi Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3 e6 7. g4 e5 8. Nf5 g6 9. g5
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, English Attack, Anti-English: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be3 Ng4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Dekker Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. g4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Adams Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. h3
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Freak Attack: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Rg1

*B91 Sicilian, Najdorf, Zagreb (Fianchetto) Variation (6.g3)
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Zagreb Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. g3

*B92 Sicilian, Najdorf, Opocensky Variation (6.Be2)
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Opocensky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Opocensky Variation, Modern Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2 e5 7. Nb3 Be7 8. 0-0 Be6
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Opocensky Variation, Traditional Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Be2 e5 7. Nb3 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Opocensky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 d6 4. d4 cxd4 5. Nxd4 a6 6. Be2 e5 7. Nb3 Be6 8. Be3

*B93 Sicilian, Najdorf, 6.f4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Amsterdam Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. f4

*B94 Sicilian, Najdorf, 6.Bg5
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Ivkov Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 Nbd7 7. Bc4 Qa5 8. Qd2 e6 9. 0-0-0 b5 10. Bb3 Bb7 11. Rhe1 Nc5 12. e5

*B95 Sicilian, Najdorf, 6...e6
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6

*B96 Sicilian, Najdorf, 7.f4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Polugaevsky Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 b5
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Polugaevsky Variation, Simagin Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 b5 8. e5 dxe5 9. fxe5 Qc7 10. Qe2
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Neo-Classical Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Nc6

*B97 Sicilian, Najdorf, 7...Qb6 including Poisoned Pawn Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Poisoned Pawn Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Qb6
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Poisoned Pawn Accepted: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Qb6 8. Qd2 Qxb2 9. Rb1 Qa3

*B98 Sicilian, Najdorf, 7...Be7
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Be7
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Goteborg Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Be7 8. Qf3 h6 9. Bh4 g5
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Browne Variation: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Be7 8. Qf3 h6 9. Bh4 Qc7
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Traditional Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Be7 8. Qf3 Qc7

*B99 Sicilian, Najdorf, 7...Be7 Main line
*Sicilian Defense: Najdorf Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 a6 6. Bg5 e6 7. f4 Be7 8. Qf3 Qc7 9. 0-0-0 Nbd7

==C – Open Games and the French Defence==
* 1.e4 e6: French Defence (C00–C19)
* 1.e4 e5: Open Game (C20–C99)

===C00–C19===
1.e4 e6: French Defence 
*C00 French Defence
*French Defense: 1. e4 e6
*French Defense: Horwitz Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. b3
*French Defense: Horwitz Attack, Papa-Ticulat Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. b3 d5 3. Bb2
*French Defense: Banzai-Leong Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. b4
*French Defense: Banzai-Leong Gambit, Pinova Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. b4 Bxb4 3. e5
*French Defense: Bird Invitation: 1. e4 e6 2. Bb5
*French Defense: Steiner Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. c4
*French Defense: Orthoschnapp Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. c4 d5 3. cxd5 exd5 4. Qb3
*French Defense: King&#x27;s Indian Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d3
*French Defense: Reversed Philidor Formation: 1. e4 e6 2. d3 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. Ngf3 Nc6 5. Be2
*French Defense: King&#x27;s Indian Attack, Franco-Hiva Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d3 f5
*French Defense: Normal Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4
*French Defense: St. George Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 a6
*French Defense: St. George Defense, Three Pawn Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 a6 3. c4
*French Defense: St. George Defense, Sanky-George Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 a6 3. c4 b5
*French Defense: St. George Defense, St. George Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 a6 3. c4 b5 4. cxb5 axb5
*French Defense: St. George Defense, Traditional Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 a6 3. Nf3 b5 4. Bd3 c5 5. c3 Bb7 6. 0-0 Nf6
*French Defense: Baeuerle Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 b5
*French Defense: Franco-Sicilian Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 c5
*French Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5
*French Defense: Schlechter Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Bd3
*French Defense: Alapin Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Be3
*French Defense: Diemer-Duhm Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. c4
*French Defense: Diemer-Duhm Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. c4 dxe4
*French Defense: Perseus Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nf3
*French Defense: Carlson Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nf3 dxe4 4. Ne5
*French Defense: Morphy Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nh3
*French Defense: Hoffmann Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Qe2 e5 4. f4 exf4
*French Defense: Franco-Hiva Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 f5
*French Defense: Franco-Hiva Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 f5 3. exf5
*French Defense: Mediterranean Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 Nf6
*Lengfellner system: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d6
*French Defense: Steinitz Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. e5
*French Defense: La Bourdonnais Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. f4
*French Defense: La Bourdonnais Variation, Reuter Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. f4 d5 3. Nf3 dxe4
*French Defense: Réti-Spielmann Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. g3
*French Defense: Queen&#x27;s Knight: 1. e4 e6 2. Nc3
*French Defense: Pelikan Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. Nc3 d5 3. f4
*French Defense: Knight Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. Nf3
*French Defense: Wing Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. e5 c5 4. b4
*French Defense: Two Knights Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. Nf3 d5 3. Nc3
*French Defense: Knight Variation, Franco-Hiva Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. Nf3 f5
*French Defense: Chigorin Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. Qe2

*C01 French, Exchange Variation
*French Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5
*French Defense: Exchange Variation, Monte Carlo Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 exd5 4. c4
*French Defense: Exchange Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. exd5 exd5 4. Nc3 Nf6 5. Bg5 Nc6
*French Defense: Exchange Variation, Svenonius Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. exd5 exd5 5. Bg5

*C02 French, Advance Variation
*French Defense: Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Extended Bishop Swap: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bd7
*French Defense: Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Frenkel Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. b4
*French Defense: Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3
*French Defense: Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6 5. Nf3
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Euwe Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6 5. Nf3 Bd7
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6 5. Nf3 Qb6 6. a3
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Lputian Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6 5. Nf3 Qb6 6. a3 Nh6
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Milner-Barry Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Nc6 5. Nf3 Qb6 6. Bd3
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Wade Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. c3 Qb6 5. Nf3 Bd7
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. dxc5
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Nimzowitsch System: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. Nf3
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Ruisdonk Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. Nf3 cxd4 5. Bd3
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. Qg4
*French Defense: Advance Variation, Nimzowitsch Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 c5 4. Qg4 cxd4 5. Nf3

*C03 French, Tarrasch
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Modern System: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 a6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Morozevich Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Be7
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Haberditz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 f5
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Guimard Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nc6
*French Defense: Guimard Variation, Thunderbunny Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nc6 4. c3 dxe4 5. Nxe4 e5

*C04 French, Tarrasch, Guimard Main line
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Guimard Defense, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nc6 4. Ngf3 Nf6

*C05 French, Tarrasch, Closed Variation
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Closed Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Botvinnik Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Bd3 c5 6. c3 b6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Closed Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Bd3 c5 6. c3 Nc6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Pawn Center Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4

*C06 French, Tarrasch, Closed Variation, Main line
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Closed Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Bd3 c5 6. c3 Nc6 7. Ne2 cxd4 8. cxd4
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Leningrad Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Bd3 c5 6. c3 Nc6 7. Ne2 cxd4 8. cxd4 Nb6

*C07 French, Tarrasch, Open Variation
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System, Süchting Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. c3
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System, Shaposhnikov Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 Nf6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Chistyakov Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 Qxd5
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Chistyakov Defense, Modern Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 Qxd5 5. Ngf3 cxd4 6. Bc4 Qd6 7. 0-0 Nf6 8. Nb3 Nc6 9. Nbxd4 Nxd4 10. Nxd4 a6
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Eliskases Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 Qxd5 5. Ngf3 cxd4 6. Bc4 Qd8
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System, Euwe-Keres Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. Ngf3

*C08 French, Tarrasch, Open, 4.exd5 exd5
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 exd5
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System, Advance Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 exd5 5. Ngf3 c4

*C09 French, Tarrasch, Open Variation, Main line
*French Defense: Tarrasch Variation, Open System, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 c5 4. exd5 exd5 5. Ngf3 Nc6

*C10 French, Paulsen Variation
*Sicilian Defense: Marshall Gambit: 1. e4 c5 2. Nc3 e6 3. d4 d5
*French Defense: Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Fort Knox Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Bd7 5. Nf3 Bc6
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Ellis Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 e5
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Blackburne Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Capablanca Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Nf3 Ngf6 6. Nxf6+ Nxf6 7. Ne5
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Maric Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Qd5
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Svenonius Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. exd5
*French Defense: Rubinstein Variation, Kasparov Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nd2 dxe4 4. Nxe4 Nd7 5. Nf3 Ngf6 6. Nxf6+ Nxf6 7. c3

*C11 French Defence
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 a6 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. e5 Nfd7
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 a6 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. e5 Nfd7 6. a3
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 a6 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Ne2
*French Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Swiss Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bd3
*French Defense: Henneberger Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Be3
*French Defense: Burn Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Burn Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Be7 6. Bxf6 Bxf6 7. Nf3 0-0
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Burn Variation, Morozevich Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Be7 6. Bxf6 gxf6
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation, Bradford Attack Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4 c5 6. dxc5 Bxc5 7. Qg4
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4 c5 6. dxc5 Nc6
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation, Brodsky-Jones Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4 c5 6. dxc5 Nc6 7. a3 Bxc5 8. Qg4 0-0 9. Nf3 f6
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4 c5 6. Nf3
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation, Boleslavsky Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. f4 c5 6. Nf3 Nc6 7. Be3
*French Defense: Steinitz Variation, Gledhill Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e5 Nfd7 5. Qg4
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. exd5

*C12 French, MacCutcheon Variation
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Dr. Olland Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bc1
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Lasker Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bd2 Bxc3
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Lasker Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bd2 Bxc3 7. bxc3 Ne4 8. Qg4 g6
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bd2 Nfd7
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Janowski Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Be3
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Bernstein Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bh4
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Chigorin Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. exf6
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Grigoriev Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. exf6 hxg5 7. fxg7 Rg8 8. h4 gxh4 9. Qg4
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. exd5
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. exd5 Qxd5 6. Bxf6 gxf6 7. Qd2 Qa5
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Duras Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. Nc3 d5 3. d4 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bb4 5. e5 h6 6. Bd2 Bxc3 7. bxc3 Ne4 8. Qg4 Kf8 9. Bc1

*C13 French, Classical
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Normal Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Richter Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. Bxf6
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Richter Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. Bxf6 Bxf6 6. e5 Be7 7. Qg4
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Ne4
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack, Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4 a6
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack, Albin-Chatard Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4 Bxg5 7. hxg5 Qxg5
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack, Breyer Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4 c5
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack, Teichmann Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4 f6
*French Defense: Alekhine-Chatard Attack, Spielmann Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. h4 0-0
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Vistaneckis Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Ng8
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Frankfurt Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Ng8 6. Be3 b6

*C14 French, Classical Variation
*French Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 a6 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bg5
*French Defense: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. Bd3
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. f4
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Stahlberg Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. f4 0-0 8. Nf3 c5 9. Qd2 Nc6 10. 0-0-0 c4
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Alapin Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. Nb5
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. Qd2
*French Defense: Classical Variation, Pollock Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e5 Nfd7 6. Bxe7 Qxe7 7. Qg4

*C15 French, Winawer (Nimzovich) Variation
*French Defense: Winawer Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Winckelmann-Reimer Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. a3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 dxe4 6. f3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Fingerslip Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bd2
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Fingerslip Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bd2 dxe4 5. Qg4 Nf6 6. Qxg7 Rg8 7. Qh6
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Fingerslip Variation, Kunin Double Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bd2 dxe4 5. Qg4 Qxd4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Fingerslip Variation, Schwarz&#x27;s Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bd2 Ne7 5. Nb1
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Kondratiyev Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bd3 c5 5. exd5 Qxd5 6. Bd2
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. exd5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Exchange Variation, Canal Attack: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. exd5 exd5 5. Bd3 Ne7 6. Qh5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Alekhine-Maróczy Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Ne2
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Alekhine Gambit, Alatortsev Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Ne2 dxe4 5. a3 Be7 6. Nxe4 Nf6 7. N2g3 0-0 8. Be2 Nc6
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Alekhine Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Ne2 dxe4 5. a3 Bxc3+
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Alekhine Gambit, Kan Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Ne2 dxe4 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Nxc3 Nc6
*French Defense: MacCutcheon Variation, Wolf Gambit: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Ne2 Nf6 5. Bg5

*C16 French, Winawer, Advance Variation
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Petrosian Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 Qd7

*C17 French, Winawer, Advance Variation
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Retreat Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Ba5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Retreat Variation, Armenian Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Ba5 6. b4 cxd4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Marózy-Wallis Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 cxd4 6. axb4 dxc3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 cxd4 6. axb4 dxc3 7. Nf3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. Bd2
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Bogoljubow Variation, Icelandic Defense: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. Bd2 Ne7 6. f4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation, Moscow Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. Qg4

*C18 French, Winawer, Advance Variation
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Portisch-Hook Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Qa5
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Qc7

*C19 French, Winawer, Advance, 6...Ne7
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. a4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Positional Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. Nf3
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Poisoned Pawn Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. Qg4
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Poisoned Pawn Variation, Paoli Variation: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. Qg4 Qc7 8. Qxg7 Rg8 9. Qxh7 cxd4 10. Kd1
*French Defense: Winawer Variation, Poisoned Pawn Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e6 2. d4 d5 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e5 c5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 Ne7 7. Qg4 Qc7 8. Qxg7 Rg8 9. Qxh7 cxd4 10. Ne2

===C20–C99===
1.e4 e5: Open Game 
*C20 King&#x27;s Pawn Game (includes Alapin&#x27;s Opening, Centre Pawn Opening, Napoleon Opening, Portuguese Opening, Danvers Opening, Bongcloud Attack)
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. e4 e5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Mengarini&#x27;s Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. a3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. b3
*Portuguese Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Bb5
*Portuguese Opening: Miguel Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bb5 Bc5 3. b4
*Portuguese Opening: Portuguese Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bb5 Nf6 3. d4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Tortoise Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Bd3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: MacLeod Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. c3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: MacLeod Attack, Norwalde Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. c3 d5 3. Qh5 Bd6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: MacLeod Attack, Lasa Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. c3 f5
*English Opening: The Whale: 1. e4 e5 2. c4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Bavarian Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. c4 d5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Leonardis Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Weber Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d3 d5 3. exd5 c6 4. dxc6 Nxc6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Clam Variation, King&#x27;s Gambit Reversed: 1. e4 e5 2. d3 f5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Clam Variation, Radisch Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d3 Nf6 3. f4 Bc5
*Center Game: 1. e4 e5 2. d4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Beyer Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 d5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Philidor Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 d6 3. dxe5 Bd7
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: King&#x27;s Head Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. f3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: King&#x27;s Head Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. f3 Nf6 3. Nc3
*Bongcloud Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Ke2
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Alapin Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Ne2
*King&#x27;s Pawn Opening: Van Hooydoon Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Qe2 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. Nf3 Bc5 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Nxd4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Napoleon Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Qf3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Opening: Speers: 1. e4 e5 2. Qg4 Nf6 3. Qf5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Wayward Queen Attack (Danvers Opening) : 1. e4 e5 2. Qh5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Wayward Queen Attack, Mellon Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Qh5 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nh6 4. d3 g6 5. Qf3 f6 6. Ne2 d5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Wayward Queen Attack, Kiddie Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Qh5 Nf6
*Barnes Opening: Walkerling: 1. f3 e5 2. e4 Nf6 3. Bc4

*C21 Center Game (includes Danish Gambit)
*Center Game Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4
*Center Game: von der Lasa Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Bc4
*Center Game: Ross Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Bd3
*Danish Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3
*Danish Gambit Declined: Sorensen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 d5
*Danish Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3
*Danish Gambit Accepted: Copenhagen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Bc4 cxb2 5. Bxb2 Bb4+
*Danish Gambit Accepted: Schlechter Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Bc4 cxb2 5. Bxb2 d5
*Danish Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Bc4 cxb2 5. Bxb2 Nf6
*Danish Gambit Accepted: Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 dxc3 4. Bc4 cxb2 5. Bxb2 Qe7
*Danish Gambit Accepted: Svenonius Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. c3 Ne7
*Center Game: Halasz-McDonnell Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. f4
*Center Game: Halasz-McDonnell Gambit, Crocodile Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. f4 Bc5 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. c3
*Center Game: Kieseritzky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3
*Center Game: Lanc-Arnold Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3 Bc5 4. c3
*Center Game: Lanc-Arnold Gambit, Schippler Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3 Bc5 4. c3 dxc3 5. Bc4
*Center Game: Kieseritzky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3 c5
*Center Game: Kieseritzky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Nf3 c5 4. Bc4
*Center Game: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4

*C22 Center Game 
*Center Game: Normal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6
*Center Game: Hall Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qc4
*Center Game: Paulsen Attack Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qe3
*Center Game: Charousek Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qe3 Bb4+ 5. c3 Be7
*Center Game: l&#x27;Hermet Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qe3 f5
*Center Game: Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qe3 Nf6
*Center Game: Kupreichik Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. d4 exd4 3. Qxd4 Nc6 4. Qe3 Nf6 5. Nc3 Bb4 6. Bd2 0-0 7. 0-0-0 Re8 8. Bc4 d6 9. Nh3

*C23 Bishop&#x27;s Opening
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Anderssen Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 b5 3. Bxb5 c6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Thorold Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 b5 3. Bxb5 f5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Boi Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: McDonnell Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. b4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: McDonnell Gambit, La Bourdonnais-Denker Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. b4 Bxb4 4. c3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: McDonnell Gambit, McDonnell Double Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. b4 Bxb4 4. f4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Four Pawns Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. b4 Bxb4 4. f4 exf4 5. Nf3 Be7 6. d4 Bh4+ 7. g3 fxg3 8. 0-0 gxh2+ 9. Kh1
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Philidor Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lewis Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3 d5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lewis Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3 d5 4. Bxd5 Nf6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lewis Countergambit, Walker Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3 d5 4. Bxd5 Nf6 5. d4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Pratt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5 d5 6. exf6 dxc4 7. Qh5 0-0
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: del Rio Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. c3 Qg5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lewis Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. d4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Stein Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. f4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lopez Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. Qe2
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lopez Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. Qe2 Nc6 4. c3 Nf6 5. f4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lopez Variation, Lopez Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Bc5 3. Qe2 Nf6 4. f4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Philidor Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 c6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Lisitsyn Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 c6 3. d4 d5 4. exd5 cxd5 5. Bb5+ Bd7 6. Bxd7+ Nxd7 7. dxe5 Nxe5 8. Ne2
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Khan Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 d5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Calabrese Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 f5
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Calabrese Countergambit, Jaenisch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 f5 3. d3

*C24 Bishop&#x27;s Opening, Berlin Defence
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Berlin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Kitchener Folly: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d3 Be7 4. Nf3 0-0
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Vienna Hybrid: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d3 Nc6 4. Nc3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Ponziani Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Warsaw Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Urusov Gambit, Panov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nf3 d5 5. exd5 Bb4+ 6. c3 Qe7+
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Krejcik Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. f3 Bc5 4. Ne2 Nc6 5. b4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Berlin Defense, Greco Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. f4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Pachman Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. Ne2 Nxe4 4. Nec3

*C25 Vienna Game
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Hamppe-Allgaier Gambit, Thorold Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. Nc3 g5 5. h4 g4 6. Ng5 h6 7. Nxf7 Kxf7 8. d4
*Vienna Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3
*Vienna Game: Zhuravlev Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Bb4 3. Qg4 Nf6
*Vienna Game: Anderssen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Bc5
*Vienna Game: Hamppe-Meitner Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Bc5 3. Na4
*Vienna Game: Giraffe Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Bc5 3. Qg4
*Vienna Game: Omaha Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 d6 3. f4
*Vienna Game: Max Lange Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Meitner-Mieses Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. Qg4 Qf6 5. Nd5
*Vienna Game: Fyfe Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. d4
*Vienna Game: Philidor Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. d4 f5
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Quelle Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 Bc5 4. fxe5 d6
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4 Qh4+ 5. Ke2
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit, Fraser-Minckwitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4 Qh4+ 5. Ke2 b6
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit, Zukertort Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4 Qh4+ 5. Ke2 d5
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit, Paulsen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4 Qh4+ 5. Ke2 d6
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Steinitz Gambit, Sörensen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. d4 Qh4+ 5. Ke2 g5
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Knight Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Cunningham Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 Be7
*Vienna Game: Hamppe-Muzio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. Bc4 g4 6. 0-0
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Hamppe-Muzio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. Bc4 g4 6. 0-0 gxf3
*Vienna Game: Hamppe-Muzio, Dubois Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. Bc4 g4 6. 0-0 gxf3 7. Qxf3 Ne5 8. Qxf4 Qf6
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Pierce Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. d4
*Vienna Game: Pierce Gambit, Rushmere Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. d4 g4 6. Bc4 gxf3 7. 0-0 d5 8. exd5 Bg4 9. dxc6
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Hamppe-Allgaier Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. h4 g4 6. Ng5
*Vienna Gambit, with Max Lange Defense: Hamppe-Allgaier Gambit, Alapin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. f4 exf4 4. Nf3 g5 5. h4 g4 6. Ng5 d6
*Vienna Game: Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3
*Vienna Game: Paulsen Variation, Mariotti Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 Bc5 4. Bg2 h5 5. Nf3 h4
*Vienna Game: Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. g3 Nf6 4. Bg2 Bc5 5. Nge2 d5

*C26 Vienna Game, Falkbeer Variation
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Horwitz Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. Nc3 b5
*Vienna Game: Falkbeer Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6
*Vienna Game: Mengarini Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. a3
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Reversed Spanish: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Bb4
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Vienna Hybrid, Spielmann Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Eifel Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. Nge2 b5
*Vienna Game: Mieses Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3
*Vienna Game: Paulsen Variation, Pollock Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 Bc5 4. Bg2 Nc6 5. Nge2 d5 6. exd5
*Vienna Game: Mieses Variation, Erben Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. g3 d5 4. exd5 c6

*C27 Vienna Game, Frankenstein–Dracula Variation
*Vienna Game: Frankenstein-Dracula Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Monster Declined: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Qh5 Nd6 5. Bb3 Be7
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Alekhine Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Qh5 Nd6 5. Bb3 Be7 6. Nf3 Nc6 7. Nxe5
*Vienna Game: Adams&#x27; Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Qh5 Nd6 5. Bb3 Nc6 6. d4
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Frankenstein-Dracula Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Qh5 Nd6 5. Bb3 Nc6 6. Nb5 g6 7. Qf3 f5 8. Qd5 Qe7 9. Nxc7+ Kd8 10. Nxa8 b6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Boden-Kieseritzky Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Nc3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Boden-Kieseritzky Gambit, Lichtenhein Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bc4 Nxe4 4. Nc3 d5

*C28 Vienna Game
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Three Knights Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Vienna Hybrid, Hromádka Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d3 Bb4 5. Ne2
*Vienna Game: Stanley Variation, Bronstein Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. f4 Nxe4 5. Nf3

*C29 Vienna Gambit, Kaufmann Variation including Würzburger Trap
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. d3
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Modern Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. d3
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Wurzburger Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. d3 Qh4+ 6. g3 Nxg3 7. Nf3 Qh5 8. Nxd5
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Breyer Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. Nf3 Be7
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Kaufmann Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. Nf3 Bg4 6. Qe2
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. Qf3
*Vienna Game: Vienna Gambit, Bardeleben Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. Qf3 f5
*Vienna Game: Heyde Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. fxe5 Nxe4 5. Qf3 f5 6. d4

*C30 King&#x27;s Gambit
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Mafia Defense: 1. e4 c5 2. f4 e5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical, Svenonius Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d3 Bc5 5. f4 d6 6. Nf3 Bg4 7. h3 Bxf3 8. Qxf3 exf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical Variation, Rotlewi Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. b4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. c3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical Variation, Euwe Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. c3 Bg4 5. fxe5 dxe5 6. Qa4+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical Variation, Rubinstein Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. c3 f5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical, Réti Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. c3 f5 5. fxe5 dxe5 6. d4 exd4 7. Bc4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical, Soldatenkov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. fxe5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Classical, Hanham Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 d6 4. Nc3 Nd7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Senechaud Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Bc5 3. Nf3 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit, Schiller&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5 3. exf5 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5 3. exf5 exf4 4. Nf3 d5 5. d4 Bd6 6. Bd3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit, Pawn Sacrifice Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5 3. exf5 exf4 4. Qh5+ g6 5. fxg6 Qe7+ 6. Kd1
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit, Shirazi Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5 3. exf5 exf4 4. Qh5+ Ke7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Panteldakis Countergambit, Greco Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f5 3. exf5 Qh4+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Soller-Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 f6 3. fxe5 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Zilbermints Double Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Queen&#x27;s Knight Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Miles Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Nc6 3. Nf3 f5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Zilbermints Double Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Nc6 3. Nf3 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Hobbs-Zilbermints Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Nc6 3. Nf3 g5 4. fxg5 h6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Norwalde Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Norwalde Variation, Schubert Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qf6 3. Nc3 Qxf4 4. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Norwalde Variation, Bücker Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qf6 3. Nc3 Qxf4 4. Nf3 Bb4 5. Bc4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Keene&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qh4+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Keene&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qh4+ 3. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Keene Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 Qh4+ 3. g3 Qe7

*C31 King&#x27;s Gambit Declined, Falkbeer and Nimzowitsch (3...c6) Countergambits
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Hinrichsen Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Miles Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Nimzowitsch-Marshall Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 c6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Pickler Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 c6 4. dxc6 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Staunton Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Anderssen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. Bb5+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. Nc3 Nf6 5. Qe2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Modern Transfer: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 exf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Milner-Barry Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. Nc3
*Van Geet Opening: Grünfeld Defense, Steiner Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. Nc3 dxe4 4. Nxe4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Blackburne Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. Nf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit, Morphy Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. f4 d5 4. exd5 e4 5. d3 Bb4 6. Bd2 e3

*C32 King&#x27;s Gambit Declined, Falkbeer, 5.dxe4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Alapin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4 Nxe4 6. Nf3 Bc5 7. Qe2 Bf2+ 8. Kd1 Qxd5+ 9. Nfd2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4 Nxe4 6. Nf3 Bc5 7. Qe2 Bf5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4 Nxe4 6. Nf3 Bc5 7. Qe2 Bf5 8. g4 0-0
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4 Nxe4 6. Qe2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. dxe4 Nxe4 6. Qe2 Qxd5 7. Nd2 f5 8. g4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit, Keres Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. Nd2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Falkbeer Countergambit, Charousek Gambit, Old Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 d5 3. exd5 e4 4. d3 Nf6 5. Qe2

*C33 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Orsini Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. b3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Schurig Gambit, with Bb5: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bb5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Kieseritzky Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 b5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Lopez Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 c6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Bledow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 d5 4. Bxd5 c6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Bledow Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 d5 4. Bxd5 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Boren-Svenonius Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 d5 4. Bxd5 Qh4+ 5. Kf1 Bd6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Gianutio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 f5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Lopez-Gianutio Countergambit, Hein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 f5 4. Qe2 Qh4+ 5. Kd1 fxe4 6. Nc3 Kd8
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Anderssen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Maurian Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Ne7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Cozio Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. e5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Bogoljubow Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3 c6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Bryan Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 b5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Greco Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Chigorin&#x27;s Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 d5 5. Bxd5 g5 6. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Cozio Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 d6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Lopez Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Grimm Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. d4 d6 7. e5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, McDonnell Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. d4 Ne7 7. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, McDonnell Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Fraser Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5 5. Nc3 Bg7 6. g3 fxg3 7. Qf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Classical Defense, Cozio Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 g5 5. Qf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Boden Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, Classical Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 Ne7 5. Nc3 g5 6. d4 Bg7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bishop&#x27;s Gambit, First Jaenisch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bc4 Qh4+ 4. Kf1 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Schurig Gambit, with Bd3: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Bd3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Tartakower Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Be2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Tartakower Gambit, Weiss Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Be2 f5 4. exf5 d6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Polerio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Gaga Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Stamma Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. h4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Tumbleweed: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Kf2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Mason-Keres Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Paris Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Ne2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Eisenberg Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nh3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Basman Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Qe2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Breyer Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Qf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Dodo Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Qg4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Carrera Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Qh5

*C34 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted, including Fischer Defence
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: King&#x27;s Knight&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Fischer Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Fischer Defense, Schulder Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d6 4. b4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Greco Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d6 4. Bc4 h6 5. d4 g5 6. h4 Bg7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Fischer Defense, Spanish Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d6 4. d4 Nf6 5. Bd3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Gianutio Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 f5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: King&#x27;s Knight&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Wagenbach Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 h5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Becker Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 h6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: MacLeod Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bonsch-Osmolovsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Ne7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Schallopp Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Schallopp Defense, Tashkent Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e5 Nh5 5. g4

*C35 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted, Cunningham Defence
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Cunningham Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Be7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Cunningham Defense, Bertin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Be7 4. Bc4 Bh4+ 5. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Cunningham Defense, Bertin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Be7 4. Bc4 Bh4+ 5. g3 fxg3 6. 0-0 gxh2+ 7. Kh1
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Cunningham Defense, McCormick Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Be7 4. Bc4 Nf6

*C36 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted, Abbazia Defence (Classical Defence, Modern Defence)
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Modern Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Modern Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d5 4. exd5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Abbazia Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d5 4. exd5 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Abbazia Defense, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 d5 4. exd5 Nf6 5. Bb5+ c6 6. dxc6 bxc6 7. Bc4 Nd5

*C37 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted, Quaade Gambit McDonnell Gambit, or Muzio Gambit
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: King&#x27;s Knight&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Middleton Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 d6 5. 0-0 Bg4 6. h3 h5 7. hxg4 hxg4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Lolli Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Bxf7+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Lolli Gambit, Young Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Bxf7+ Kxf7 6. 0-0 gxf3 7. Qxf3 Qf6 8. d4 Qxd4+ 9. Be3 Qf6 10. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Ghulam-Kassim Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kotov Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. d4 gxf3 6. Bxf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Ghulam-Kassim Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. d4 gxf3 6. Qxf3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Australian Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. h4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: McDonnell Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit, Cochrane Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 f3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit, Viennese Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit, Santa Maria Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit, Silberschmidt Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 Nh6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Salvio Gambit, Anderssen Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 Nh6 7. d4 d6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Silberschmidt Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. Kf1 Nh6 7. d4 f3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit, Wild Muzio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit, Brentano Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit, Holloway Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit Accepted, From&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qe7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit, Sarratt Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Double Muzio Gambit, Young Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6 7. Bxf7+ Kxf7 8. d4 Qxd4+ 9. Be3 Qf6 10. Nc3 fxe3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Double Muzio Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6 7. e5 Qxe5 8. Bxf7+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Double Muzio Gambit, Paulsen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6 7. e5 Qxe5 8. d3 Bh6 9. Nc3 Ne7 10. Bd2 Nbc6 11. Rae1
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Double Muzio Gambit, Bello Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6 7. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Double Muzio Gambit, Baldwin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 gxf3 6. Qxf3 Qf6 7. Nc3 Qd4+ 8. Kh1 Qxc4 9. Nd5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Muzio Gambit, Kling and Horwitz Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 g4 5. 0-0 Qe7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Rosentreter Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Rosentreter Gambit, Testa Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. d4 g4 5. Bxf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Rosentreter Gambit, Sörensen Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. d4 g4 5. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Sörensen Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. d4 g4 5. Ne5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Rosentreter Gambit, Bird Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. d4 g4 5. Ne5 Qh4+ 6. g3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Quaade Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Blachly Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 Nc6 4. Bc4 g5

*C38 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Traditional Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Mayet Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7 5. d4 d6 6. c3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Philidor Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7 5. h4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Greco Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7 5. h4 h6 6. d4 d6 7. Nc3 c6 8. hxg5 hxg5 9. Rxh8 Bxh8 10. Ne5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Hanstein Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. Bc4 Bg7 5. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Philidor Gambit, Schultz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 h6 4. Bc4 d6 5. d4 g5 6. h4 Bg7 7. Qd3

*C39 King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted, Allgaier and Kieseritzky Gambits including Rice Gambit
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: King&#x27;s Knight&#x27;s Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky, Polerio Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Be7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Paulsen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Bg7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Brentano Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Brentano Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 d5 6. d4 Nf6 7. Bxf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Brentano Defense, Caro Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 d5 6. d4 Nf6 7. Bxf4 Nxe4 8. Nd2
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Kolisch Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 d6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Long Whip: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 h5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky, Long Whip Defense, Jaenisch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 h5 6. Bc4 Rh7 7. d4 Bh6 8. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Neumann Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Berlin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Anderssen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Bc4 d5 7. exd5 Bd6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Anderssen-Cordel Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Bc4 d5 7. exd5 Bd6 8. d4 Nh5 9. Bxf4 Nxf4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky, Rice Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Bc4 d5 7. exd5 Bd6 8. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Rice Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Bc4 d5 7. exd5 Bd6 8. 0-0 Bxe5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Paulsen Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Bc4 d5 7. exd5 Bg7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Berlin Defense, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Berlin Defense, de Riviere Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Nf6 6. Nxg4 d5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Rosenthal Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Qe7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky, Salvio Defense, Cozio Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ne5 Qe7 6. d4 f5 7. Bc4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Kieseritzky Gambit, Cotter Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier Gambit, Urusov Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. Bc4+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier, Urusov Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. Bc4+ d5 8. Bxd5+ Kg7 9. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier Gambit, Thorold Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. d4
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier, Cook Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. d4 d5 8. Bxf4 dxe4 9. Bc4+ Kg7 10. Be5+
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier, Blackburne Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier, Horny Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 h6 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. Qxg4 Nf6 8. Qxf4 Bd6
*King&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Allgaier, Schlechter Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. f4 exf4 3. Nf3 g5 4. h4 g4 5. Ng5 Nf6

*C40 King&#x27;s Knight Opening (includes Gunderam Defence, Brazilian Defence, Greco Defence, Damiano Defence, Elephant Gambit, and Latvian Gambit.)
*King&#x27;s Knight Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Busch-Gass Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Bc5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Busch-Gass Gambit, Chiodini Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Bc5 3. Nxe5 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Gunderam Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 c6
*Elephant Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d5
*Elephant Gambit: Maróczy Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d5 3. exd5 Bd6
*Elephant Gambit: Paulsen Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d5 3. exd5 e4
*Elephant Gambit: Wasp Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d5 3. Nxe5 dxe4 4. Bc4 Qg5
*Latvian Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5
*Latvian Gambit: Senechaud Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. b4
*Latvian Gambit: Mayet Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4
*Latvian Gambit: Mayet Attack, Strautins Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 b5
*Latvian Gambit: Mayet Attack, Polerio-Svedenborg Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 fxe4 4. Nxe5 d5
*Latvian Gambit: Corkscrew Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 fxe4 4. Nxe5 Nf6
*Latvian Gambit: Mayet Attack, Poisoned Pawn Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 fxe4 4. Nxe5 Qg5 5. d4 Qxg2
*Latvian Gambit: Behting Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 fxe4 4. Nxe5 Qg5 5. Nf7 Qxg2 6. Rf1 d5 7. Nxh8 Nf6
*Latvian Gambit: Mayet Attack, Morgado Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Bc4 Nf6
*Latvian Gambit: Diepstraten Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. c4
*Latvian Gambit: Mason Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. d4
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. exf5
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Ian Defense: 1.e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. exf5 e4 4. Ne5 Nf6 5. Be2 Be7 6. Bh5+ Kf8
*Latvian Gambit: Lobster Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. g4
*Latvian Gambit: Mlotkowski Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nc3
*Latvian Gambit: Fraser Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Nc6
*Latvian Gambit: Corkscrew Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Nf6 4. Bc4 fxe4 5. Nf7 Qe7 6. Nxh8 d5
*Latvian Gambit: Greco Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qe7
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. d4
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Bilguer Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. d4 d6 5. Nc4
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Bronstein Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. d4 d6 5. Nc4 fxe4 6. Be2
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. d4 d6 5. Nc4 fxe4 6. Ne3
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Bronstein Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. d4 d6 5. Nc4 fxe4 6. Qh5+ g6 7. Qe2
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Foltys-Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. Nc4
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Foltys Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. Nc4 fxe4 5. d3
*Latvian Gambit Accepted: Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f5 3. Nxe5 Qf6 4. Nc4 fxe4 5. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Damiano Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Damiano Defense, Damiano Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f6 3. Nxe5 fxe5 4. Qh5+ g6 5. Qxe5+ Qe7 6. Qxh8
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Damiano Defense, Damiano Gambit, Chigorin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 f6 3. Nxe5 Qe7 4. Nf3 d5
*Gunderam Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Qe7
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Gunderam Defense, Gunderam Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Qe7 3. Bc4 f5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: McConnell Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Qf6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: La Bourdonnais Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Qf6 3. Bc4 Qg6 4. 0-0

*C41 Philidor Defence
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Sozin Variation: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 e5 4. Nf3 Nbd7 5. Bc4 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Qe2 c6 8. a4 exd4
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Delayed Bishop Sacrifice: 1. e4 d6 2. d4 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. Nf3 e5 5. Bc4 Be7 6. dxe5 dxe5 7. Bxf7+
*Philidor Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6
*Philidor Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bc4
*Philidor Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bc4 Be7
*Philidor Defense: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bc4 Be7 4. c3
*Philidor Defense: Lopez Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bc4 f5
*Philidor Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4
*Philidor Defense: Philidor Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Bd7
*Philidor Defense: Albin-Blackburne Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Bg4 4. dxe5 Nd7
*Philidor Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4
*Philidor Defense: Morphy Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4
*Philidor Defense: Bird Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3
*Philidor Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4
*Philidor Defense: Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 d5 5. exd5
*Philidor Defense: Larsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 g6
*Philidor Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6
*Philidor Defense: Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 Be7 6. Be2 0-0 7. 0-0 c5 8. Nf3 Nc6 9. Bg5 Be6 10. Re1
*Philidor Defense: Boden Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 exd4 4. Qxd4 Bd7
*Philidor Defense: Philidor Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 f5
*Philidor Defense: Lopez Countergambit, Jaenisch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 f5 4. Bc4 exd4 5. Ng5 Nh6 6. Nxh7
*Philidor Defense: Philidor Countergambit, del Rio Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 f5 4. dxe5 fxe4 5. Ng5 d5 6. e6
*Philidor Defense: Philidor Countergambit, Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 f5 4. dxe5 fxe4 5. Ng5 d5 6. e6 Bc5 7. Nc3
*Philidor Defense: Philidor Countergambit, Zukertort Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 f5 4. Nc3
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation, Delmar Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 c6 5. c3
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation, Schlechter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 c6 5. Nc3
*Philidor Defense: Hanham, Kmoch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 c6 5. Ng5
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation, Krause Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 c6 5. 0-0
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation, Steiner Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 c6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. dxe5
*Philidor Defense: Hanham Variation, Sharp Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Bc4 Nb6
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Shirov Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nd7 4. Nc3 Ngf6 5. g4
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Klein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Bc4
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. dxe5
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Sokolsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. dxe5 Nxe4 5. Nbd2
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation, Rellstab Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. dxe5 Nxe4 5. Qd5
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Bishop Sacrifice: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Bc4 Be7 6. Bxf7+
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch, Larobok Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Bc4 Be7 6. Ng5 0-0 7. Bxf7+
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Forcing Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Bc4 Be7 6. Ng5 0-0 7. Bxf7+ Rxf7 8. Ne6
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Lion&#x27;s Claw, with Bc4 and h6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Bc4 Be7 6. 0-0 h6
*Philidor Defense: Lion Variation, Lion&#x27;s Claw, with Be2 and c6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Be2 Be7 6. 0-0 c6
*Philidor Defense: Nimzowitsch, Locock Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 Nf6 4. Ng5

*C42 Petrov&#x27;s Defence, including Marshall Trap
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Italian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bc4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Three Knights Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nc4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Karklins-Martinovsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nd3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Millennium Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. Bd3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Kaufmann Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. c4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: French Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Marshall Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0 8. c4 Bg4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Marshall Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0 8. c4 Bg4 9. cxd5 f5 10. Re1 Bxh2+
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Staunton Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0 8. c4 c6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Marshall Variation, Chinese Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0 8. c4 c6 9. Re1 Bg4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Chigorin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Be7 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. Re1
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Be7 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. Re1 Bg4 9. c3 f5 10. c4 Bh4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Be7 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. Re1 Bg4 9. c3 f5 10. Nbd2
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Mason Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Be7 7. 0-0 0-0
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Mason-Showalter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Nc6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Jaenisch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Nc6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. c4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Chigorin Variation, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Nc6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. c4 Nb4 9. Be2
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Chigorin Variation, Browne Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Nc6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. c4 Nb4 9. cxd5
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Krause Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 d5 6. Bd3 Nc6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. Re1 Bg4 9. c3 f5 10. c4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Classical Attack, Closed Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. d4 Nf6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. Nc3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Cozio Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. Qe2
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Cochrane Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nxf7
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Cochrane Gambit, Bishop Check Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nxf7 Kxf7 5. Bc4+
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Cochrane Gambit, Center Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 d6 4. Nxf7 Kxf7 5. d4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Stafford Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 Nc6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Stafford Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 Nc6 4. Nxc6 dxc6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Damiano Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 Nxe4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Damiano Variation, Kholmov Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nxe5 Nxe4 4. Qe2 Qe7
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Moody Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Qe2 Nc6 4. d4

*C43 Petrov&#x27;s Defence, Modern (Steinitz) Attack
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Urusov Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nf3
*Bishop&#x27;s Opening: Urusov Gambit, Keidansky Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Bc4 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nf3 Nxe4 5. Qxd4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 d5
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 exd4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Tal Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. e5 Ne4 5. Bb5
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. e5 Ne4 5. Qe2
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Bardeleben Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. e5 Ne4 5. Qe2 Nc5 6. Nxd4 Nc6
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Center Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 exd4 4. e5 Ne4 5. Qxd4
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Center Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 Nxe4 4. Bd3
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Trifunovic Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 Nxe4 4. Bd3 d5 5. Nxe5 Bd6 6. 0-0 0-0 7. c4 Bxe5
*Petrov&#x27;s Defense: Modern Attack, Murrey Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. d4 Nxe4 4. Bd3 Nc6

*C44 King&#x27;s Pawn Game (includes Ponziani Opening, Inverted Hungarian Opening, Irish Gambit, Konstantinopolsky Opening and some Scotch Game)
*King&#x27;s Knight Opening: Normal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Pachman Wing Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. b4
*Scotch Game: Benima Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Be7 4. d4 exd4
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Dubois Réti Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Kingside Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5 Ng4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Tayler Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Be2
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Tayler Opening, Inverted Hanham: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Be2 Nf6 4. d3 d5 5. Nbd2
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Tayler Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Be2 Nf6 4. d4
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Tayler Opening, Basman Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Be2 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5
*Ponziani Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3
*Ponziani Opening: Romanishin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Be7
*Ponziani Opening: Spanish Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 d5 4. Bb5
*Ponziani Opening: Spanish Variation, Harrwitz Attack, Nikitin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 d5 4. Bb5 dxe4 5. Nxe5 Qd5 6. Qa4
*Ponziani Opening: Caro Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 d5 4. Qa4 Bd7
*Ponziani Opening: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 d5 4. Qa4 f6
*Ponziani Opening: Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 d5 4. Qa4 Nf6
*Ponziani Opening: Ponziani Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 f5
*Ponziani Opening: Ponziani Countergambit, Schmidt Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 f5 4. d4 d6 5. d5
*Ponziani Opening: Jaenisch Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6
*Ponziani Opening: Neumann Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. Bc4
*Ponziani Opening: Jaenisch Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. d3
*Ponziani Opening: Jaenisch Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. d3 d5
*Ponziani Opening: Jaenisch Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. d3 d5 5. Nbd2
*Ponziani Opening: Vukovic Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nf6 4. d4 Nxe4 5. d5 Bc5
*Ponziani Opening: Réti Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c3 Nge7
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Dresden Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c4
*Dresden Opening: The Goblin: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. c4 Nf6 4. Nxe5
*Latvian Gambit: Clam Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d3 f5 4. exf5
*Scotch Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4
*Scotch Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4
*Scotch Game: Relfsson Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bb5
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, London Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bb4+
*Scotch Game: Cochrane Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bb4+ 5. c3 dxc3 6. bxc3 Ba5 7. e5
*Scotch Game: Hanneken Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bb4+ 5. c3 dxc3 6. 0-0 cxb2 7. Bxb2 Nf6 8. Ng5 0-0 9. e5 Nxe5
*Scotch Game: Haxo Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Sarratt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. Ng5
*Scotch Game: Cochrane-Shumov Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. Ng5 Nh6 6. Nxf7 Nxf7 7. Bxf7+ Kxf7 8. Qh5+ g6 9. Qxc5 d5
*Scotch Game: Vitzthum Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. Ng5 Nh6 6. Qh5
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Cochrane-Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. 0-0 d6 6. c3 Bg4
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Advance Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. e5
*Scotch Game: Göring Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3
*Scotch Game: Scotch Gambit, Göring Gambit Declined: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3 d5
*Scotch Game: Göring Gambit, Double Pawn Sacrifice: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3 dxc3 5. Bc4
*Scotch Game: Göring Gambit, Bardeleben Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3 dxc3 5. Bc4 Nf6 6. Nxc3 Bb4
*Scotch Game: Göring Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3 dxc3 5. Nxc3 Bb4
*Scotch Game: Sea-Cadet Mate: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. c3 dxc3 5. Nxc3 d6 6. Bc4 Bg4 7. 0-0 Ne5 8. Nxe5 Bxd1 9. Bxf7+ Ke7 10. Nd5#
*Scotch Game: Lolli Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 Nxd4
*Scotch Game: Napoleon Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 Nxd4 4. Nxd4 exd4 5. Bc4
*Scotch Game: Lolli Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 Nxd4 4. Nxd4 exd4 5. Qxd4
*King&#x27;s Knight Opening: Konstantinopolsky: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. g3
*Irish Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nxe5
*King&#x27;s Pawn Game: Schulze-Müller Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nxe5 Nxe5 4. d4

*C45 Scotch Game
*Scotch Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4
*Scotch Game: Malaniuk Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bb4+
*Scotch Game: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5
*Scotch Game: Paulsen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Nge7 7. Bb5
*Scotch Game: Paulsen, Gunsberg Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Nge7 7. Bb5 Nd8
*Scotch Game: Meitner Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Nge7 7. Nc2
*Scotch Game: Classical Variation, Blackburne Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Nge7 7. Qd2
*Scotch Game: Gottschall Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Nge7 7. Qd2 d5 8. Nb5 Bxe3 9. Qxe3 0-0 10. Nxc7 Rb8 11. Nxd5 Nxd5 12. exd5 Nb4
*Scotch Game: Classical Variation, Millennium Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. c3 Qg6
*Scotch Game: Blumenfeld Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Be3 Qf6 6. Nb5
*Scotch Game: Potter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Nb3
*Scotch Game: Romanishin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Nb3 Bb4+
*Scotch Game: Classical Variation, Intermezzo Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Bc5 5. Nxc6 Qf6
*Scotch Game: Schmidt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6
*Scotch Game: Alekhine Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. e5
*Scotch Game: Mieses Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nxc6 bxc6 6. e5
*Scotch Game: Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nxc6 bxc6 6. Nd2
*Scotch Game: Ghulam-Kassim Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Nxd4 5. Qxd4 d6 6. Bd3
*Scotch Game: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4
*Scotch Game: Braune Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Be3
*Scotch Game: Horwitz Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nb5
*Scotch Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nb5 Bb4+ 6. Bd2
*Scotch Game: Rosenthal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nb5 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Qxe4+ 7. Be2 Kd8 8. 0-0 Bxd2 9. Nxd2 Qg6
*Scotch Game: Horwitz Attack, Blackburne Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nb5 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Qxe4+ 7. Be2 Kd8 8. 0-0 Bxd2 9. Qxd2
*Scotch Game: Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nc3
*Scotch Game: Modern Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nc3 Bb4
*Scotch Game: Fraser Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nf3
*Scotch Game: Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Nxd4 Qh4 5. Nf5

*C46 Three Knights Game including Halloween Gambit
*Three Knights Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3
*Three Knights Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Bb4
*Three Knights Opening: Schlechter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nd5 Nf6
*Three Knights Opening: Winawer Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 f5
*Three Knights Opening: Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 g6
*Three Knights Opening: Steinitz-Rosenthal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 g6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nd5

*C47 Four Knights Game
*Four Knights Game: Italian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3
*Four Knights Game: Italian Variation, Noa Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Nc3 Nxe4 5. Bxf7+
*Four Knights Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6
*Four Knights Game: Gunsberg Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. a3
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Oxford Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 Bb4 5. d5 Nd4
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Krause Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 Bb4 5. Nxe5
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Krause Gambit, Leonhardt Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 Bb4 5. Nxe5 Qe7
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 exd4
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Belgrade Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nd5
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Belgrade Gambit, Modern Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nd5 Nxe4 6. Qe2 f5
*Four Knights Game: Scotch Variation, Schmid Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nxd4 Nxe4
*Four Knights Game: Halloween Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nxe5
*Four Knights Game: Halloween Gambit, Plasma Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nxe5 Nxe5 5. d4 Nc6 6. d5 Ne5 7. f4 Ng6 8. e5 Ng8 9. d6 cxd6 10. exd6 Qf6 11. Nb5 Rb8
*Four Knights Game: Halloween Gambit, Oldtimer Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nxe5 Nxe5 5. d4 Ng6 6. e5 Ng8 7. Bc4 Bb4 8. Qf3 f5

*C48 Four Knights Game, Spanish Variation
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Ranken Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 a6 5. Bxc6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Spielmann Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 a6 5. Bxc6 dxc6 6. Nxe5 Nxe4 7. Nxe4 Qd4 8. 0-0 Qxe5 9. Re1 Be6 10. d4 Qd5
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bc5
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Bardeleben Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bc5 5. 0-0 0-0 6. Nxe5 Nxe5 7. d4 Bd6 8. f4 Nc6 9. e5 Bb4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Marshall Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Ba4 Bc5 6. Nxe5 0-0
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Be2
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Be2 Nxf3+ 6. Bxf3 Bc5 7. 0-0 0-0 8. d3 d6 9. Na4 Bb6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Nxd4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Marshall Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Nxe5 Bc5 6. 0-0 0-0
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. Nxe5 Qe7 6. f4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Henneberger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. Bb5 Nd4 5. 0-0

*C49 Four Knights Game, Double Ruy Lopez
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Double Spanish: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. Bxc6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Double Spanish: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 Bxc3
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Svenonius Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 Bxc3 7. bxc3 d5
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Janowski Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 Bxc3 7. bxc3 d6 8. Re1
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation, Metger Unpin: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Bg5 Bxc3 8. bxc3 Qe7
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Bg5 Bxc3 8. bxc3 Qe7 9. Re1 Nd8 10. d4 Bg4
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Bg5 Ne7
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation, Blake Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Bg5 Ne7 8. Nh4 c6 9. Bc4 d5 10. Bb3 Qd6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Ne2
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Alatortsev Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 Qe7 7. Ne2 d5
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Symmetrical Variation, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. d3 d6 7. Bg5 Be6
*Four Knights Game: Spanish Variation, Gunsberg Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Nc3 Nc6 4. Bb5 Bb4 5. 0-0 0-0 6. Nd5 Nxd5 7. exd5 e4

*C50 Italian Game (includes Blackburne Shilling Gambit, Hungarian Defence, Semi-Italian Opening, Italian Gambit, Légal Trap, Rousseau Gambit, Koltanowski Gambit and Giuoco Pianissimo)
*Italian Game: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5
*Italian Game: Jerome Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. Bxf7+
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo, Lucchini Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3 f5
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo, Dubois Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3 f5 5. Ng5 f4
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo, Italian Four Knights Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3 Nf6 5. Nc3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo, Canal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d3 Nf6 5. Nc3 d6 6. Bg5
*Italian Game: Rosentreter Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. d4
*Four Knights Game: Italian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. Nc3 Nf6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Albin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. c3
*Italian Game: Deutz Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d4
*Italian Game: Hungarian Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Be7
*Italian Game: Hungarian Defense, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Be7 4. d4 exd4 5. c3 Nf6 6. e5 Ne4
*Italian Game: Paris Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 d6
*Italian Game: Rousseau Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 f5
*Italian Game: Anti-Fried Liver Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 h6
*Italian Game: Blackburne-Kostić Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nd4
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo, Normal: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d3 Bc5
*Italian Game: Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. Nc3 d6 6. d3

*C51 Evans Gambit
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Fontaine Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 b5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. a4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Showalter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. a4 a6 6. Nc3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Lange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. b5 Na5 6. Nxe5 Nh6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Pavlov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. b5 Na5 6. Nxe5 Nh6 7. d4 d6 8. Bxh6 dxe5 9. Bxg7 Rg8 10. Bxf7+ Kxf7 11. Bxe5 Qg5 12. Nd2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Hirschbach Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. b5 Na5 6. Nxe5 Qg5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Vasquez Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. b5 Na5 6. Nxe5 Qg5 7. Bxf7+ Ke7 8. Qh5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Hicken Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. b5 Na5 6. Nxe5 Qg5 7. Qf3 Qxe5 8. Qxf7+ Kd8 9. Bb2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Declined, Cordel Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bb6 5. Bb2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Morphy Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, McDonnell Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Harding Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. cxd4 Bb4+ 8. Bd2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, McDonnell Defense, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Ulvestad Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. d5 Na5 10. Bb2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. d5 Na5 10. Bb2 Ne7
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Bg4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Fraser Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Bg4 10. Qa4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Fraser-Mortimer Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Bg4 10. Qa4 Bd7 11. Qb3 Na5 12. Bxf7+ Kf8 13. Qc2
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Mortimer-Evans Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Bg4 10. Qa4 Bd7 11. Qb3 Na5 12. Bxf7+ Kf8 13. Qc2 Kxf7
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Göring Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Na5 10. Bg5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bc5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. cxd4 Bb6 9. Nc3 Na5 10. Bg5 f6 11. Be3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Stone-Ware Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bd6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Be7
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Anderssen Variation, Cordel Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Be7 6. d4 Na5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Mayet Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Bf8
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Hein Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 d5

*C52 Evans Gambit with 4...Bxb4 5.c3 Ba5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Leonhardt Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 b5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Bronstein Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 d6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Sokolsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 d6 7. Bg5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Tartakower Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 d6 7. Qb3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Levenfish Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 d6 7. Qb3 Qd7 8. dxe5 dxe5 9. 0-0 Bb6 10. Ba3 Na5 11. Nxe5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Pierce Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Johner Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 b5
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Dufresne Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Waller Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 d6 8. Qb3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Compromised Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 dxc3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Compromised Defense, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 dxc3 8. Qb3 Qf6 9. e5 Qg6 10. Nxc3 Nge7 11. Ba3
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Compromised Defense, Potter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 dxc3 8. Qb3 Qf6 9. e5 Qg6 10. Nxc3 Nge7 11. Rd1
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Mieses Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 exd4 7. 0-0 Nge7
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Laroche Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. d4 Nf6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Slow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 d6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Lasker Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 d6 7. d4 Bb6
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Sanders-Alapin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 d6 7. d4 Bd7
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Alapin-Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 d6 7. d4 Bg4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Anderssen Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 Nf6 7. d4 exd4
*Italian Game: Evans Gambit, Richardson Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. b4 Bxb4 5. c3 Ba5 6. 0-0 Nf6 7. d4 0-0 8. Nxe5

*C53 Giuoco Piano
*Italian Game: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, La Bourdonnais Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 d6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb6
*Italian Game: Bird&#x27;s Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. b4
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Closed Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Center Holding Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7 5. d4 Bb6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Mestel Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7 5. d4 Bb6 6. Bg5
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Eisinger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7 5. d4 Bb6 6. d5 Nb8 7. d6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7 5. d4 Bb6 6. 0-0 d6 7. a4 a6 8. h3 Nf6 9. Re1

*C54 Giuoco Piano
*Italian Game: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with a6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 a6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with d6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, Albin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. b4
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with a6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. Nbd2 a6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. Nbd2 0-0 7. 0-0
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. 0-0 0-0
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Re1 a6 8. Bb3 Ba7 9. h3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Center Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Traditional Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Krause Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Bd2 Nxe4 8. Bxb4 Nxb4 9. Bxf7+ Kxf7 10. Qb3+ d5 11. Ne5+ Kf6 12. f3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Cracow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Kf1
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Greco&#x27;s Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Bxc3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Bxc3 9. bxc3 d5 10. Ba3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Moeller-Therkatz Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Bxc3 9. d5
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Therkatz-Herzog Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Bxc3 9. d5 Bf6 10. Re1 Ne7 11. Rxe4 d6 12. Bg5 Bxg5 13. Nxg5 0-0 14. Nxh7
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Moeller-Bayonet Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Bxc3 9. d5 Bf6 10. Re1 Ne7 11. Rxe4 d6 12. g4
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Greco Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Nxc3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Aitken Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Nxc3 9. bxc3 Bxc3 10. Ba3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Bernstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. cxd4 Bb4+ 7. Nc3 Nxe4 8. 0-0 Nxc3 9. bxc3 Bxc3 10. Qb3 d5
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit, Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. e5 d5 7. Bb5 Ne4 8. cxd4 Bb4+
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Ghulam-Kassim Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. e5 Ne4 7. Bd5 Nxf2 8. Kxf2 dxc3+ 9. Kg3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with a5: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d3 a5 6. c3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. c3 a6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with h6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d3 h6
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d3 h6 6. c3
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Giuoco Pianissimo, with h6: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d3 h6 6. c3 d6
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Holzhausen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. d4 Bxd4 6. Nxd4 Nxd4 7. Bg5 d6 8. f4 Qe7 9. fxe5 dxe5 10. Nc3
*Italian Game: Giuoco Piano, Rosentreter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. d4 Bxd4 6. Nxd4 Nxd4 7. Bg5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. f4
*Italian Game: Classical Variation, Greco Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. c3 Nf6 6. e5 d5

*C55 Two Knights Defence
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Modern Bishop&#x27;s Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d3
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Modern Bishop&#x27;s Opening: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d3 Be7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. d4 Bxd4 6. Nxd4 Nxd4 7. Bg5 d6

*C56 Two Knights Defence
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Walbrodt-Baird Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. c3 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. 0-0
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Max Lange Attack Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nf6 5. d4 exd4 6. e5 d5 7. exf6 dxc4 8. Re1+ Be6 9. fxg7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Open Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4
*Italian Game: Scotch Invitation Declined: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 d6
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Max Lange Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5 d5 6. Bb5 Ne4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Keidansky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. e5 d5 6. Bb5 Ne4 7. Nxd4 Bc5 8. Nxc6 Bxf2+ 9. Kf1 Qh4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Perreux Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. Ng5
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Max Lange Attack, Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5 d5 7. exf6 dxc4 8. Re1+ Be6 9. Ng5 Qd5 10. Nc3 Qf5 11. g4 Qg6 12. Nce4 Bb6 13. f4 0-0-0
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Max Lange Attack, Rubinstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5 d5 7. exf6 dxc4 8. Re1+ Be6 9. Ng5 Qd5 10. Nc3 Qf5 11. Nce4 Bf8
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Max Lange Attack, Krause Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5 Ng4 7. c3
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Double Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Nxe4
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Nakhmanson Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Nc3
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Anderssen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Re1 d5 7. Bxd5 Qxd5 8. Nc3
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Anderssen Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Re1 d5 7. Bxd5 Qxd5 8. Nc3 Qa5 9. Nxe4 Be6 10. Bd2 Qd5 11. Bg5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Max Lange Attack, Loman Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Bc5 5. 0-0 Nf6 6. e5 d5 7. exf6 dxc4 8. Re1+ Be6 9. Ng5 g6
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Max Lange Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Bc5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Max Lange Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Max Lange Attack, Long Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5 d5 7. exf6 dxc4 8. Re1+ Be6 9. Ng5 Qd5 10. Nc3 Qf5 11. Nce4
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Max Lange Attack, Spielmann Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Bc5 6. e5 Ng4
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, de Riviere Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Janowski Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d6
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Yurdansky Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Re1 d5 7. Bxd5 Qxd5 8. Nc3 Qa5 9. Nxe4 Be6 10. Bg5 h6 11. Bh4 g5 12. Nf6+ Ke7 13. b4
*Italian Game: Scotch Gambit, Canal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. d4 exd4 4. Bc4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Re1 d5 7. Nc3

*C57 Two Knights Defence, including the Fried Liver Attack
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Knight Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Traxler Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Traxler Counterattack, Bishop Sacrifice Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5 5. Bxf7+
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Traxler Variation, Trencianske-Teplice Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5 5. Bxf7+ Ke7 6. d4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Traxler Counterattack, Knight Sacrifice Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5 5. Nxf7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Traxler Counterattack, King March Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Bc5 5. Nxf7 Bxf2+ 6. Kxf2 Nxe4+ 7. Ke3
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Knight Attack, Normal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Ulvestad Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 b5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Ulvestad Variation, Kurkin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 b5 6. Bf1 h6 7. Nxf7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Kloss Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nb4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Fritz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nd4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Fritz, Gruber Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nd4 6. c3 b5 7. Bf1 Nxd5 8. Ne4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Lolli Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6. d4
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Pincus Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6. d4 Bb4+
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Fried Liver Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6. Nxf7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Fegatello Attack, Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Nxd5 6. Nxf7 Kxf7 7. Qf3+ Ke6 8. Nc3 Nb4 9. Qe4 c6 10. a3 Na6 11. d4 Nc7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Ponziani-Steinitz Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 Nxe4

*C58 Two Knights Defence
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Bishop Check Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qf3
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Blackburne Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qf3 cxb5
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Paoli Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qf3 Qc7 9. Bd3
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Colman Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qf3 Rb8
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Kieseritzky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. d3
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Yankovich Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. d3 h6 7. Nf3 e4 8. Qe2 Nxc4 9. dxc4 Bc5 10. Nfd2
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Maróczy Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. d3 h6 7. Nf3 e4 8. Qe2 Nxc4 9. dxc4 Be7

*C59 Two Knights Defence
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Suhle Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2 h6
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Knorre Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2 h6 9. Nf3 e4 10. Ne5 Bd6 11. d4 Qc7 12. Bd2
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Polerio Defense, Göring Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2 h6 9. Nf3 e4 10. Ne5 Qc7
*Italian Game: Two Knights Defense, Steinitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Be2 h6 9. Nh3

*C60 Ruy Lopez Unusual Black 3rd moves and 3...g6
*Ruy Lopez: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5
*Ruy Lopez: Bulgarian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a5
*Ruy Lopez: Rotary-Albany Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 b6
*Ruy Lopez: Alapin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bb4
*Ruy Lopez: Alapin Defense, Alapin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bb4 4. c3 Ba5 5. Bxc6 dxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Lucena Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Spanish Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Spanish Countergambit, Harding Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d5 4. Nxe5 Qg5 5. Nxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Spanish Countergambit, Harding Countergambit, Fricke Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d5 4. Nxe5 Qg5 5. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Nürnberg Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f6
*Ruy Lopez: Brentano Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g5
*Ruy Lopez: Fianchetto Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6
*Ruy Lopez: Fianchetto Defense, Kevitz Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. c3 f5
*Ruy Lopez: Cozio Defense, Tartakower Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. d4 exd4 5. Nxd4 Bg7 6. Be3 Nge7 7. Nc3 0-0 8. Qd2 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Pollock Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Na5
*Ruy Lopez: Retreat Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nb8
*Ruy Lopez: Cozio Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nge7
*Ruy Lopez: Cozio Defense, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nge7 4. Nc3 g6
*Ruy Lopez: Vinogradov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Qe7

*C61 Ruy Lopez, Bird&#x27;s Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Bird Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nd4
*Ruy Lopez: Bird Variation, Paulsen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nd4 4. Nxd4 exd4 5. 0-0 Ne7

*C62 Ruy Lopez, Old Steinitz Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Old Steinitz Defense, Semi-Duras Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6 4. d4 Bd7 5. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Steinitz Defense, Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6 4. d4 Bd7 5. Nc3 Nf6 6. Bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Steinitz Defense, Center Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0

*C63 Ruy Lopez, Schliemann Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Schönemann Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Jaenisch Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. exf5
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Dyckhoff Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Nc3
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Kostić Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Nc3 fxe4 5. Nxe4 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Möhring Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Nc3 fxe4 5. Nxe4 d5 6. Nxe5 dxe4 7. Nxc6 Qd5
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Nc3 fxe4 5. Nxe4 d5 6. Nxe5 dxe4 7. Nxc6 Qg5
*Ruy Lopez: Schliemann Defense, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 f5 4. Nc3 fxe4 5. Nxe4 Nf6

*C64 Ruy Lopez, Classical (Cordel) Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Spanish Wing Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. b4
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Central Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Charousek Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. c3 Bb6
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Konikowski Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. c3 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Cordel Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. c3 f5
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Defense, Boden Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. c3 Qe7
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Defense, Zaitsev Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Bc5 4. 0-0 Nd4 5. b4
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Defense, Benelux Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. c3 0-0 6. d4 Bb6
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Modern Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. c3 0-0 6. d4 Bb6 7. Bg5

*C65 Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence including Mortimer Trap
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Kaufmann Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d3 Bc5 5. Be3
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d3 d6 5. Bxc6+
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Duras Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d3 d6 5. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Mortimer Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d3 Ne7
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Mortimer Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d3 Ne7 5. Nxe5 c6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Nyholm Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. d4 exd4 5. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Halloween Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. Nxe5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Beverwijk Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Classical Variation, Zukertort Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Bc5 5. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Fishing Pole Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Ng4

*C66 Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence, 4.0-0 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Tarrasch Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 d6 4. d4 Bd7 5. Nc3 Nf6 6. 0-0 Be7 7. Re1 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Improved Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Hedgehog Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6 5. d4 Bd7 6. Nc3 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Closed Bernstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6 5. d4 Bd7 6. Nc3 Be7 7. Bg5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Closed Showalter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6 5. d4 Bd7 6. Nc3 Be7 7. Bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Closed Wolf Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6 5. d4 Bd7 6. Nc3 exd4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed Berlin Defense, Chigorin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 d6 5. d4 Nd7

*C67 Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence, Open Variation
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Rio Gambit Accepted: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Rosenthal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 a6
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Rio de Janeiro Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Minckwitz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. dxe5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Trifunovic Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Pillsbury Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 Nd6 7. Bxc6 bxc6 8. dxe5 Nb7 9. b3
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Zukertort Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 Nd6 7. Bxc6 bxc6 8. dxe5 Nb7 9. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Rio de Janeiro Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 Nd6 7. Bxc6 bxc6 8. dxe5 Nb7 9. Nc3 0-0 10. Re1 Nc5 11. Nd4 Ne6 12. Be3 Nxd4 13. Bxd4 c5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Winawer Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 Nd6 7. Bxc6 bxc6 8. dxe5 Nb7 9. Nd4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Cordel Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Be7 6. Qe2 Nd6 7. Bxc6 bxc6 8. dxe5 Nf5
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, l&#x27;Hermet Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6
*Ruy Lopez: Open Berlin Defense, Showalter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6 6. Ba4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, l&#x27;Hermet Variation, Westerinen Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6 6. Bxc6 dxc6 7. dxe5 Ne4
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, l&#x27;Hermet Variation, Berlin Wall Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6 6. Bxc6 dxc6 7. dxe5 Nf5 8. Qxd8+ Kxd8
*Ruy Lopez: Berlin Defense, Berlin Wall: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6 6. Bxc6 dxc6 7. dxe5 Nf5 8. Qxd8+ Kxd8 9. Nc3 Bd7
*Ruy Lopez: Open Berlin Defense, l&#x27;Hermet Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 Nf6 4. 0-0 Nxe4 5. d4 Nd6 6. dxe5

*C68 Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Lutikov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Alekhine Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. d4 exd4 6. Qxd4 Qxd4 7. Nxd4 Bd6
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange, Alekhine Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. d4 exd4 6. Qxd4 Qxd4 7. Nxd4 Bd7
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Keres Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. Nc3
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Romanovsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. Nc3 f6 6. d3

*C69 Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation, 5.0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Normal Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, King&#x27;s Bishop Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. 0-0 Bd6
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Alapin Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. 0-0 Bg4 6. h3 h5
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Gligoric Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. 0-0 f6
*Ruy Lopez: Exchange Variation, Bronstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Bxc6 dxc6 5. 0-0 Qd6

*C70 Ruy Lopez, 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 3.Bb5 a6 4.Ba4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Caro Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Graz Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5 5. Bb3 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Norwegian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5 5. Bb3 Na5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Norwegian Variation, Nightingale Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5 5. Bb3 Na5 6. Bxf7+
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Alapin&#x27;s Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Bb4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Classical Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Schliemann Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 f5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Schliemann Defense Deferred, Jaenisch Gambit Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 f5 5. exf5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Fianchetto Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 g6
*Ruy Lopez: Bird&#x27;s Defense Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nd4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Cozio Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nge7

*C71 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence including Noah&#x27;s Ark Trap
*Ruy Lopez: Noah&#x27;s Ark Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 b5 5. Bb3 d6 6. d4 Nxd4 7. Nxd4 exd4 8. Qxd4 c5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. Nc3

*C72 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence 5.0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Kecskemet Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. 0-0 Bd7 6. c3 Nf6 7. d4 Be7 8. Nbd2 0-0 9. Re1 Be8

*C73 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence, Richter Variation
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. Bxc6+ bxc6 6. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. Bxc6+ bxc6 6. d4 f6

*C74 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense, Siesta Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 f5
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 f5 6. exf5 Bxf5 7. 0-0

*C75 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 Bd7
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 d6 5. c3 Bd7 6. d4 Nge7

*C76 Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence, Fianchetto (Bronstein) Variation
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Modern Steinitz Defense, Fianchetto Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 g6 4. c3 a6 5. Ba4 d6 6. d4 Bd7

*C77 Ruy Lopez, Morphy Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Bayreuth Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. Bxc6
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Jaffe Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Anderssen Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. d3
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Duras Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. d3 d6 6. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Mackenzie Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Tarrasch Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. Nc3
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Wormald Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. Qe2
*Ruy Lopez: Wormald Attack, Grünfeld Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. Qe2 b5 6. Bb3 Be7 7. d4 d6 8. c3 Bg4

*C78 Ruy Lopez, 5.0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Arkhangelsk Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 b5 6. Bb3 Bb7
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Wing Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 b5 6. Bb3 Be7 7. a4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 b5 6. Bb3 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Rabinovich Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 b5 6. Bb3 d6 7. Ng5 d5 8. exd5 Nd4 9. Re1 Bc5 10. Rxe5+ Kf8
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Neo-Arkhangelsk Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Central Countergambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Brix Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 g6

*C79 Ruy Lopez, Steinitz Defence Deferred (Russian Defence)
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Steinitz Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Steinitz Defense Deferred, Lipnitsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d6 6. Bxc6+ bxc6 7. d4 Bg4
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Steinitz Deferred: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d6 6. Bxc6+ bxc6 7. d4 Nxe4
*Ruy Lopez: Steinitz Defense Deferred, Boleslavsky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 d6 6. Bxc6+ bxc6 7. d4 Nxe4 8. Re1 f5 9. dxe5 d5 10. Nc3

*C80 Ruy Lopez, Open (Tarrasch) Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Open: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4
*Ruy Lopez: Open: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Open: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Schlechter Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. a4 Nxd4
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Berger Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. a4 Nxd4 9. Nxd4 exd4 10. Nc3
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Harksen Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Open: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Bernstein Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Nbd2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Bernstein Variation, Luther Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Nbd2 Bc5 10. Qe1
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Karpov Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Nbd2 Nc5 10. c3 d4 11. Ng5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Zukertort Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Ne7
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Richter Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. d5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Friess Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Nxe5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Riga Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 exd4
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Knorre Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Nc3
*Ruy Lopez: Morphy Defense, Tartakower Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Qe2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Skipworth Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. Re1 d5

*C81 Ruy Lopez, Open, Howell Attack
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Howell Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Qe2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Howell Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Qe2 Be7 10. c4
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Howell Attack, Ekstrom Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. Qe2 Be7 10. Rd1 0-0 11. c4 bxc4 12. Bxc4 Qd7

*C82 Ruy Lopez, Open, 9.c3
*Ruy Lopez: Open: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Italian Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, St. Petersburg Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5 10. Nbd2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Dilworth Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5 10. Nbd2 0-0 11. Bc2 Nxf2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Motzko Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5 10. Qd3
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Motzko Attack, Nenarokov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Bc5 10. Qd3 Ne7
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Berlin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Nc5

*C83 Ruy Lopez, Open, Classical Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Classical Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Malkin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Be7 10. Nbd2 0-0 11. Qe2
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Breslau Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Be7 10. Re1 0-0 11. Nd4 Nxe5
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Tarrasch Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 b5 7. Bb3 d5 8. dxe5 Be6 9. c3 Be7 10. Re1 0-0 11. Nd4 Qd7 12. Nxe6 fxe6 13. Rxe4
*Ruy Lopez: Open, Classical Defense, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Nxe4 6. d4 Be7 7. Re1 b5 8. Bb3 d5 9. dxe5 Be6 10. c3

*C84 Ruy Lopez, Closed Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Closed: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Martinez Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. d3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Center Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Basque Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. d4 exd4 7. e5 Ne4 8. c3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Center Attack, Basque Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. d4 exd4 7. e5 Ne4 8. c3 dxc3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Morphy Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Nc3

*C85 Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation Doubly Deferred (DERLD)
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Delayed Exchange: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Bxc6

*C86 Ruy Lopez, Worrall Attack
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Worrall Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Qe2
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Worrall Attack, Delayed Castling Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Qe2 b5 7. Bb3 d6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Worrall Attack, Castling Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Qe2 b5 7. Bb3 0-0

*C87 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Averbakh Variation
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Averbakh Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 d6

*C88 Ruy Lopez, Closed
*Ruy Lopez: Closed: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Trajkovic Counterattack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 Bb7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Balla Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 Na5 9. Bc2 c5 10. d4 Qc7 11. a4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Leonhardt Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 Na5 9. Bc2 c5 10. d4 Qc7 11. h3 Nc6 12. d5 Nb8 13. Nbd2 g5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Alekhine Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 Na5 9. Bc2 c5 10. d4 Qc7 11. Nbd2 0-0 12. Nf1 Bg4 13. Ne3 Bxf3 14. Qxf3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Rosen Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Noah&#x27;s Ark Trap: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. d4 Nxd4 9. Nxd4 exd4 10. Qxd4 c5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Anti-Marshall: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. a4

*C89 Ruy Lopez, Marshall Counterattack
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Steiner Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 e4
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Modern Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 c6
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Re3 Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 c6 12. Bxd5 cxd5 13. d4 Bd6 14. Re3
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 c6 12. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Modern Main Line: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 c6 12. d4 Bd6 13. Re1 Qh4 14. g3 Qh3
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Main Line, Spassky Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 c6 12. d4 Bd6 13. Re1 Qh4 14. g3 Qh3 15. Be3 Bg4 16. Qd3 Rae8 17. Nd2 Re6 18. a4 Qh5
*Ruy Lopez: Marshall Attack, Original Marshall Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. c3 d5 9. exd5 Nxd5 10. Nxe5 Nxe5 11. Rxe5 Nf6

*C90 Ruy Lopez, Closed, 7...d6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Suetin Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. a3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Lutikov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. Bc2
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Pilnik Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 0-0 8. d3 d6 9. c3

*C91 Ruy Lopez, Closed, 9.d4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Yates Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. d4 Bg4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Yates Variation, Short Attack: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. d4 Bg4 10. a4

*C92 Ruy Lopez, Closed, 9.h3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Flohr System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Bb7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Smyslov-Breyer-Zaitsev Hybrid: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Bb7 10. d4 Re8 11. Nbd2 Bf8 12. a3 h6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Kholmov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Be6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Karpov Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nd7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Zaitsev System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Re8

*C93 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Smyslov Defence 
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Smyslov Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 h6

*C94 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Breyer Defence, 10.d3
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer Defense, Quiet Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8 10. d3

*C95 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Breyer Defence, 10.d4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8 10. d4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer Defense, Zaitsev Hybrid: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8 10. d4 Nbd7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8 10. d4 Nbd7 11. Nbd2 Bb7 12. Bc2 c5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Breyer Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Nb8 10. d4 Nbd7 11. Nh4

*C96 Ruy Lopez, Closed, 8...Na5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Borisenko Variation: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Nc6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Keres Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Nd7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Rossolimo Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c6 11. d4 Qc7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense, Gajewski Gambit: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 d5

*C97 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Chigorin Defence
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin, Yugoslav System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 Bd7 13. Nf1 Rfe8 14. Ne3 g6

*C98 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Chigorin, 12...Nc6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 Nc6
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 Nc6 13. dxc5

*C99 Ruy Lopez, Closed, Chigorin, 12...cxd4
*Ruy Lopez: Closed, Chigorin Defense, Panov System: 1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. 0-0 Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 d6 8. c3 0-0 9. h3 Na5 10. Bc2 c5 11. d4 Qc7 12. Nbd2 cxd4 13. cxd4

==D – Closed Games and Semi-Closed Games==
* 1.d4 d5: Closed Game (D00–D69)
* 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 with 3...d5: Grünfeld Defence (D70–D99)

===D00–D69===
1.d4 d5: Closed Game 
*D00 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game (including Blackmar–Diemer Gambit, Halosar Trap and others)
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4 d5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Accelerated London System: 1. d4 d5 2. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Accelerated London System, Steinitz Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Bf4 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Accelerated London System, Steinitz Countergambit Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. Bf4 c5 3. dxc5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Accelerated London System, Steinitz Countergambit, Morris Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Bf4 c5 3. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Accelerated London System, Steinitz Countergambit, Morris Countergambit Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. Bf4 c5 3. e4 dxe4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Levitsky Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Levitsky Attack, Welling Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Bg5 Bg4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4 d5 2. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: 1. d4 d5 2. e3 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Stonewall Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e3 Nf6 3. Bd3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Fritz Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Bc4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Diemer-Rosenberg Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Be3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Blackmar Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. f3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Zeller Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Bf5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Zeller Defense, Soller Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Bf5 4. f3 Nf6 5. Bc4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Reversed Albin Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 c5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit, Soller Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. Be3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit, Endgame Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. dxe5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit, Rasmussen Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. Nge2
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit, Lange Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. Nxe4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Lemberger Countergambit, Sneiders Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 e5 4. Qh5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Netherlands Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 f5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: Rasa-Studier Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Be3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: von Popiel Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit: von Popiel Gambit, Zilbermints Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Bf5 5. Bxf6 exf6 6. g4 Bg6 7. Qe2 Bb4 8. Qb5+
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Gedult Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 a6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Vienna Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 Bf5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Brombacher Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 c5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: O&#x27;Kelly Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 c6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Langeheinicke Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 e3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Elbert Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 e5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Weinsbach Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 e6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Ritter Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 b6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Gunderam Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bf5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Gunderam Defense, Stader Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bf5 6. Ne5 e6 7. g4 Be4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Teichmann Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bg4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Teichmann Defense, Classical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bg4 6. h3 Bxf3 7. Qxf3 c6 8. Be3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Teichmann Defense, Seidel-Hall Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bg4 6. h3 Bxf3 7. Qxf3 c6 8. g4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Teichmann Defense, Ciesielski Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Bg4 6. h3 Bxf3 7. Qxf3 c6 8. Qf2
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Kaulich Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 c5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Ziegler Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 c6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Euwe Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 e6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Euwe Defense, Zilbermints Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 e6 6. Bg5 Be7 7. Bd3 Nc6 8. 0-0 Nxd4 9. Kh1
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 g6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense, Mad Dog Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 g6 6. Bc4 Bg7 7. h4
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense, Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 g6 6. Bc4 Bg7 7. Ne5
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense, Kloss Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 g6 6. Bc4 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Kh1
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense, Studier Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 g6 6. Bc4 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Qe1
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Schlutter Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Nbd7
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Pietrowsky Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Nc6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Holwell Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Nxf3 Qd6
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Accepted: Ryder Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 exf3 5. Qxf3
*Blackmar-Diemer Gambit Declined: Lamb Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. e4 dxe4 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. f3 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Mason Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. f4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Zurich Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. g4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Alburt Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 Bf5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Anti-Veresov: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 Bg4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Irish Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Shaviliuk Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 e6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Shropshire Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 h5
*Amazon Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. Qd3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation, Fianchetto Defense: 1. d4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. Nc3 d5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Hübsch Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. e4

*D01 Richter–Veresov Attack
*Rapport-Jobava System, with e6: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 e6 3. Bf4
*Rapport-Jobava System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bf4
*Rapport-Jobava System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bf4 e6
*Rapport-Jobava System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nc3 Nf6 3. Bf4 g6
*Richter-Veresov Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5
*Richter-Veresov Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Bf5
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Veresov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Bf5 4. Bxf6
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Richter Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Bf5 4. f3
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Malich Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 c5 4. Bxf6 gxf6 5. e4 dxe4 6. d5
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Two Knights System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Nbd7 4. Nf3
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Two Knights System, Grünfeld Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Nbd7 4. Nf3 g6
*Richter-Veresov Attack: Boyce Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nc3 d5 3. Bg5 Ne4

*D02 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game, 2.Nf3 (including the London System)
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Zukertort Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense, Pseudo-Slav: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Bf5 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 c6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Krause Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chandler Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 c5 3. g3 cxd4 4. Bg2
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Levitsky Attack, Euwe Variation, Modern Line: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 c6 3. Bg5 h6 4. Bh4 Qb6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: London System, with e6: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 e6 3. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Chigorin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Symmetrical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: London System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Zilbermints Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Symmetrical Variation, Pseudo-Catalan: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. g3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: London System, Pterodactyl Variation: 1. d4 g6 2. Nf3 Bg7 3. Bf4 c5 4. c3 cxd4 5. cxd4 Qa5+
*London System: Poisoned Pawn Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 d5 3. Bf4 c5 4. e3 Qb6 5. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Anti-Torre: 1. Nf3 d5 2. d4 Bg4

*D03 Torre Attack, Tartakower Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Torre Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Torre Attack, Grünfeld Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bg5 g6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Torre Attack, Gossip Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. Bg5 Ne4

*D04 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game, Colle System
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System, Anti-Colle: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 Bf5
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System, Grünfeld Formation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 g6 4. Bd3 Bg7

*D05 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game, Zukertort Variation (including Colle System)
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Zukertort Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 c5 3. e3 Nf6 4. Nbd2 e6 5. b3
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 e6
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 e6 4. Bd3
*Rubinstein Opening: Semi-Slav Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. e3 e6 4. Bd3 Bd6 5. 0-0 0-0 6. b3 Nbd7 7. Bb2
*Rubinstein Opening: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 d5 5. b3
*Rubinstein Opening: Bogoljubow Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 d5 5. b3 Nc6 6. 0-0 Bd6 7. Bb2 0-0
*Rubinstein Opening: Classical Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 d5 5. b3 Nc6 6. 0-0 Be7 7. Bb2 0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game: Colle System, Traditional Colle: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. e3 c5 4. Bd3 d5 5. c3

*D06 Queen&#x27;s Gambit (including the Baltic Defence, Marshall Defence and Symmetrical Defence)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Zilbermints Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Bf5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense, Argentinian Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Bf5 3. cxd5 Bxb1 4. Qa4+ c6 5. dxc6 Nxc6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense, Pseudo-Chigorin: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Bf5 3. Nc3 e6 4. Nf3 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense, Queen Attack Deferred: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Bf5 3. Nc3 e6 4. Qb3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Baltic Defense, Queen Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Bf5 3. Qb3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Austrian Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Austrian Defense, Gusev Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c5 3. cxd5 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Austrian Defense, Haberditz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c5 3. cxd5 Nf6 4. e4 Nxe4 5. dxc5 Qa5+
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Austrian Attack, Salvio Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c5 3. dxc5 d4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Marshall Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Marshall Defense, Tan Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nf6 3. cxd5 c6

*D07 QGD, Chigorin Defence
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. cxd5 Qxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Exchange Variation, Costa&#x27;s Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. cxd5 Qxd5 4. e3 e5 5. Nc3 Bb4 6. Bd2 Bxc3 7. Bxc3 exd4 8. Ne2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nc3 dxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Janowski Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nc3 dxc4 4. Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Modern Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nc3 dxc4 4. Nf3 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Tartakower Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nc3 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nf3 Bg4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Main Line, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nf3 Bg4 4. Qa4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Chigorin Defense, Lazard Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 Nc6 3. Nf3 e5

*D08 QGD, Albin Countergambit and Lasker Trap
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Lasker Trap: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. e3 Bb4+ 5. Bd2 dxe3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Normal Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Tartakower Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Modern Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Nbd2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Krenosz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Nbd2 Bg4 6. h3 Bxf3 7. Nxf3 Bb4+ 8. Bd2 Qe7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Janowski Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Nbd2 f6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Balogh Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. Nbd2 Qe7

*D09 QGD, Albin Countergambit, 5.g3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. g3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Fianchetto Variation, Be6 Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. g3 Be6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Fianchetto Variation, Bf5 Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. g3 Bf5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Albin Countergambit, Fianchetto Variation, Bg4 Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e5 3. dxe5 d4 4. Nf3 Nc6 5. g3 Bg4

*D10 QGD, Slav Defence
*Slav Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. cxd5
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation, Boor Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. cxd5 cxd5 4. Nc3 Nf6 5. f3
*Slav Defense: Diemer Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. e4
*Slav Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3
*Slav Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 dxc4
*Slav Defense: Slav Gambit, Alekhine Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 dxc4 4. e4
*Slav Defense: Winawer Countergambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 e5
*Slav Defense: Winawer Countergambit, Anti-Winawer Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 e5 4. e4

*D11 QGD, Slav Defence, 3.Nf3
*Slav Defense: Modern Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3
*Slav Defense: Bonet Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*Slav Defense: Quiet Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3
*Slav Defense: Quiet Variation, Pin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bg4
*Slav Defense: Breyer Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nbd2

*D12 QGD, Slav Defence, 4.e3 Bf5
*Slav Defense: Quiet Variation, Schallopp Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bf5
*Slav Defense: Quiet Variation, Amsterdam Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bf5 5. cxd5 cxd5 6. Nc3 e6 7. Ne5 Nfd7
*Slav Defense: Quiet Variation, Landau Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bf5 5. cxd5 cxd5 6. Qb3 Qc8 7. Bd2 e6 8. Na3

*D13 QGD, Slav Defence, Exchange Variation
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. cxd5 cxd5
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation, Schallopp Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bf5 5. cxd5 cxd5 6. Nc3

*D14 QGD, Slav Defence, Exchange Variation
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation, Symmetrical Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. cxd5 cxd5 4. Nc3 Nf6 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. Bf4 Bf5
*Slav Defense: Exchange Variation, Trifunovic Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. cxd5 cxd5 5. Nc3 Nc6 6. Bf4 Bf5 7. e3 e6 8. Qb3 Bb4

*D15 QGD, Slav, 4.Nc3
*Slav Defense: Three Knights Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3
*Slav Defense: Chebanenko Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 a6
*Slav Defense: Chebanenko Variation, Advance System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 a6 5. c5
*Slav Defense: Two Knights Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4
*Slav Defense: Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. e3
*Slav Defense: Geller Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. e4
*Slav Defense: Geller Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. e4 b5 6. e5
*Slav Defense: Schlechter Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 g6
*Slav Defense: Süchting Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 Qb6

*D16 QGD, Slav Accepted, Alapin Variation
*Slav Defense: Alapin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4
*Slav Defense: Steiner Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bg4
*Slav Defense: Soultanbeieff Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 e6
*Slav Defense: Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Na6

*D17 QGD, Slav Defence, Czech Defence
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Krause Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Wiesbaden Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5 e6
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Wiesbaden Variation, Sharp Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5 e6 7. f3 Bb4 8. e4
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Krause Attack, Fazekas Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5 Na6 7. e4
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5 Nbd7 7. Nxc4 Qc7 8. g3 e5
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Carlsbad Variation, Morozevich Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Ne5 Nbd7 7. Nxc4 Qc7 8. g3 e5 9. dxe5 Nxe5 10. Bf4 Nfd7 11. Bg2 g5
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Bled Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. Nh4

*D18 QGD, Dutch Variation
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Classical System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. e3
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Lasker Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. e3 Na6

*D19 QGD, Dutch Variation
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Dutch Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. e3 e6 7. Bxc4 Bb4 8. 0-0
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Classical System, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. e3 e6 7. Bxc4 Bb4 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Qe2
*Slav Defense: Czech Variation, Dutch Variation, Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bf5 6. e3 e6 7. Bxc4 Bb4 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Qe2 Ne4 10. g4

*D20 Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted without 3.Nf3 (Central Variation, Old Variation, and atypical moves by White)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Old Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Old Variation, Billinger Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 e5 4. Bxc4 exd4 5. Qb3 Qe7 6. a3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Old Variation, Korchnoi Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 e5 4. Bxc4 exd4 5. Qb3 Qe7 6. Kf1
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Old Variation, Novikov Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 e5 4. Bxc4 exd4 5. Qb3 Qe7 6. Nd2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Old Variation, Christensen Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 e5 4. Bxc4 exd4 5. Qb3 Qe7 6. Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Saduleto Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, Greco Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, Rubinstein Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, Rubinstein Defense, Yefimov Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 c5 4. d5 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Linares Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 c5 4. d5 Nf6 5. Nc3 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, McDonnell Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, McDonnell Defense, Somov Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 e5 4. Bxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Schwartz Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 f5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, Modern Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Central Variation, Alekhine System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e4 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Accelerated Mannheim Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Qa4+

*D21 QGA, 3.Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Normal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Alekhine Defense, Borisenko-Furman Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 a6 4. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Slav Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Gunsberg Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Rosenthal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 e6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Godes Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nd7

*D22 QGA, Alekhine Defence (3...a6)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Alekhine Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 a6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Alekhine Defense, Haberditz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 a6 4. e3 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Alekhine Defense, Alatortsev Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 a6 4. e3 Bg4 5. Bxc4 e6 6. d5

*D23 Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted (3...Nf6)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Mannheim Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Qa4+

*D24 QGA, 4.Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Showalter Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Bogoljubow Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 a6 5. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Gunsberg Defense, Prianishenmo Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 c5 5. d5 e6 6. e4 exd5 7. e5

*D25 QGA, 4.e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Normal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Winawer Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Be6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Janowski-Larsen Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 Bg4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 g6

*D26 QGA, Classical Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Normal Variation, Traditional System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Normal Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Steinitz Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 cxd4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Steinitz Variation, Development Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 Nc6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical, Furman Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. Qe2 a6 7. dxc5 Bxc5 8. 0-0 Nc6 9. e4 b5 10. e5

*D27 QGA, Classical Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Russian Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. e3 Nf6 4. Bxc4 e6 5. Nf3 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. a4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Furman Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. dxc5 Bxc5

*D28 QGA, Classical Variation 7.Qe2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Alekhine System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. Qe2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Alekhine System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. Qe2 b5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical, Flohr Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. Qe2 b5 8. Bb3 Nc6 9. Rd1 c4 10. Bc2 Nb4 11. Nc3 Nxc2 12. Qxc2 Bb7 13. d5 Qc7

*D29 QGA, Classical Variation 8...Bb7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Alekhine System, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. Qe2 b5 8. Bb3 Bb7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Accepted: Classical Defense, Alekhine System, Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 dxc4 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Bxc4 c5 6. 0-0 a6 7. Qe2 b5 8. Bb3 Bb7 9. Rd1 Nbd7 10. Nc3 Bd6

*D30 Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defence
*Semi-Slav Defense: Quiet Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nbd2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Quiet Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nbd2 Nbd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semmering Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nbd2 Nbd7 6. Bd3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Stonewall Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nbd2 Ne4 6. Bd3 f5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tarrasch Defense, Pseudo-Tarrasch: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tarrasch Defense, Pseudo-Tarrasch Bishop Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Spielmann Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. e3 c6 5. Nbd2 g6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Traditional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Vienna Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Bg5 Bb4+
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Bg5 h6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 e6 3. c4 d5 4. Bg5 c6 5. Nbd2 Nbd7 6. e3

*D31 QGD, 3.Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Queen&#x27;s Knight Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Janowski Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 a6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Charousek Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Charousek Variation, Miladinovic Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. e4 dxe4 5. f3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Uhlmann Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. Rc1 dxc4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Accelerated Move Order: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Anti-Noteboom, Stonewall Variation, Portisch Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e3 f5 5. g4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Marshall Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Gunderam Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e4 dxe4 5. f3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Marshall Gambit, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e4 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Bb4+ 6. Bd2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Marshall Gambit, Tolush Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e4 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Qxd4 7. Bxb4 Qxe4+ 8. Be2 c5 9. Bxc5 Qxg2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Marshall Gambit, Forgotten Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e4 dxe4 5. Nxe4 Bb4+ 6. Nc3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Noteboom Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Slav, Abrahams Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. a4 Bb4 6. e3 b5 7. Bd2 a5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Noteboom Variation, Abrahams Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. a4 Bb4 6. e3 Bxc3+ 7. bxc3 b5 8. axb5 cxb5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Noteboom Variation, Anti-Noteboom Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. Bg5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Noteboom Variation, Anti-Noteboom Variation, Belyavsky Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. Bg5 f6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Slav, Koomen Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. e3 b5 6. a4 Bb4 7. Bd2 Qe7
*Semi-Slav Defense: Noteboom Variation, Anti-Noteboom Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 dxc4 5. g3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Slav, Junge Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c6 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. a4 Bb4 6. e3 b5 7. Bd2 Qb6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Alapin Variation: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 b6 3. Nc3 d5

*D32 QGD, Tarrasch Defence
*Tarrasch Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5
*Tarrasch Defense: Schara Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 cxd4
*Tarrasch Defense: von Hennig Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 cxd4 5. Qxd4 Nc6 6. Qd1 exd5 7. Qxd5 Be6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tarrasch Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5
*Tarrasch Defense: Tarrasch Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. dxc5 d4 6. Na4 b5
*Tarrasch Defense: Marshall Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. e4
*Tarrasch Defense: Two Knights Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3
*Tarrasch Defense: Grünfeld Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. dxc5 d4 7. Na4 b5
*Tarrasch Defense: Symmetrical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. e3 Nf6 5. Nf3 Nc6

*D33 QGD, Tarrasch, Schlechter–Rubinstein System
*Tarrasch Defense: Rubinstein System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3
*Tarrasch Defense: Swedish Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 c4
*Tarrasch Defense: Swedish Variation, Central Break: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 c4 7. e4
*Tarrasch Defense: Prague Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6
*Tarrasch Defense: Wagner Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Bg4
*Tarrasch Defense: Dubov Tarrasch: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 cxd4 8. Nxd4 Bc5

*D34 QGD, Tarrasch, 7...Be7
*Tarrasch Defense: Prague Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Endgame Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 Be6
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Advance Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 c4
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Spassky Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 cxd4 10. Nxd4 h6 11. Be3 Bg4
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 cxd4 10. Nxd4 h6 11. Be3 Re8
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Chandler Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 cxd4 10. Nxd4 h6 11. Be3 Re8 12. Rc1 Be6
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Petursson Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 cxd4 10. Nxd4 Re8
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Réti Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. dxc5 Bxc5 10. Na4
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Classical Tarrasch Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. g3 Nf6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. dxc5 d4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tarrasch Defense, Stoltz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. g3 Nc6 6. Bg2 Nf6 7. 0-0 Be7 8. Nc3 0-0 9. Bg5 Be6 10. Rc1 b6
*Tarrasch Defense: Classical Variation, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c5 4. Nf3 d5 5. cxd5 exd5 6. g3 Nc6 7. Bg2 Be7 8. 0-0 0-0 9. Bg5 Be6 10. Rc1 c4

*D35 QGD, Exchange Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Normal Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation, Positional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation, Chameleon Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Bg5 Be7 6. e3 0-0 7. Bd3 Nbd7 8. Qc2 Re8 9. Nge2 Nf8 10. 0-0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation, Positional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Bg5 c6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation, Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. cxd5 exd5 6. Bf4

*D36 QGD, Exchange, positional line, 6.Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Exchange Variation, Reshevsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 exd5 5. Bg5 c6 6. Qc2

*D37 QGD, 4.Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack, Fianchetto Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 b6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack, Orthodox Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 c6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack, Two Knights Defense, Blockade Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Three Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 c5 7. dxc5 Bxc5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 c5 7. dxc5 Bxc5 8. Qc2 Nc6 9. a3 Qa5 10. 0-0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 c5 7. dxc5 Bxc5 8. Qc2 Nc6 9. Rd1 Qa5 10. a3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Harrwitz Attack, Two Knights Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Miles Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Three Knights, Vienna Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 dxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Vienna Variation, Quiet Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 dxc4 5. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Barmen Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Nbd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Knight Defense, Alekhine Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Nbd7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 dxc4

*D38 QGD, Ragozin Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ragozin Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Bb4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Westphalian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ragozin Defense, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. Qa4+

*D39 QGD, Ragozin, Vienna Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ragozin Defense, Vienna Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. Bg5 dxc4

*D40 QGD, Semi-Tarrasch Defence
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Pillsbury Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 c5 5. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Symmetrical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 c5 5. e3 Nc6 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Levenfish Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 c5 5. e3 Nc6 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Qe2 Qe7 9. dxc5 Bxc5 10. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c5

*D41 QGD, Semi-Tarrasch, 5.cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, San Sebastian Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 c5 7. Nf3 cxd4 8. cxd4 Bb4+ 9. Bd2 Qa5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Kmoch Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 c5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e4 Nxc3 7. bxc3 cxd4 8. cxd4 Bb4+ 9. Bd2 Bxd2+ 10. Qxd2 0-0 11. Bb5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c5 5. cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Pillsbury Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e4

*D42 QGD, Semi-Tarrasch, 7.Bd3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e3 Nc6 7. Bd3

*D43 QGD, Semi-Slav Defence
*Semi-Slav Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Anti-Moscow Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Hastings Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bxf6 Qxf6 7. Qb3

*D44 QGD, Semi-Slav, 5.Bg5 dxc4
*Semi-Slav Defense Accepted: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 dxc4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation, Ekstrom Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4 b5 7. e5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. exf6 gxh4 10. Ne5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4 b5 7. e5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. Nxg5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation, Lilienthal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4 b5 7. e5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. Nxg5 hxg5 10. Bxg5 Nbd7 11. g3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation, Szabo Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4 b5 7. e5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. Nxg5 hxg5 10. Bxg5 Nbd7 11. Qf3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Botvinnik Variation, Alatortsev System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 c6 5. Bg5 dxc4 6. e4 b5 7. e5 h6 8. Bh4 g5 9. Nxg5 Nd5

*D45 QGD, Semi-Slav, 5.e3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Accelerated Meran Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 a6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Qc2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 b6 7. b3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation, Center Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 Bd6 7. e4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation, Center Variation, Mikhalchishin Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 Bd6 7. e4 dxe4 8. Nxe4 Nxe4 9. Qxe4 e5 10. dxe5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation, Shabalov Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 Bd6 7. g4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Rubinstein System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Ne5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 c6 4. e3 e6 5. Nc3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 Bd6 7. b3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stoltz Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 c6 4. e3 e6 5. Nc3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 Bd6 7. b3 0-0 8. Bb2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Stonewall Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 c6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Ne4 6. Bd3 f5

*D46 QGD, Semi-Slav, 6.Bd3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Romih Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 Bb4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 Bd6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Chigorin Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 Bd6 7. Qc2
*Semi-Slav Defense: Bogoljubow Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 Be7
*Semi-Slav Defense: Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Qc2 b6 7. b3 Bb7 8. Bd3 Be7 9. 0-0 0-0 10. Bb2

*D47 QGD, Semi-Slav, 7.Bc4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Semi-Meran Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Wade Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 Bb7
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Wade Variation, Larsen Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 Bb7 9. e4 b4 10. Na4 c5 11. e5 Nd5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Wade Variation, Kaidanov Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 Bb7 9. e4 b4 10. Na4 c5 11. e5 Nd5 12. 0-0 cxd4 13. Nxd4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Lundin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 b4

*D48 QGD, Meran, 8...a6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Old Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Reynolds&#x27; Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. d5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Pirc Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 c6 4. e3 Nf6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 b4

*D49 QGD, Meran, 11.Nxb5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Blumenfeld Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Rabinovich Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5 Ng4
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Stahlberg Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 e6 5. Nf3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5 Nxe5 12. Nxe5 axb5 13. Qf3
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Rellstab Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Nf3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5 Nxe5 12. Nxe5 axb5 13. 0-0 Qd5 14. Qe2 Ba6 15. Bg5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Sozin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5 Nxe5
*Semi-Slav Defense: Meran Variation, Sozin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 c6 4. Nc3 e6 5. e3 Nbd7 6. Bd3 dxc4 7. Bxc4 b5 8. Bd3 a6 9. e4 c5 10. e5 cxd4 11. Nxb5 Nxe5 12. Nxe5 axb5 13. 0-0

*D50 QGD, 4.Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Been-Koomen Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Pseudo-Tarrasch Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c5 5. cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Pseudo-Tarrasch Variation, Canal Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c5 5. cxd5 Qb6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Semi-Tarrasch Defense, Krause Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c5 5. Nf3 cxd4 6. Nxd4 e5 7. Ndb5 a6 8. Qa4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Pseudo-Tarrasch Variation, Primitive Pillsbury Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c5 5. Nf3 cxd4 6. Qxd4

*D51 QGD, 4.Bg5 Nbd7 (Cambridge Springs Defence and Elephant Trap)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation, Knight Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation, Knight Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Manhattan Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3 Bb4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation, Knight Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3 c6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Capablanca Variation, Anti-Cambridge Springs Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3 c6 6. a3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. Nf3 c6 6. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Rochlin Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. Nf3 c6 6. Rc1 Qa5 7. Bd2

*D52 QGD
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 Qa5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 Qa5 7. cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense, Yugoslav Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 Qa5 7. cxd5 Nxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense, Bogoljubow Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 Qa5 7. Nd2 Bb4 8. Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 e6 5. Bg5 Nbd7 6. e3 Qa5 7. Nd2 dxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense, Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3 c6 6. Nf3 Qa5 7. Bxf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Cambridge Springs Defense, Argentine Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Nbd7 5. e3 c6 6. Nf3 Qa5 7. Nd2 Bb4 8. Qc2 0-0 9. Bh4

*D53 QGD, 4.Bg5 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation, Heral Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. Bxf6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 Ne4

*D54 QGD, Anti-ne0-0rthodox Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ne0-0rthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Rc1

*D55 QGD, 6.Nf3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Pillsbury Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 d5 5. cxd5 exd5 6. Bg5 Be7 7. e3 0-0 8. Bd3 Bb7 9. Ne5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ne0-0rthodox Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Anti-Tartakower Variation, Petrosian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bxf6 Bxf6 7. e3 0-0 8. Rc1 c6 9. Bd3 Nd7 10. 0-0 dxc4 11. Bxc4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Modern Variation, Normal Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Ne0-0rthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 h6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Anti-Tartakower Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 h6 7. Bxf6

*D56 QGD, Lasker Defence
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 Ne4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense, Russian Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 h6 7. Bh4 Ne4 8. Bxe7 Qxe7 9. Qc2 Nf6 10. Bd3 dxc4 11. Bxc4 c5 12. 0-0 Nc6 13. Rfd1 Bd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense, Teichmann Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 Ne4 8. Bxe7 Qxe7 9. Qc2

*D57 QGD, Lasker Defence, Main line
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 Ne4 8. Bxe7 Qxe7 9. cxd5 Nxc3 10. bxc3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense, Bernstein Variation, Mar del Plata Gambit: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 h6 7. Bh4 Ne4 8. Bxe7 Qxe7 9. cxd5 Nxc3 10. bxc3 exd5 11. Qb3 Rd8 12. c4 Be6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Lasker Defense, Bernstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. Nf3 Ne4 8. Bxe7 Qxe7 9. cxd5 Nxc3 10. bxc3 exd5 11. Qb3 Qd6

*D58 QGD, Tartakower (Tartakower–Makogonov–Bondarevsky) System
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tartakower Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 b6 8. cxd5 exd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tartakower Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 b6

*D59 QGD, Tartakower (Tartakower–Makogonov–Bondarevsky) System, 8.cxd5 Nxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tartakower Defense, Makogonov Exchange Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 b6 8. cxd5 Nxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Tartakower Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Be7 4. Nf3 Nf6 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 0-0 7. e3 b6 8. cxd5 Nxd5 9. Bxe7 Qxe7 10. Nxd5 exd5 11. Rc1 Be6

*D60 QGD, Orthodox Defence
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rauzer Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Qb3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Bd3

*D61 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Rubinstein Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Qc2

*D62 QGD, Orthodox Defence, 7.Qc2 c5, 8.cxd5 (Rubinstein)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Variation, Flohr Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c5 8. cxd5

*D63 QGD, Orthodox Defence, 7.Rc1
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Pillsbury Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 b6 8. cxd5 exd5 9. Bd3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Henneberger Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 a6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Swiss, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 a6 8. cxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Capablanca Variation: 1. Nf3 d5 2. d4 Nf6 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 b6 8. cxd5 exd5 9. Bb5

*D64 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Rubinstein Attack (with Rc1)
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. a3 a6 9. Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Qc2 a6
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Attack: 1. Nf3 d5 2. d4 Nf6 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Qc2 Ne4

*D65 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Rubinstein Attack, Main line
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Rubinstein Attack: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Qc2 a6 9. cxd5

*D66 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Bd3 line including Rubinstein Trap
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Bd3 Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 c6 5. Nf3 Be7 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 0-0 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 b5

*D67 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Bd3 line, Capablanca freeing manoeuvre
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Capablanca System: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Bd3 Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. Ne4
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. 0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Janowski Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. Nf3 Nf6 3. c4 e6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. h4

*D68 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Classical Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Classical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. 0-0 Nxc3 12. Rxc3 e5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Classical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. 0-0 Nxc3 12. Rxc3 e5 13. Qb1
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. Nc3 Be7 5. Bg5 0-0 6. e3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. 0-0 Nxc3 12. Rxc3 e5 13. Qc2

*D69 QGD, Orthodox Defence, Classical, 13.dxe5
*Queen&#x27;s Gambit Declined: Orthodox Defense, Classical Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. Bg5 Be7 5. e3 0-0 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. Rc1 c6 8. Bd3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 Nd5 10. Bxe7 Qxe7 11. 0-0 Nxc3 12. Rxc3 e5 13. dxe5 Nxe5 14. Nxe5 Qxe5

===D70–D99===
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 with 3...d5: Grünfeld Defence 
*D70 Neo-Grünfeld Defence
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Goglidze Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. f3 d5
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: with g3: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 d5
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: with Nf3: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 d5

*D71 Neo-Grünfeld, 5.cxd5
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 d5 5. cxd5 Nxd5

*D72 Neo-Grünfeld, 5.cxd5, Main line
*1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 d5 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.cxd5

*D73 Neo-Grünfeld, 5.Nf3
*1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 d5 4.Bg2 Bg7 5.Nf3

*D74 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.cxd5 Nxd5, 7.0-0
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. 0-0

*D75 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.cxd5 Nxd5, 7.0-0 c5, 8.Nc3
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 0-0 5. g3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Bg2 c5 8. 0-0
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. 0-0 c5 8. dxc5

*D76 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.cxd5 Nxd5, 7.0-0 Nb6
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. 0-0 Nb6

*D77 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.0-0
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. 0-0 d5 6. c4
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Classical Variation, Modern Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. 0-0 d5 6. c4 dxc4
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Classical Variation, Polgar Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. 0-0 d5 6. c4 Nc6

*D78 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.0-0 c6
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Classical Variation, Original Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 c6 6. 0-0 d5

*D79 Neo-Grünfeld, 6.0-0, Main line
*Neo-Grünfeld Defense: Ultra-Delayed Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 c6 6. 0-0 d5 7. cxd5 cxd5

*D80 Grünfeld Defence
*Grünfeld Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5
*Grünfeld Defense: Stockholm Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5
*Grünfeld Defense: Lundin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bg5 Ne4 5. Nxe4 dxe4 6. Qd2 c5
*Grünfeld Defense: Lutikov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. f3
*Grünfeld Defense: Lutikov Variation, Murrey Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. f3 c5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. Na4
*Grünfeld Defense: Gibbon Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. g4
*Grünfeld Defense: Zaitsev Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. h4

*D81 Grünfeld, Russian Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Accelerated Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Qb3

*D82 Grünfeld, 4.Bf4
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4

*D83 Grünfeld Gambit
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack, Grünfeld Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. e3 0-0
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack, Grünfeld Gambit, Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Rc1
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack, Grünfeld Gambit, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Rc1 c5 7. dxc5 Be6
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack, Reshevsky Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. Rc1 0-0 6. e3 c5 7. dxc5 Qa5

*D84 Grünfeld Gambit Accepted
*Grünfeld Defense: Brinckmann Attack, Grünfeld Gambit Accepted: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Bf4 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Nxd5 Qxd5 8. Bxc7

*D85 Grünfeld, Nadanian Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Modern Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Nf3
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Modern Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Nf3 c5
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Modern Exchange Variation, Pawn Grab Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Nf3 c5 8. Rb1 0-0 9. Be2 Nc6 10. d5 Bxc3+
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Nadanian Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. Na4
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Modern Exchange Variation, Kramnik&#x27;s Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. Nc3 d5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e4 Nxc3 7. bxc3 c5 8. h3
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Modern Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. Nc3 d5 5. cxd5 Nxd5 6. e4 Nxc3 7. bxc3 c5 8. Rb1

*D86 Grünfeld, Exchange, Classical Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Simagin&#x27;s Lesser Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 0-0 8. Ne2 b6
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Simagin&#x27;s Improved Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 0-0 8. Ne2 Nc6
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Larsen Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 0-0 8. Ne2 Qd7
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Larsen Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 0-0 8. Ne2 Qd7 9. 0-0 b6

*D87 Grünfeld, Exchange, Spassky Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Seville Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 c5 8. Ne2 Nc6 9. Be3 0-0 10. 0-0 Bg4 11. f3 Na5 12. Bxf7+
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Spassky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 c5 8. Ne2 0-0

*D88 Grünfeld, Spassky Variation, Main line, 10...cxd4, 11.cxd4
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Spassky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 c5 8. Ne2 Nc6 9. Be3 0-0 10. 0-0 cxd4 11. cxd4

*D89 Grünfeld, Spassky Variation, Main line, 13.Bd3
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Spassky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 c5 8. Ne2 Nc6 9. Be3 0-0 10. 0-0 Bg4 11. f3 Na5 12. Bd3 cxd4 13. cxd4 Be6
*Grünfeld Defense: Exchange Variation, Sokolsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. cxd5 Nxd5 5. e4 Nxc3 6. bxc3 Bg7 7. Bc4 c5 8. Ne2 0-0 9. 0-0 Nc6 10. Be3 Bg4 11. f3 Na5 12. Bd3 cxd4 13. cxd4 Be6 14. d5

*D90 Grünfeld, Three Knights Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7
*Grünfeld Defense: Flohr Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qa4+

*D91 Grünfeld, Three Knights Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Petrosian System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Bg5

*D92 Grünfeld, 5.Bf4
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Hungarian Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Bf4

*D93 Grünfeld with 5.Bf4 0-0 6.e3
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Hungarian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Bf4 0-0 6. e3

*D94 Grünfeld, 5.e3
*Grünfeld Defense: Flohr Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 g6 5. Nf3 Bg7 6. Bd3 0-0 7. 0-0 Bf5
*Grünfeld Defense: Smyslov Defense: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nc3 Nf6 4. e3 g6 5. Nf3 Bg7 6. Bd3 0-0 7. 0-0 Bg4
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Burille Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3
*Grünfeld Defense: Makogonov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. b4
*Grünfeld Defense: Opocensky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Bd2
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Paris Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Bd3

*D95 Grünfeld with 5.e3 0-0 6.Qb3
*Grünfeld Defense: Pachman Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. e3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Bxc4 0-0 7. Nf3 Nbd7 8. Ng5
*Grünfeld Defense: Three Knights Variation, Vienna Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Qb3
*Grünfeld Defense: Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. e3 0-0 6. Qb3 e6

*D96 Grünfeld, Russian Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3

*D97 Grünfeld, Russian Variation with 7.e4
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Hungarian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 a6
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Levenfish Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 b6
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Szabo Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 c6
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Prins Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Na6
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Byrne Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Nc6

*D98 Grünfeld, Russian, Smyslov Variation
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Bg4
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Keres Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Bg4 8. Be3 Nfd7 9. Be2 Nb6 10. Qd3 Nc6 11. 0-0-0

*D99 Grünfeld Defence, Smyslov, Main line
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Bg4 8. Be3 Nfd7 9. Qb3
*Grünfeld Defense: Russian Variation, Yugoslav Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 d5 4. Nf3 Bg7 5. Qb3 dxc4 6. Qxc4 0-0 7. e4 Bg4 8. Be3 Nfd7 9. Qb3 c5

==E – Indian Defences==
* 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6: Indian systems with ...e6 (E00–E59)
* 1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 without 3...d5: Indian systems with ...g6 (except Grünfeld) (E60–E99)

===E00–E59===
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 e6: Indian systems with ...e6 
*E00 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game (including Neo-Indian Attack, Trompowsky Attack, Catalan Opening and others)
*Indian Defense: Seirawan Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Bg5
*Catalan Opening: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3
*Catalan Opening: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5
*Catalan Opening: Hungarian Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 e5
*Indian Defense: Devin Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g4
*Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Qb3

*E01 Catalan, Closed
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2

*E02 Catalan, Open, 5.Qa4
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4

*E03 Catalan, Open, Alekhine Variation
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4 5. Qa4+ Nbd7 6. Qxc4
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4 5. Qa4+ Nbd7 6. Qxc4 a6 7. Qc2

*E04 Catalan, Open, 5.Nf3
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4 5. Nf3
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense, Modern Sharp Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4 5. Nf3 Nc6 6. Qa4 Bb4+

*E05 Catalan, Open, Classical line
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense, Classical Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 dxc4 5. Nf3 Be7
*Catalan Opening: Open Defense, Classical Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 dxc4

*E06 Catalan, Closed, 5.Nf3
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 c6 7. Qc2 b6 8. Nbd2 Bb7 9. e4 Na6
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Bb4+ 5. Bd2 Be7 6. Bg2 0-0 7. 0-0 c6 8. Bf4 b6

*E07 Catalan, Closed, 6...Nbd7
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 c6 8. Qd3

*E08 Catalan, Closed, 7.Qc2
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Zagoryansky Variation: 1. d4 e6 2. c4 Nf6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Rd1 b6 9. a4
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Spassky Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Be7 4. Bg2 d5 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. b3 b6 9. Rd1 Bb7 10. Nc3 b5
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 c6 7. Qc2 b6 8. Rd1 Nbd7 9. Bf4
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. b3
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. b3 b6
*Catalan Opening: Closed: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Bf4 b6 9. Nbd2 Bb7 10. e4

*E09 Catalan, Closed, Main line
*Catalan Opening: Closed Variation, Rabinovich Variation: 1. d4 d5 2. c4 c6 3. Nf3 Nf6 4. Qc2 e6 5. Nbd2 Be7 6. g3 Nbd7 7. Bg2 0-0 8. 0-0 b5
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Sokolsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 d5 4. Bg2 Be7 5. Nf3 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Nbd2 b6 9. b3 a5 10. Bb2 Ba6
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 c6 7. Qc2 b6 8. Nbd2 Bb7 9. e4 Nbd7
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Bf4 b6 9. Nbd2 Bb7 10. e4 dxe4 11. Nxe4 Nxe4 12. Qxe4
*Catalan Opening: Closed, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Nbd2
*Catalan Opening: Closed Variation, Traditional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Be7 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Qc2 c6 8. Nbd2 b6

*E10 Queen&#x27;s Pawn Game 3.Nf3
*Indian Defense: Anti-Nimzo-Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3
*Indian Defense: Dzindzi-Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 a6
*Blumenfeld Countergambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 b5
*Blumenfeld Countergambit: Duz-Khotimirsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 b5 5. Bg5
*Blumenfeld Countergambit: Spielmann Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 b5 5. Bg5 exd5 6. cxd5 h6
*Blumenfeld Countergambit Accepted: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 c5 4. d5 b5 5. dxe6 fxe6 6. cxb5 d5
*Indian Defense: Döry Indian: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Ne4

*E11 Bogo-Indian Defence
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7 5. Bg2 d5 6. Nf3
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7 5. Bg2 d5 6. Nf3 Nbd7 7. 0-0 0-0 8. Qc2 c6
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7 5. Bg2 d5 6. Nf3 0-0
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7 5. Bg2 d5 6. Nf3 0-0 7. 0-0
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. g3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7 5. Bg2 d5 6. Nf3 0-0 7. Qc2 c6 8. 0-0
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Monticelli Trap: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Bxd2+ 7. Qxd2 0-0 8. Nc3 Ne4 9. Qc2 Nxc3 10. Ng5
*Bogo-Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Wade-Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 a5
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Be7
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Bxd2+
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Vitolins Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 c5
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Haiti Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Nc6
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 Qe7
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Grünfeld Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Nbd2
*Bogo-Indian Defense: New England Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Nfd2
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Bb4+ 5. Bd2 Be7 6. Bg2 0-0 7. 0-0 c6 8. Qc2 Nbd7 9. Bf4 b6 10. Nbd2
*Bogo-Indian Defense: Retreat Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 d5 4. g3 Bb4+ 5. Bd2 Be7 6. Bg2 0-0 7. 0-0 c6 8. Qc2 Nbd7 9. Bf4 b6 10. Nbd2 Ba6

*E12 Queen&#x27;s Indian Defence
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation, Farago Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Ba6 5. Qc2 Bb7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Marco Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 exd5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Modern Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Romanishin Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Bd2
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Petrosian Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Rashkovsky Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Qa4+
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Kasparov Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. Qc2
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Hedgehog Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 g6
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Andersson Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. a3 Bb7 5. Nc3 Ne4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Miles Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Bf4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation, Duchamp Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 Bb4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation, Duchamp Variation, Modern Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. Bg5 Bb7 6. Nd2
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov-Petrosian Variation, Polovodin Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 Bb7 5. a3 d5 6. cxd5 Nxd5 7. e4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov Variation, Botvinnik Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 Bb7 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 g5 7. Bg3 Nh5

*E13 Queen&#x27;s Indian, 4.Nc3, Main line
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kasparov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. Nc3 Bb4 5. Bg5 h6 6. Bh4 Bb7

*E14 Queen&#x27;s Indian, 4.e3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Spassky System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. e3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. e3 Bb7 5. Bd3 c5 6. 0-0 Be7 7. b3 0-0 8. Bb2 cxd4 9. Nxd4

*E15 Queen&#x27;s Indian, 4.g3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation, Quiet Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. b3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Check Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. b3 Bb4+
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Check Variation, Intermezzo Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. b3 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Check Variation, Modern Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. b3 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Qe7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation, Nimzowitsch Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. Qa4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Nimzowitsch Variation, Timman&#x27;s Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Ba6 5. Qb3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Traditional Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 c5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Buerger Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 c5 6. d5 exd5 7. Ng5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 c5 6. d5 exd5 7. Nh4

*E16 Queen&#x27;s Indian, Capablanca Variation
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Bb4+
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Riumin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Bb4+ 6. Bd2 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Yates Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Bd2 a5 5. g3 b6 6. Bg2 Bb7

*E17 Queen&#x27;s Indian, 5.Bg2 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Traditional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Anti-Queen&#x27;s Indian System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Opocensky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. Nc3 Ne4 7. Bd2
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Euwe Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. b3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Taimanov Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. d5 exd5 8. Nd4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Polugaevsky Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. d5 exd5 8. Nh4
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Kramnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Re1

*E18 Queen&#x27;s Indian, Old Main line, 7.Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Traditional Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Traditional Variation, Nimzowitsch Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3 d5
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Tiviakov Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3 Na6

*E19 Queen&#x27;s Indian, Old Main line, 9.Qxc3
*Queen&#x27;s Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Traditional Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 b6 4. g3 Bb7 5. Bg2 Be7 6. 0-0 0-0 7. Nc3 Ne4 8. Qc2 Nxc3 9. Qxc3

*E20 Nimzo-Indian Defence
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Kmoch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. f3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Romanishin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. g3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Romanishin Variation, English Hybrid: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 c5 5. g3 cxd4 6. Nxd4 0-0 7. Bg2 d5 8. cxd5 Nxd5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Romanishin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 c5 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Mikenas Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qd3

*E21 Nimzo-Indian, Three Knights Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation, Korchnoi Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 c5 5. d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation, Euwe Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 c5 5. d5 Ne4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Three Knights Variation, Shocron Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+ 4. Nc3 c5 5. d5 b5

*E22 Nimzo-Indian, Spielmann Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Spielmann Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qb3

*E23 Nimzo-Indian, Spielmann, 4...c5, 5.dxc5 Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Spielmann Variation, Romanovsky Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qb3 c5 5. dxc5 Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Spielmann Variation, Stahlberg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qb3 c5 5. dxc5 Nc6 6. Nf3 Ne4 7. Bd2 Nxc5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Spielmann Variation, Stahlberg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qb3 c5 5. dxc5 Nc6 6. Nf3 Ne4 7. Bd2 Nxc5 8. Qc2 f5 9. g3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Spielmann Variation, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qb3 c5 5. dxc5 Nc6 6. Nf3 Ne4 7. Bd2 Nxd2

*E24 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Accelerated: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. a3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. f3 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 c5 7. e3 0-0 8. cxd5 Nxd5

*E25 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation, Keres Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. f3 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 c5 7. cxd5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Keres Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. f3 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 c5 7. cxd5 Nxd5 8. dxc5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Romanovsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. f3 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3 c5 7. cxd5 Nxd5 8. dxc5 f5

*E26 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation, 4.a3 Bxc3+ 5.bxc3 c5 6.e3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. a3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 c5 6. e3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, O&#x27;Kelly Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. a3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 c5 6. e3 b6

*E27 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation, 5...0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. a3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 0-0

*E28 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation, 6.e3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. bxc3

*E29 Nimzo-Indian, Sämisch Variation, Main line
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Bd3 Nc6 6. a3 Bxc3+ 7. bxc3 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Capablanca Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Bd3 Nc6 6. a3 Bxc3+ 7. bxc3 0-0 8. Ne2 b6 9. e4 Ne8

*E30 Nimzo-Indian, Leningrad Variation, 
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Leningrad Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bg5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Leningrad Variation, Averbakh Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bg5 h6 5. Bh4 c5 6. d5 b5

*E31 Nimzo-Indian, Leningrad Variation, Main line
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Leningrad Variation, Benoni Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Bg5 h6 5. Bh4 c5 6. d5 d6

*E32 Nimzo-Indian, Classical Variation (4.Qc2)
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Vitolins-Adorjan Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 0-0 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 b5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Keres Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 0-0 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 b6

*E33 Nimzo-Indian, Classical Variation, 4...Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Zurich Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Milner-Barry Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 Nc6 5. Nf3 d6

*E34 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, Noa Variation (4...d5)
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Belyavsky Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. cxd5 Qxd5 6. Nf3 Qf5 7. Qd1 e5

*E35 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, Noa Variation, 5.cxd5 exd5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. cxd5 exd5

*E36 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, Noa Variation, 5.a3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. a3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation, Botvinnik Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 Ne4

*E37 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, Noa Variation, Main line, 7.Qc2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 Ne4 7. Qc2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Noa Variation, San Remo Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 d5 5. a3 Bxc3+ 6. Qxc3 Ne4 7. Qc2 Nc6 8. e3 e5

*E38 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, 4...c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Berlin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Berlin Variation, Steiner Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 c5 5. dxc5 Bxc3+

*E39 Nimzo-Indian, Classical, Pirc Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Berlin Variation, Pirc Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 c5 5. dxc5 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Classical Variation, Berlin Variation, Macieja System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Qc2 c5 5. dxc5 0-0 6. a3 Bxc5 7. Nf3 b6 8. Bf4

*E40 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Taimanov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 Nc6

*E41 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 c5 5.Bd3 Nc6 6.Nf3 Bxc3+ 7.bxc3 d6, Hübner Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Hübner Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Hübner Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Bd3 Nc6 6. Nf3 Bxc3+ 7. bxc3 d6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Hübner Deferred: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Nf3 0-0

*E42 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 c5, 5.Ne2 (Rubinstein) 
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Hübner Variation, Rubinstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Ne2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Hübner Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Ne2 cxd4 6. exd4 0-0 7. a3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Hübner Variation, Rubinstein Variation, Sherbakov Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 c5 5. Ne2 cxd4 6. exd4 0-0 7. c5

*E43 Nimzo-Indian, Fischer Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation, with Ne4: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 Ne4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 0-0 7. 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 0-0 7. 0-0 c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 0-0 7. 0-0 c5 8. Na4 cxd4 9. a3 Be7
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 Ne4 5. Qc2 f5 6. Nf3 b6 7. Bd3 Bb7
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 c5 6. Nf3 b6 7. 0-0 Bb7 8. Na4 Qe7
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 b6 5. e3 Ne4 6. Qc2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 b6 5. e3 Ne4 6. Qc2 Bb7 7. Bd3 Bxc3+ 8. bxc3 f5 9. 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: St. Petersburg Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. Nf3 Bxc3+ 5. bxc3 b6 6. e3 Bb7 7. Bd3 0-0 8. 0-0

*E44 Nimzo-Indian, Fischer Variation, 5.Ne2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Fischer Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Ne2

*E45 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Bronstein (Byrne) Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Bronstein (Byrne) Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Ne2 Ba6

*E46 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Reshevsky Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Ne2
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Simagin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Ne2 d5 6. a3 Bd6

*E47 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 0-0, 5.Bd3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Bishop Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3

*E48 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 0-0, 5.Bd3 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Bishop Attack, Classical Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Ragozin Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 Nc6 7. 0-0

*E49 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Botvinnik System
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Botvinnik System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. a3 Bxc3+ 7. bxc3

*E50 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 0-0, 5.Nf3, without ...d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Nf3

*E51 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3 0-0, 5.Nf3 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Ragozin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 Nc6 7. 0-0 dxc4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Ragozin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Nf3 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Sämisch Deferred: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Nf3 d5 6. a3

*E52 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line with ...b6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Schlechter Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 b6 5. Bd3 Bb7 6. Nf3 0-0 7. 0-0 d5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Schlechter Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 b6

*E53 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line with ...c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System, Keres Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 b6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 Nbd7

*E54 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Gligoric System with 7...dxc4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 dxc4 8. Bxc4
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System, Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 dxc4 8. Bxc4 Qe7

*E55 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Gligoric System, Bronstein Variation
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System, Bronstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 dxc4 8. Bxc4 Nbd7

*E56 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line with 7...Nc6
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Gligoric System, Bernstein Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 Nc6

*E57 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line with 8...dxc4 and 9...Bxc4 cxd4 
*1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Nf3 d5 6. Bd3 c5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. a3 dxc4 9. Bxc4 cxd4

*E58 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line with 8...Bxc3
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Bernstein Defense, Exchange Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. a3 Bxc3 9. bxc3

*E59 Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line
*Nimzo-Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Bernstein Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nc3 Bb4 4. e3 0-0 5. Bd3 d5 6. Nf3 c5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. a3 Bxc3 9. bxc3 dxc4 10. Bxc4

===E60–E99===
1.d4 Nf6 2.c4 g6 without 3...d5: Indian systems with ...g6 (except Grünfeld) 
*E60 King&#x27;s Indian Defence
*Indian Defense: West Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6
*Indian Defense: Anti-Grünfeld, Advance Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. d5
*Indian Defense: Anti-Grünfeld, Adorjan Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. d5 b5
*Indian Defense: Anti-Grünfeld, Alekhine Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. f3
*Indian Defense: Anti-Grünfeld, Alekhine Variation, Leko Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. f3 e5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Immediate Fianchetto: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3
*Indian Defense: King&#x27;s Indian Variation, Fianchetto Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2
*Grünfeld Defense: Counterthrust Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 d5
*Indian Defense: Anti-Grünfeld, Basman-Williams Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. h4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Classical Variation, Benoni Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 0-0 5. e3 d6 6. Be2 c6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Santasiere Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. b4
*Queen&#x27;s Pawn, Mengarini Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Qc2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation, King&#x27;s Knight Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Classical Variation, Hollywood Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. Nf3 g6 3. c4 Bg7 4. Nc3 0-0 5. e3 d6 6. Be2 Nc6

*E61 King&#x27;s Indian Defence, 3.Nc3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Smyslov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. Bg5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Benjamin Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2 c6 7. 0-0 Qb6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 0-0 5. e3 d6 6. Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Classical Variation, Queenside Storm Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 0-0 5. e3 d6 6. Be2 Nbd7 7. 0-0 e5 8. b4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Classical Variation, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 0-0 5. e3 d6 6. Be2 Nbd7 7. 0-0 e5 8. dxe5 dxe5

*E62 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Carlsbad Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. Nc3 d6 6. Nf3 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Lesser Simagin (Spassky): 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. Nc3 d6 6. Nf3 Nc6 7. 0-0 Bf5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Delayed Fianchetto: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. g3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Larsen Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2 c6 7. 0-0 Bf5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Simagin Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2 Nc6 7. 0-0 Bg4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Kavalek Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 c6 7. Nc3 Qa5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Uhlmann-Szabo System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nc6 7. Nc3 e5

*E63 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto, Panno Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Panno Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nc6 7. Nc3 a6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Panno Variation, Blockade Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nc6 7. Nc3 a6 8. d5 Na5 9. Nd2 c5 10. Qc2 e5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Panno Variation, Donner Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nc6 7. Nc3 a6 8. d5 Na5 9. Nd2 c5 10. Qc2 Rb8 11. b3 b5 12. Bb2 bxc4 13. bxc4 Bh6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Panno Variation, Korchnoi Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nc6 7. Nc3 a6 8. h3 Rb8 9. Be3 b5 10. Nd2

*E64 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto, Yugoslav System
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Yugoslav Variation, Rare Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. Nc3 d6 6. Nf3 c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Pterodactyl Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 c5 5. Bg2 Qa5+
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Yugoslav System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 d6 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Hungarian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 d6 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 a6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Double Fianchetto Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 d6 5. Bg2 0-0 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 e5 8. b3

*E65 King&#x27;s Indian, Yugoslav, 7.0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Yugoslav Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 c5 7. Nc3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Yugoslav Variation, Exchange Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 c5 7. Nc3 Nc6 8. dxc5 dxc5

*E66 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto, Yugoslav Panno
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Yugoslav Variation, Advance Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 c5 7. Nc3 Nc6 8. d5

*E67 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto with ...Nd7
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Debrecen Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. g3 Bg7 4. Bg2 0-0 5. Nc3 d6 6. Nf3 Nbd7
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Classical Fianchetto: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 e5

*E68 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto, Classical Variation, 8.e4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Long Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. Nf3 d6 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2 Nbd7 7. 0-0 e5 8. e4 Re8 9. h3 exd4 10. Nxd4 Nc5 11. Re1 a5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Classical Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 e5 8. e4

*E69 King&#x27;s Indian, Fianchetto, Classical Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Fianchetto Variation, Classical Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nf3 Bg7 4. g3 0-0 5. Bg2 d6 6. 0-0 Nbd7 7. Nc3 e5 8. e4 c6 9. h3

*E70 King&#x27;s Indian, 4.e4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Accelerated Averbakh Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Bg5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kramer Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nge2

*E71 King&#x27;s Indian, Makogonov System (5.h3)
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Makogonov Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. h3

*E72 King&#x27;s Indian with e4 and g3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Deferred Fianchetto: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. g3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Pomar System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. g3 0-0 6. Bg2 e5 7. Nge2

*E73 King&#x27;s Indian, 5.Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Standard Development: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Semi-Averbakh System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Be3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Spanish Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 a6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Flexible Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 h6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Modern Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 Na6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Modern Defense, Burgess Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 Na6 7. Qd2 c6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Geller Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 Nbd7
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Nc6 Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 Nc6

*E74 King&#x27;s Indian, Averbakh, 6...c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Benoni Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Benoni Defense, Advance Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 c5 7. d5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Benoni Defense, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 c5 7. dxc5

*E75 King&#x27;s Indian, Averbakh, Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Averbakh Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. Bg5 c5 7. d5 e6

*E76 King&#x27;s Indian, Four Pawns Attack
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Modern Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 Na6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Dynamic Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. d5

*E77 King&#x27;s Indian, Four Pawns Attack, 6.Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Be2 0-0 6. f4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Six Pawns Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Be2 c5 7. d5 e6 8. dxe6 fxe6 9. g4 Nc6 10. h4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Normal Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. d5 e6 8. Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Florentine Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. d5 e6 8. Be2 exd5 9. e5

*E78 King&#x27;s Indian, Four Pawns Attack, with Be2 and Nf3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Fluid Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. Be2

*E79 King&#x27;s Indian, Four Pawns Attack, Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Four Pawns Attack, Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f4 0-0 6. Nf3 c5 7. Be2 cxd4 8. Nxd4 Nc6 9. Be3

*E80 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3

*E81 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, 5...0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Normal Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Sämisch Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 c5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Byrne Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 c6 7. Bd3 a6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Steiner Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Bg5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Bobotsov-Korchnoi-Petrosian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Nge2

*E82 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Double Fianchetto Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Double Fianchetto: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 b6

*E83 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, 6...Nc6 (Panno Variation)
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Yates Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Panno Formation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 Nc6 7. Nge2 a6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Ruban Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 Nc6 7. Nge2 Rb8

*E84 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Panno Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Panno Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 Nc6 7. Nge2 a6 8. Qd2 Rb8

*E85 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Orthodox Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Orthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5

*E86 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Orthodox, 7.Nge2 c6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. Nge2 c6

*E87 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Orthodox, 7.d5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Closed Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. d5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Bronstein Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. d5 Nh5 8. Qd2 Qh4+ 9. g3 Nxg3 10. Qf2 Nxf1 11. Qxh4 Nxe3 12. Ke2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Orthodox Variation, Bronstein Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. d5 Nh5 8. Qd2 Qh4+ 9. g3 Nxg3 10. Qf2 Nxf1 11. Qxh4 Nxe3 12. Ke2 Nxc4

*E88 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Orthodox, 7.d5 c6
*1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. d5 c6

*E89 King&#x27;s Indian, Sämisch, Orthodox Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Sämisch Variation, Closed Variation, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. f3 0-0 6. Be3 e5 7. Nge2 c6 8. d5 cxd5

*E90 King&#x27;s Indian, 5.Nf3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Normal Variation, Rare Defenses: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Larsen Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Zinnowitz Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Bg5

*E91 King&#x27;s Indian, 6.Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Kazakh Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 Na6

*E92 King&#x27;s Indian, Classical Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Gligoric-Taimanov System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. Be3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. d5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation, Stein Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. d5 a5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Exchange Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. dxe5

*E93 King&#x27;s Indian, Petrosian System, Main line 
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation, Normal Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. d5 Nbd7
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Petrosian Variation, Keres Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. d5 Nbd7 8. Bg5 h6 9. Bh4 g5 10. Bg3 Nh5 11. h4

*E94 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox Variation
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Positional Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 d6 3. Nc3 Nbd7 4. e4 e5 5. Nf3 g6 6. Be2 Bg7 7. 0-0 0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Ukrainian Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 a5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Donner Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 c6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Glek Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Na6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Positional Defense, Closed Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 Nbd7 7. 0-0 e5 8. d5

*E95 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox, 7...Nbd7, 8.Re1
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nbd7 8. Re1

*E96 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox, 7...Nbd7, Main line
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Positional Defense, Main Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nbd7 8. Re1 c6 9. Bf1 a5

*E97 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox, Aronin–Taimanov Variation (Yugoslav Attack / Mar del Plata Variation)
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Aronin-Taimanov Defense: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Bayonet Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. b4
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Bayonet Attack, Yepishin&#x27;s Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. b4 Nh5 10. Qc2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Bayonet Attack, Sokolov&#x27;s Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. b4 Nh5 10. Re1
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Korchnoi Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Bd2
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Modern System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Nd2

*E98 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox, Aronin–Taimanov, 9.Ne1
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Classical System: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Ne1
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Classical System, Neo-Classical Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Ne1 Nd7 10. Be3
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Classical System, Kozul Gambit: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Ne1 Nd7 10. Be3 f5 11. f3 f4 12. Bf2 g5 13. Rc1 Ng6 14. c5

*E99 King&#x27;s Indian, Orthodox, Aronin–Taimanov, Defence
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Classical System, Traditional Line: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Ne1 Nd7 10. f3 f5
*King&#x27;s Indian Defense: Orthodox Variation, Classical System, Benko Attack: 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6 3. Nc3 Bg7 4. e4 d6 5. Nf3 0-0 6. Be2 e5 7. 0-0 Nc6 8. d5 Ne7 9. Ne1 Nd7 10. f3 f5 11. g4

== Statistics ==
These statistics show a movement away from symmetrical defences to asymmetrical defences. In particular, in reply to 1.e4, the Sicilian and French defences, and to 1.d4 the Indian defences. Also, particularly amongst strong players, an increased use of the English Opening for White.

==See also==
* Chess opening theory table
* List of chess openings named after people
* List of chess openings named after places

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q374709" start="10" end="32" title="List of chess openings" label="list of chess openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218856" start="57" end="88" title="Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings" label="Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067476" start="729" end="743" title="Indian defences" label="Indian systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q728468" start="765" end="778" title="Dutch Defence" label="Dutch Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q764768" start="862" end="880" title="Irregular chess openings" label="Irregular Openings"/>
<link wikidata="Q491725" start="887" end="911" title="Anderssen&amp;#x27;s Opening" label="Anderssen&amp;#x27;s Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q596219" start="1164" end="1180" title="Van Geet Opening" label="Van Geet Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442767" start="1243" end="1255" title="Ware Opening" label="Ware Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q652447" start="1573" end="1587" title="Polish Opening" label="Polish Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q505769" start="3022" end="3039" title="Saragossa Opening" label="Saragossa Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540957" start="3048" end="3062" title="Mieses Opening" label="Mieses Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266153" start="3263" end="3288" title="Van &amp;#x27;t Kruijs Opening" label="Van&amp;#x27;t Kruijs Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q790702" start="3740" end="3754" title="Barnes Opening" label="Barnes Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q505757" start="3991" end="4008" title="Hungarian Opening" label="Hungarian Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472582" start="5202" end="5214" title="Grob&amp;#x27;s Attack" label="Grob Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q867941" start="6517" end="6532" title="Clemenz Opening" label="Clemenz Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528520" start="6687" end="6701" title="Kadas Opening" label="Kádas Opening:"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528515" start="7137" end="7150" title="Sodium Attack" label="Sodium Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q596219" start="7360" end="7376" title="Van Geet Opening" label="Van Geet Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q642339" start="9219" end="9231" title="Amar Opening" label="Amar Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q645666" start="9409" end="9430" title="Larsen&amp;#x27;s Opening" label="Larsen&amp;#x27;s Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q769253" start="10278" end="10297" title="Bird&amp;#x27;s Opening" label="Bird&amp;#x27;s Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247016" start="11947" end="11980" title="Zukertort Opening" label="Réti Opening or Zukertort Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q614491" start="15492" end="15517" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Attack" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q841497" start="16915" end="16927" title="Réti Opening" label="Réti Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693" start="17427" end="17442" title="English Opening" label="English Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038119" start="23626" end="23642" title="Hedgehog (chess)" label="Hedgehog Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="34573" end="34595" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132401" start="38621" end="38635" title="Modern Defence" label="Modern Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553648" start="38659" end="38671" title="Wade Defence" label="Wade Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505791" start="39186" end="39204" title="Old Benoni Defence" label="Old Benoni Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="40670" end="40692" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352303" start="40694" end="40711" title="Trompowsky Attack" label="Trompowsky Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q761632" start="42847" end="42859" title="Torre Attack" label="Torre Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q200727" start="43891" end="43918" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q899932" start="44206" end="44224" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355899" start="44226" end="44245" title="East Indian Defence" label="East Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067476" start="45274" end="45288" title="Indian defences" label="Indian systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="45294" end="45316" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q113981" start="45738" end="45753" title="Budapest Gambit" label="Budapest Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q441458" start="46753" end="46771" title="Old Indian Defence" label="Old Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505791" start="47902" end="47916" title="Benoni Defense" label="Benoni Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q546055" start="47922" end="47934" title="Benko Gambit" label="Benko Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q505791" start="47960" end="47974" title="Benoni Defence" label="Benoni Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q546055" start="48534" end="48546" title="Benko Gambit" label="Benko Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q546055" start="50390" end="50408" title="Benko Gambit, 7.e4" label="Benko Gambit, 7.e4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15255691" start="52641" end="52667" title="Benoni, Taimanov Variation" label="Benoni, Taimanov Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q505791" start="53163" end="53180" title="Benoni, Classical" label="Benoni, Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q728468" start="55404" end="55417" title="Dutch Defence" label="Dutch Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q728468" start="55432" end="55445" title="Dutch Defence" label="Dutch Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653117" start="56940" end="56962" title="Dutch, Staunton Gambit" label="Dutch, Staunton Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="62607" end="62623" title="Sicilian Defence" label="Sicilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631907" start="62692" end="62716" title="King&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="King&amp;#x27;s Pawn Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q558940" start="68343" end="68363" title="Scandinavian Defence" label="Scandinavian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109397" start="68413" end="68428" title="Tennison Gambit" label="Tennison Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q544490" start="72567" end="72590" title="Alekhine&amp;#x27;s Defence" label="Alekhine&amp;#x27;s Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132401" start="77931" end="77956" title="Robatsch Defence" label="Robatsch (Modern) Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888629" start="77968" end="77985" title="Monkey&amp;#x27;s Bum" label="Monkey&amp;#x27;s Bum"/>
<link wikidata="Q678245" start="81739" end="81751" title="Pirc Defence" label="Pirc Defence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="82969" end="83005" title="Pirc Defence#Classical (Two Knights) System: 4.Nf3" label="Pirc, Classical (Two Knights) System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197939" start="83740" end="83761" title="Pirc Defence, Austrian Attack" label="Pirc, Austrian Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q192538" start="84572" end="84589" title="Caro–Kann Defence" label="Caro–Kann Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="94111" end="94127" title="Sicilian Defence" label="Sicilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="94134" end="94150" title="Sicilian Defence" label="Sicilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736878" start="99759" end="99785" title="Sicilian Defence, Alapin Variation" label="Sicilian, Alapin Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622561" start="111718" end="111750" title="Sicilian Defence, Accelerated Dragon" label="Sicilian, Accelerated Fianchetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q838696" start="112522" end="112534" title="Maróczy Bind" label="Maroczy bind"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="118686" end="118702" title="Sicilian Defence" label="Sicilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507484" start="121871" end="121888" title="Magnus Smith Trap" label="Magnus Smith Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q188566" start="122906" end="122930" title="Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer" label="Sicilian, Richter–Rauzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q993460" start="126546" end="126572" title="Sicilian Defence, Dragon Variation" label="Sicilian, Dragon Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q993460" start="130281" end="130323" title="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 7...0-0" label="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 7...0-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507483" start="130916" end="130956" title="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 9.Bc4" label="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 9.Bc4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507483" start="131784" end="131827" title="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 10.0-0-0" label="Sicilian, Dragon, Yugoslav Attack, 10.0-0-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q731658" start="132600" end="132632" title="Sicilian Defence, Scheveningen Variation" label="Sicilian, Scheveningen Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q731658" start="135981" end="136003" title="Sicilian, Sozin, 7.Be3" label="Sicilian, Sozin, 7.Be3"/>
<link wikidata="Q766249" start="139666" end="139689" title="Poisoned Pawn Variation" label="Poisoned Pawn Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428090" start="140569" end="140605" title="Sicilian, Najdorf, 7...Be7 Main line" label="Sicilian, Najdorf, 7...Be7 Main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q189253" start="140806" end="140820" title="French Defence" label="French Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q753060" start="140842" end="140851" title="Open Game" label="Open Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q189253" start="140886" end="140900" title="French Defence" label="French Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q189253" start="140907" end="140921" title="French Defence" label="French Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q189253" start="158183" end="158217" title="French, Winawer, Advance Variation" label="French, Winawer, Advance Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q753060" start="159496" end="159505" title="Open Game" label="Open Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631907" start="159512" end="159533" title="King&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="King&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472620" start="159544" end="159565" title="Alapin&amp;#x27;s Opening" label="Alapin&amp;#x27;s Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253413" start="159567" end="159586" title="Centre Pawn Opening" label="Centre Pawn Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236580" start="159588" end="159604" title="Napoleon Opening" label="Napoleon Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855141" start="159606" end="159624" title="Portuguese Opening" label="Portuguese Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671558" start="159626" end="159641" title="Danvers Opening" label="Danvers Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q101111977" start="159643" end="159659" title="Bongcloud Attack" label="Bongcloud Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671558" start="161317" end="161332" title="Danvers Opening" label="Danvers Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q492969" start="161622" end="161633" title="Center Game" label="Center Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414751" start="161644" end="161657" title="Danish Gambit" label="Danish Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q658266" start="163663" end="163684" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Opening" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q498759" start="166441" end="166452" title="Vienna Game" label="Vienna Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444674" start="170227" end="170257" title="Frankenstein–Dracula Variation" label="Frankenstein–Dracula Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928329" start="171402" end="171417" title="Würzburger Trap" label="Würzburger Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q194506" start="172351" end="172369" title="King&amp;#x27;s Gambit" label="King&amp;#x27;s Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410945" start="182859" end="182874" title="Fischer Defence" label="Fischer Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133006" start="185072" end="185088" title="McDonnell Gambit" label="McDonnell Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956226" start="185093" end="185105" title="Muzio Gambit" label="Muzio Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776161" start="189976" end="189987" title="Rice Gambit" label="Rice Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237452" start="193910" end="193936" title="King&amp;#x27;s Knight Opening" label="King&amp;#x27;s Knight Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252570" start="193947" end="193963" title="Gunderam Defence" label="Gunderam Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252570" start="193965" end="193982" title="Brazilian Defence" label="Brazilian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524684" start="193984" end="193997" title="Greco Defence" label="Greco Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158490" start="193999" end="194014" title="Damiano Defence" label="Damiano Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q607492" start="194016" end="194031" title="Elephant Gambit" label="Elephant Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q501691" start="194037" end="194051" title="Latvian Gambit" label="Latvian Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q466964" start="197271" end="197287" title="Philidor Defence" label="Philidor Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q326928" start="201347" end="201368" title="Petrov&amp;#x27;s Defence" label="Petrov&amp;#x27;s Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179126" start="201380" end="201393" title="Marshall Trap" label="Marshall Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q505822" start="206752" end="206768" title="Ponziani Opening" label="Ponziani Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620591" start="206770" end="206796" title="Inverted Hungarian Opening" label="Inverted Hungarian Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070783" start="206798" end="206810" title="Irish Gambit" label="Irish Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519427" start="206812" end="206837" title="Konstantinopolsky Opening" label="Konstantinopolsky Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q831778" start="206847" end="206858" title="Scotch Game" label="Scotch Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q831778" start="211301" end="211312" title="Scotch Game" label="Scotch Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q505763" start="214040" end="214058" title="Three Knights Game" label="Three Knights Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228712" start="214069" end="214085" title="Four Knights Game, Halloween Gambit" label="Halloween Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q890984" start="214531" end="214548" title="Four Knights Game" label="Four Knights Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q835939" start="219903" end="219915" title="Italian Game" label="Italian Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q138612" start="219926" end="219952" title="Blackburne Shilling Gambit" label="Blackburne Shilling Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q499590" start="219954" end="219971" title="Hungarian Defence" label="Hungarian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137287" start="219973" end="219993" title="Semi-Italian Opening" label="Semi-Italian Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825621" start="219995" end="220009" title="Italian Gambit" label="Italian Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134278" start="220011" end="220021" title="Légal Trap" label="Légal Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096451" start="220023" end="220038" title="Rousseau Gambit" label="Rousseau Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486797" start="220063" end="220080" title="Giuoco Piano" label="Giuoco Pianissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q681934" start="221698" end="221710" title="Evans Gambit" label="Evans Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486797" start="228139" end="228151" title="Giuoco Piano" label="Giuoco Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q233139" start="233427" end="233446" title="Two Knights Defence" label="Two Knights Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401102" start="237086" end="237104" title="Fried Liver Attack" label="Fried Liver Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="241361" end="241370" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="242818" end="242848" title="Ruy Lopez, Bird&amp;#x27;s Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Bird&amp;#x27;s Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="243016" end="243047" title="Ruy Lopez, Old Steinitz Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Old Steinitz Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="243418" end="243447" title="Ruy Lopez, Schliemann Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Schliemann Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="244348" end="244385" title="Ruy Lopez, Classical (Cordel) Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Classical (Cordel) Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="245330" end="245355" title="Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9093856" start="245366" end="245379" title="Mortimer Trap" label="Mortimer Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q333750" start="249394" end="249423" title="Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation" label="Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="250639" end="250648" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="251846" end="251880" title="Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Modern Steinitz Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q471009" start="251891" end="251911" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark Trap" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="253749" end="253774" title="Ruy Lopez, Morphy Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Morphy Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="254577" end="254593" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez, 5.0-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="255401" end="255455" title="Ruy Lopez, Steinitz Defence Deferred (Russian Defence)" label="Ruy Lopez, Steinitz Defence Deferred (Russian Defence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="255985" end="256019" title="Ruy Lopez, Open (Tarrasch) Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Open (Tarrasch) Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="258013" end="258043" title="Ruy Lopez, Open, Howell Attack" label="Ruy Lopez, Open, Howell Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="259490" end="259524" title="Ruy Lopez, Open, Classical Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Open, Classical Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="260293" end="260318" title="Ruy Lopez, Closed Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="260930" end="260983" title="Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation Doubly Deferred (DERLD)" label="Ruy Lopez, Exchange Variation Doubly Deferred (DERLD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="261088" end="261113" title="Ruy Lopez, Worrall Attack" label="Ruy Lopez, Worrall Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q434808" start="261489" end="261497" title="Yuri Averbakh" label="Averbakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="262820" end="262853" title="Ruy Lopez, Marshall Counterattack" label="Ruy Lopez, Marshall Counterattack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="265240" end="265263" title="Ruy Lopez, Closed, 9.h3" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed, 9.h3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="266070" end="266104" title="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Smyslov Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Smyslov Defence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="266240" end="266280" title="Ruy Lopez#Breyer Variation: 9.h3 Nb8" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Breyer Defence, 10.d3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="266567" end="266607" title="Ruy Lopez#Breyer Variation: 9.h3 Nb8" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Breyer Defence, 10.d4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="268136" end="268171" title="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Chigorin Defence" label="Ruy Lopez, Closed, Chigorin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517916" start="269324" end="269335" title="Closed Game" label="Closed Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q753005" start="269378" end="269394" title="Grünfeld Defence" label="Grünfeld Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517916" start="269429" end="269440" title="Closed Game" label="Closed Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="269447" end="269469" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q880889" start="269481" end="269503" title="Blackmar–Diemer Gambit" label="Blackmar–Diemer Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q880889" start="269505" end="269517" title="Halosar Trap" label="Halosar Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780589" start="276134" end="276156" title="Richter–Veresov Attack" label="Richter–Veresov Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305104" start="277058" end="277071" title="London System" label="London System"/>
<link wikidata="Q761632" start="278200" end="278212" title="Torre Attack" label="Torre Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q606438" start="278508" end="278520" title="Colle System" label="Colle System"/>
<link wikidata="Q606438" start="278827" end="278839" title="Colle System" label="Colle System"/>
<link wikidata="Q107925" start="279583" end="279602" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q745487" start="279618" end="279632" title="Baltic Defence" label="Baltic Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709120" start="279634" end="279650" title="Marshall Defence" label="Marshall Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709138" start="279655" end="279674" title="Symmetrical Defence" label="Symmetrical Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q581316" start="280828" end="280844" title="Chigorin Defence" label="Chigorin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138509" start="281962" end="281981" title="Albin Countergambit" label="Albin Countergambit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770578" start="281986" end="281997" title="Lasker Trap" label="Lasker Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q531324" start="283483" end="283495" title="Slav Defence" label="Slav Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q531324" start="285360" end="285376" title="QGD; Slav, 4.Nc3" label="QGD, Slav, 4.Nc3"/>
<link wikidata="Q537790" start="288256" end="288284" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Accepted" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Accepted"/>
<link wikidata="Q320242" start="294133" end="294161" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Declined" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Declined"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456633" start="297612" end="297628" title="Tarrasch Defence" label="Tarrasch Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514088" start="304471" end="304492" title="Semi-Tarrasch Defence" label="Semi-Tarrasch Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570575" start="305981" end="305998" title="Semi-Slav Defence" label="Semi-Slav Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570575" start="306280" end="306306" title="QGD; Semi-Slav 5.Bg5 dxc4" label="QGD, Semi-Slav, 5.Bg5 dxc4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028233" start="312808" end="312833" title="Cambridge Springs Defence" label="Cambridge Springs Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389588" start="312838" end="312851" title="Elephant Trap" label="Elephant Trap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="316095" end="316109" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Declined#4. Bg5 Systems" label="Lasker Defence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="316609" end="316634" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Gambit Declined#4. Bg5 Systems" label="Lasker Defence, Main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q668421" start="320640" end="320655" title="Rubinstein Trap" label="Rubinstein Trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q753005" start="322904" end="322920" title="Grünfeld Defence" label="Grünfeld Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q753005" start="322923" end="322947" title="D70 Neo-Grünfeld Defence" label="D70 Neo-Grünfeld Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q753005" start="324751" end="324767" title="Grünfeld Defence" label="Grünfeld Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612907" start="326274" end="326292" title="Grünfeld Defence, Nadanian Variation" label="Nadanian Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="332751" end="332773" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247033" start="332785" end="332802" title="Neo-Indian Attack" label="Neo-Indian Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352303" start="332804" end="332821" title="Trompowsky Attack" label="Trompowsky Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138488" start="332823" end="332838" title="Catalan Opening" label="Catalan Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138488" start="333169" end="333176" title="Catalan Opening" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158353" start="336388" end="336410" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Pawn Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q80965" start="336986" end="337005" title="Bogo-Indian Defence" label="Bogo-Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q200727" start="338732" end="338759" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q200727" start="341618" end="341643" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian, 4.g3" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Indian, 4.g3"/>
<link wikidata="Q921388" start="345285" end="345305" title="Nimzo-Indian Defence" label="Nimzo-Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355826" end="355855" title="Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line" label="Nimzo-Indian, 4.e3, Main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q899932" start="358037" end="358063" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410980" start="366733" end="366770" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence, Four Pawns Attack" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian, Four Pawns Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410979" start="368106" end="368143" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence, Sämisch Variation" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian, Sämisch Variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693" start="376344" end="376359" title="English Opening" label="English Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q957168" start="376387" end="376413" title="Chess opening theory table" label="Chess opening theory table"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079730" start="376416" end="376457" title="List of chess openings named after people" label="List of chess openings named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609390" start="376460" end="376501" title="List of chess openings named after places" label="List of chess openings named after places"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99624" wikidata="Q8214783" url="?curid=99624" title="University of La Verne">
<text>The University of La Verne (ULV) is a private university in La Verne, California. Founded in 1891, the university is composed of the College of Arts &amp; Sciences, College of Business &amp; Public Management, the LaFetra College of Education, College of Law, College of Health and Community Well-Being, an online adult school, two military centers, and a Regional Campus Administration that oversees six regional campuses. It awards undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral degrees. Many of their classes are taught at smaller campuses throughout the greater Los Angeles area and Kern County.

==History==
=== Lordsburg College ===
The University of La Verne was founded in 1891 as Lordsburg College by members of the Church of the Brethren, a German Christian sect originating from the Schwarzenau Brethren. Historically, the Brethren are considered one of the &quot;peace churches&quot;, like the Quakers and the Mennonites, and slots on the Board of Trustees are still held for members of the Brethren. The baccalaureate ceremony is held at the local Church of the Brethren, and the holder of the post of campus minister must be a member of the Church of the Brethren.

The Lordsburg College originally opened in a hotel building located on the corner of 3rd Street and D Street in La Verne, CA (then called Lordsburg). The land-boom hotel is said to never have hosted a single paying guest, as the interest in land around Southern California had subsided by the time the hotel was complete. In 1899, two members of the Church of the Brethren decided the hotel building could be repurposed as a college, so they purchased the hotel, along with 100 city lots, for $15,000. The Lordsburg College building was demolished in 1928, shortly after the completion of Founders Hall.

In 1901, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote that the Lordsburg College &quot;seems to be predestined to an early demise.&quot; Attendance had shrunk to only 12 students, just two more than the number of faculty, and the college had been burdened by multiple scandals involving its administration. The college&#x27;s second president, E.A. Miller, had a scandal in Virginia which followed him to California. William Hoover, the school&#x27;s fourth president, resigned in 1901.

=== La Verne College ===
When the agricultural town of Lordsburg renamed itself to La Verne in 1917, Lordsburg College renamed itself accordingly, becoming La Verne College. The college reorganized in 1977, 87 years after its founding, to become the University of La Verne. Since then, the university has grown to consist of the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Business and Public Management, the LaFetra College of Education, the College of Law, and multiple regional campuses.

The University of La Verne conferred its first master&#x27;s degree in 1965 and awarded its first doctorate in 1969. In 1969, La Verne began its adult education program. The university opened its first regional campus, in Orange County, in 1981 and has since opened additional locations throughout the area, including Vandenberg AFB and Pt. Mugu. Despite its Church of the Brethren heritage, the university describes itself as non-sectarian.

===Athens, Greece===
La Verne extended to a campus in Athens in 1975, mainly for the children of US military personnel. By the time of the sudden closure of the Athens campus in 2004, the campus operated as a franchise, sending back per graduating student to the main university in California. Students and faculty were given 48 hours&#x27; notice of the closure prior to the start of classes. Stephen C. Morgan, president of La Verne at the time, justified the closure on financial grounds. The Athens campus had by 2004 gained a reputation as &quot;one of the best private, English-language institutions in Greece&quot;.

== Enrollment and admissions ==

The University of La Verne does not require the SAT or ACT for first-time freshmen students applying for admission. In 2024, University of La Verne accepted 73.5% of undergraduate applicants, with admission standards considered average, applicant competition considered low, and with those enrolled having an average 3.24 high school GPA. The university being a test optional school, those enrolled that submitted test scores had an average 1140 SAT score (6% submitting scores) or average 21 ACT score (1% submitting scores).

==Academics==
La Verne Online offers select programs through online coursework and some programs offer student choice on whether to take a class on campus or online.

=== Colleges ===
The University of La Verne has five colleges:

* The College of Arts and Sciences
* The LaFetra College of Education
* The College of Business and Public Management
* The College of Law
* The College of Health and Community Well-Being

===College of Law===

The University of La Verne College of Law was founded in 1970 and is currently located in Ontario, California. In February 2006, the college was provisionally accredited by the American Bar Association (ABA), allowing students to take the bar exam and become practicing attorneys in any U.S. jurisdiction. In June 2011, the ABA denied the College full ABA accreditation. On August 29, 2011, the college announced it received accreditation from the Committee of Bar Examiners of the State Bar of California. In March 2012, the ABA again granted provisional approval. On March 14, 2016, the ABA granted full accreditation. Of the La Verne graduates who took the California bar exam for the first time in July 2016, 31% passed, vs. a statewide average of 62%. In November 2019, the university&#x27;s board of trustees voted to change from an ABA-accredited school to a California Bar-accredited school, a decision that was influenced in part by the ABA&#x27;s introduction of tougher accreditation standards in May 2019 which shortened the timeframe schools had to ensure a 75-percent bar pass rate from five to two years.

=== Online school ===
The University of La Verne offers a limited number of undergraduate and graduate degree programs fully online.

=== Accreditations ===
The University of La Verne is accredited by the WASC Senior College and University Commission]]. Several programs are accredited or approved by discipline-specific organizations:
* The Physician Assistant program is provisionally accredited by the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant.
* The Doctorate in Clinical Psychology is accredited by the American Psychological Association.
* The Master of Public Administration program is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA).
* Teacher education programs are approved by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC).
*The College of Law is accredited by the State Bar of California

=== Rankings ===

The University of La Verne is ranked tied for No.196 in National Universities, tied for No.164 in Best Colleges for Veterans, tied for No.7 in Top Performers on Social Mobility, and having a $48,200 median starting salary of alumni,
as reported in &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;&#x27;s 2024-2025 Best Colleges rankings.

The University of La Verne is ranked tied for No.135 nationally in the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; 2024 Best Graduate Schools ranking for Public Affairs.

== Campus ==

The University of La Verne&#x27;s address is 1950 3rd Street in La Verne, California. Some of the most prominent buildings on campus include Founders Hall, which was completed in 1927, the Abraham Campus Center, the Sports Science &amp; Athletics Pavilion, Citrus Hall, and the Wilson Library.

In 2014, La Verne held a grand opening ceremony for the newly constructed Campus West, located just over a half-mile from the main campus. Campus West is home to the university&#x27;s baseball and softball fields.

Some of the oldest buildings still standing on campus include Founders Hall, Miller Hall (constructed in 1918), and the Hanawalt House (constructed in 1905).

=== Student housing ===

There are three on-campus housing options for students.

* Citrus Hall
* Vista La Verne
* The Oaks

Citrus Hall opened for the Fall 2018 semester and houses about 400 students. The Spot dining hall, located on the first floor of Citrus Hall in wings B and C, opened at the same time, replacing the Davenport Dining Hall a block away. Generally, Citrus Hall houses first-year students, Vista La Verne houses graduate students, and continuing students stay in either Vista La Verne or The Oaks.

=== Sports Science and Athletics Pavilion ===
The Sports Science and Athletics Pavilion, or SSAP, is a large tent structure located in the central campus, between the football stadium and Citrus Hall. The SSAP has an indoor basketball/volleyball court, workout rooms, locker rooms, classrooms, and various other facilities. When first constructed in the 1970s, the building contained facilities for the Athletics Department, Art Department, and the schools radio and TV stations. The SSAP also contained a snack bar and game area for students. The building now serves only the athletics department for the most part, as the Art and Communications departments now have their own building on D Street. The Campus Center now serves the functions the snack bar and game area once did.

A smaller tent located next to the SSAP contains the Dailey Theatre and other facilities for the Theatre Department.

Often referred to as &quot;The Tents,&quot; or the &quot;Super Tents,&quot; they were the &quot;world’s first permanent–tensioned membrane structure&quot; when completed in the early 1970s. They are constructed using a fabric made from woven fiberglass coated with Teflon.

=== Wilson Library ===
The Elvin and Betty Wilson Library—La Verne&#x27;s main library—contains over 193,000 volumes and access to over 70 academic databases.

An Alpha Beta supermarket was constructed on the corner of &#x27;D&#x27; street and second street in 1955. The site was previously occupied by a park, which was constructed after the demolition of the original Lordsburg College building. In 1977, the University purchased the Alpha Beta supermarket and converted it into a new library. This was done with the help of contributions made by Elvin and Betty Wilson, the donors the library is now named after. The library was closed between 1993 and 1996 to allow for expansion, again with the help of the same donors.

The library is a two-story building, but has two level for books per floor, making it seem like a four-story building. The first floor has study and meeting rooms, a help desk, offices, and paid printing facilities. The second floor (third level) contains the Honors Center and one classroom. The university&#x27;s archives and special collections are located on the fourth level.

=== Transportation ===
A free shuttle used to be offered between the main campus at the Wilson Library and a remote parking lot, near Campus West. The shuttle service was suspended in 2019, after the opening of a new $16 million parking garage on the main campus in 2016, which added 693 spaces.

An extension to the LA Metro&#x27;s A line is projected to be completed in 2025. A station will be located between the La Verne campus and the Pomona Fairplex, on the northeast corner of &#x27;E&#x27; Street and Arrow Highway.

== Student life and traditions ==

=== Greek life ===
The University of La Verne has chapters of five sororities and two fraternities.

==== Fraternities ====

* Phi Delta Theta (ΦΔΘ)
* Sigma Alpha Epsilon (ΣΑΕ)

==== Sororities ====

* Alpha Omicron Pi ( ΑΟΠ)
* Iota Delta (ΙΔ)
* Phi Sigma Sigma (ΦΣΣ )
* Sigma Gamma Rho (ΣΓΡ)
* Sigma Kappa ( ΣΚ)

=== The Rock ===
The rock has been a tradition at the University of La Verne for more than 60 years. The original rock was painted orange with the letters &quot;LVC,&quot; because the school was still named La Verne College at the time. In the 1960s La Verne students took it upon themselves to replace the rock with a much larger one. They buried much of it so that it would not be stolen by rival schools, as the original rock had been in the past.

The new rock would be painted by clubs and organizations, sometimes being repainted overnight to prank other students. This tradition continues, but students must reserve the rock before painting it.

=== Homecoming ===
Each year, La Verne holds its homecoming event prior to the homecoming football game. A street fair is held on 3rd Street, outside Founders Hall, and student clubs and organizations set up booths and host activities. A parade is also hosted with student made floats.

=== Student government ===
The Associated Students of the University of La Verne (ASULV) is the University of La Verne&#x27;s official student government. Aside from the executive board, there are two senators for the College of Arts and Sciences, two senators for the College of Business and Public Management, one senator for the College of Education, and five senators at large. All members are elected annually.

The Campus Activities Board (CAB) was founded in 2005 and is a non-profit on campus organization that organizes and coordinates events and programs on campus each year. CAB has two executive board members and nine chair persons.

==Campus locations==
===United States===
* Main Campus in La Verne
* University of La Verne College of Law in Ontario
* La Verne High Desert in Victorville
* La Verne Inland Empire in Ontario
* La Verne Kern County in Bakersfield
* La Verne Orange County in Irvine
* La Verne San Fernando Valley in Burbank
* La Verne Ventura County in Oxnard

Military satellite campuses:
* Point Mugu NAS
* Vandenberg SFB

==Athletics==
At the University of La Verne, approximately 30% of traditional-age undergraduates participate in intercollegiate athletics annually. (An NCAA Division III member, the University does not offer scholarships based on athletic ability.) Its athletic program is dedicated to developing scholar-athletes who demonstrate a commitment to academic and athletic success. Intercollegiate athletics are an integral part of the overall college experience, engaging the campus community and establishing a sense of spirit and pride while promoting a healthy lifestyle and fitness of mind and body.

La Verne has captured numerous SCIAC Championships, and has claimed NCAA team titles in baseball (1995), men&#x27;s volleyball (1999) and women&#x27;s volleyball (1982, 2001).
* Women&#x27;s volleyball is a perennial national contender with three national titles (1981, 1982, 2001) and 22 conference championships in its history. The program produced two National Players of the Year (Amy Smith – 2003; Ryan Winn – 2001).
* Baseball has a national reputation stretching back five decades, with two national titles (1972, 1995) and 20 conference titles.
* Football&#x27;s competitive tradition (including an undefeated conference season in 2015) can be traced back 83 years and is a keystone of the University&#x27;s athletic legacy. 
* Softball has established a competitive reputation, earning eight NCAA Division III playoff berths since 2006. Arleena DeLaCruz (Pitcher) leading the way to the playoffs in 2006 and drafted professionally to the Chicago Bandits. 
* Men&#x27;s golf won seven consecutive SCIAC championships from 2007 to 2013 and placed second at the Division III national championship tournaments twice (2007, 2009). Kelby Scharmann claimed the individual national championship in 2015 and Mitchell Fedorka received the Jack Nicklaus Award as the Golf Coaches Association of America&#x27;s collegiate player of the year.
* Track and field programs are a national powerhouse, having produced nine individual national champions and 76 All-Americans.

La Verne offers 18 intercollegiate athletic teams—9 sports for men and 9 for women. The Leopards are a member of the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC) and compete at the NCAA Division III level.


=== Women&#x27;s sports teams ===
* Basketball
* Cross Country
* Golf
* Soccer
* Softball
* Swimming and Diving
* Track and Field
* Volleyball
* Water Polo
=== Men&#x27;s sports teams ===
* Baseball
* Basketball
* Cross Country
* Football
* Golf
* Soccer
* Swimming and Diving
* Track and Field
* Water Polo
==Publications==
* &quot;VOICE Magazine&quot;
* &quot;La Verne Magazine&quot; 
* &quot;Campus Times&quot;

==Notable alumni==
* Art Acevedo – Miami Police Department Chief of Police
* Joseph Ashton – American film and voice actor
* Vernard Eller – Author and Christian pacifist
* Phil Esbenshade – Professional skateboarder and attorney
* Roger Hernández – Democratic member of the California State Assembly
* David Hollinger – Preston Hotchkis Professor of History, emeritus at the University of California, Berkeley, author, former President of the Organization of American Historians
* Darren Kavinoky – Motivational Speaker
* Larry Kennan – Executive director of NFL Coaches Association (NFLCA)
* Nick Leyva - Professional Baseball player, coach, and manager
* Ross Mathews – television host
* Mike Morrell – Republican member of the California State Assembly
* Ryan O&#x27;Donohue - Actor
* Steve Ortmayer – Assistant head coach of University of Kentucky football team
* Dan Quisenberry – Professional baseball player
* Alex Villanueva - Law enforcement officer serving as the 33rd Sheriff of Los Angeles County, California
* Joaquin Zendejas – Former football player
* Anthony Zuiker – &quot;CSI&quot; creator and executive producer

==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8214783" start="4" end="26" title="University of La Verne" label="University of La Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8214783" start="28" end="31" title="University of La Verne" label="ULV"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="38" end="56" title="private university" label="private university"/>
<link wikidata="Q985347" start="60" end="80" title="La Verne, California" label="La Verne, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089826" start="716" end="738" title="Church of the Brethren" label="Church of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="785" end="805" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q12371246" start="866" end="880" title="peace churches" label="peace churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="897" end="904" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="913" end="923" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonites"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1008" end="1021" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="1795" end="1812" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q985347" start="2342" end="2350" title="La Verne, California" label="La Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="2799" end="2812" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="2850" end="2859" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="2974" end="2987" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q461492" start="3070" end="3084" title="Vandenberg AFB" label="Vandenberg AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208095" start="3089" end="3097" title="Pt. Mugu" label="Pt. Mugu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="3249" end="3255" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="3404" end="3413" title="franchising" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3589" end="3606" title="Stephen C. Morgan" label="Stephen C. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4186" end="4189" title="Academic grading in the United States#Grade conversion" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="4298" end="4301" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="4345" end="4348" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q488134" start="4912" end="4931" title="Ontario, California" label="Ontario, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="4999" end="5023" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q907666" start="5061" end="5069" title="bar exam" label="bar exam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5304" end="5327" title="State Bar of California#Becoming an attorney in California" label="State Bar of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758323" start="6130" end="6140" title="Higher education accreditation in the United States" label="accredited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6348" end="6420" title="Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant" label="Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="6482" end="6516" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970751" start="6585" end="6653" title="National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration" label="National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="7106" end="7134" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259702" start="11152" end="11167" title="Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority" label="LA Metro&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267759" start="11168" end="11174" title="A Line (Los Angeles Metro)" label="A line"/>
<link wikidata="Q104849656" start="11215" end="11222" title="La Verne/Fairplex station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430689" start="11275" end="11290" title="Fairplex" label="Pomona Fairplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378722" start="11522" end="11537" title="Phi Delta Theta" label="Phi Delta Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512272" start="11546" end="11565" title="Sigma Alpha Epsilon" label="Sigma Alpha Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735091" start="11597" end="11613" title="Alpha Omicron Pi" label="Alpha Omicron Pi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11623" end="11633" title="Iota Delta" label="Iota Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181567" start="11641" end="11656" title="Phi Sigma Sigma" label="Phi Sigma Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512318" start="11666" end="11681" title="Sigma Gamma Rho" label="Sigma Gamma Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512330" start="11690" end="11701" title="Sigma Kappa" label="Sigma Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q985347" start="13354" end="13362" title="La Verne, California" label="La Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q488134" start="13406" end="13413" title="Ontario, California" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q495353" start="13440" end="13451" title="Victorville, California" label="Victorville"/>
<link wikidata="Q488134" start="13480" end="13487" title="Ontario, California" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="13514" end="13525" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49219" start="13554" end="13560" title="Irvine, California" label="Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="13595" end="13602" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q209338" start="13632" end="13638" title="Oxnard, California" label="Oxnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972210" start="13671" end="13685" title="Point Mugu NAS" label="Point Mugu NAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q461492" start="13688" end="13702" title="Vandenberg SFB" label="Vandenberg SFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="14336" end="14341" title="SCIAC" label="SCIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="15889" end="15944" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="15972" end="15976" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="15977" end="15989" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q83687907" start="16435" end="16446" title="Art Acevedo" label="Art Acevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810176" start="16491" end="16504" title="Joseph Ashton (actor)" label="Joseph Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921946" start="16539" end="16552" title="Vernard Eller" label="Vernard Eller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="16566" end="16584" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181876" start="16587" end="16602" title="Phil Esbenshade" label="Phil Esbenshade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358328" start="16646" end="16661" title="Roger Hernández" label="Roger Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235100" start="16717" end="16732" title="David Hollinger" label="David Hollinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="16790" end="16824" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356176" start="16858" end="16893" title="Organization of American Historians" label="Organization of American Historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225003" start="16896" end="16911" title="Darren Kavinoky" label="Darren Kavinoky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490611" start="16937" end="16949" title="Larry Kennan" label="Larry Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="16974" end="16977" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027476" start="17008" end="17018" title="Nick Leyva" label="Nick Leyva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369503" start="17072" end="17084" title="Ross Mathews" label="Ross Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848113" start="17105" end="17117" title="Mike Morrell" label="Mike Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414086" start="17173" end="17192" title="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Donohue" label="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Donohue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613520" start="17203" end="17217" title="Steve Ortmayer" label="Steve Ortmayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="17244" end="17266" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214238" start="17283" end="17298" title="Dan Quisenberry" label="Dan Quisenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58975558" start="17332" end="17347" title="Alex Villanueva" label="Alex Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="17394" end="17401" title="Sheriff" label="Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="17405" end="17435" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q62059328" start="17438" end="17454" title="Joaquin Zendejas" label="Joaquin Zendejas"/>
<link wikidata="Q470834" start="17482" end="17496" title="Anthony Zuiker" label="Anthony Zuiker"/>
<link wikidata="Q264198" start="17505" end="17508" title="CSI (franchise)" label="CSI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99625" wikidata="Q646496" url="?curid=99625" title="Mother-in-law joke">
<text>Humour and jokes about one&#x27;s mother-in-law (the mother of one&#x27;s spouse) are a mainstay of comedy. The humour is based on the premise that the average mother-in-law often considers her son-in-law to be unsuitable for her daughter (or daughter-in-law unsuitable for her son), and usually includes the stereotype that mothers-in-law are generally rude, overbearing, obnoxious, and/or unattractive.

British comedians such as Les Dawson and Jim Davidson have often used them, and many television sitcoms have featured stereotypical mothers-in-law.

There is evidence that this joke dates back to Roman times: &quot;Satire VI&quot; by Juvenal says that one cannot be happy while one&#x27;s mother-in-law is still alive. Most of the mother-in-law jokes are easily translatable to other languages and are easily understandable in most European cultures.

In a book on cartooning written by Dave Breger, the author lists a series of &quot;tired gags&quot;, and gives a suggestion on how to exploit them. In his illustration, Breger and his wife go to a museum and see a &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot; skeleton. Mrs. Breger says, &quot;And no funny remarks, please, about that Mother called or something...&quot; 

A study of mothers-in-law by Pamela Cotterill found that &quot;they tended not to be upset by jokes because they seemed so far fetched they couldn&#x27;t apply to them, but they didn&#x27;t find them funny&quot;. Cotterill also found that daughters-in-law did not find them funny either, largely because they saw that one day the jokes could be applied to them.

The jokes are considered offensive by some. A widely reported case is that of the London borough where, in 2010, a workshop leaflet called &quot;Cultural Awareness: General Problems&quot; advised against using them. The leaflet states that &quot;mother-in-law jokes, as well as offensively sexist in their own right, can also be seen as offensive on the grounds that they disrespect elders or parents.&quot;

==Portrayals==
The stereotype is often portrayed on film and in popular entertainment. Some examples include:
*Viola Fields (Jane Fonda) in the film &quot;Monster-in-Law&quot;.
*Marie Barone (Doris Roberts) in the sitcom &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;, who is extremely meddlesome and incessantly makes conceited remarks to her daughter-in-law Debra.
*Adele Delfino (Celia Weston) on the television series &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;.
*Endora (Agnes Moorehead) in the sitcom &quot;Bewitched&quot; is a witch who is not happy with the decision of her daughter to marry a normal human, and often uses her magic to cause trouble for him.
*Norma Speakman (Liz Smith) in the sitcom &quot;The Royle Family&quot;, who enjoys baiting son-in-law Jim.
*Olivia Jefferson (Zara Cully) in the sitcom &quot;The Jeffersons&quot; often puts down her daughter-in-law Louise.
*Mrs. Marcus (Ethel Merman) in the film &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot; frequently berates her son-in-law, Russell Finch (Milton Berle), complains almost constantly, and annoys most of the other characters in the film.
*Mrs. Gibson (Ethel Owen) in various episodes of the TV show &quot;The Honeymooners&quot; frequently insults her son-in-law Ralph by making jokes about his weight, telling Alice about other men who have courted her before she married Ralph in front of him and saying things that make him mad enough that he shouts at her to get out of the house.
*Pearl Slaghoople in the animated series &quot;The Flintstones&quot; often ponders why her daughter Wilma had to marry Fred Flintstone.
*Madge Harvey (Sheila Reid) in the sitcom &quot;Benidorm&quot; frequently irritates her son-in-law Mick.

==Other==
The plant &quot;Dracaena trifasciata&quot; is sometimes referred to as &quot;mother-in-law&#x27;s tongue&quot;.

==See also==

* Maternal insult
* &quot;Mother-in-Law (song)&quot;, a 1961 song written by Allen Toussaint and performed by Ernie K-Doe

==References==
==External links==
* Mother in Law Support and Stories Collection
* Mother-In-Law Stories, Jokes and Support</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="0" end="6" title="Humour" label="Humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q646496" start="11" end="47" title="Mother-in-law joke" label="jokes about one&amp;#x27;s mother-in-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12498236" start="160" end="173" title="parent-in-law" label="mother-in-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q954007" start="194" end="204" title="Affinity (law)" label="son-in-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529406" start="432" end="442" title="Les Dawson" label="Les Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559713" start="447" end="459" title="Jim Davidson" label="Jim Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="502" end="509" title="Situation comedy" label="sitcoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="602" end="607" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426233" start="621" end="630" title="Satire VI" label="Satire VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="640" end="647" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="838" end="844" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="871" end="881" title="cartooning" label="cartooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q287546" start="893" end="904" title="Dave Breger" label="Dave Breger"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="1055" end="1061" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="1078" end="1091" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="1098" end="1106" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1656" end="1662" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="1864" end="1870" title="sexist" label="sexist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="2108" end="2118" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q682904" start="2138" end="2152" title="Monster-in-Law" label="Monster-in-Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570454" start="2161" end="2173" title="Marie Barone" label="Marie Barone"/>
<link wikidata="Q232959" start="2175" end="2188" title="Doris Roberts" label="Doris Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="2210" end="2233" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q289931" start="2355" end="2367" title="Celia Weston" label="Celia Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="2400" end="2420" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q65465310" start="2429" end="2435" title="Endora (Bewitched)" label="Endora"/>
<link wikidata="Q231221" start="2437" end="2452" title="Agnes Moorehead" label="Agnes Moorehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044635" start="2474" end="2483" title="Bewitched" label="Bewitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q291438" start="2645" end="2654" title="Liz Smith (actress)" label="Liz Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398704" start="2676" end="2692" title="The Royle Family" label="The Royle Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599730" start="2736" end="2752" title="Olivia Jefferson" label="Olivia Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023856" start="2754" end="2764" title="Zara Cully" label="Zara Cully"/>
<link wikidata="Q153227" start="2786" end="2800" title="The Jeffersons" label="The Jeffersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q129087" start="2865" end="2877" title="Ethel Merman" label="Ethel Merman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="2897" end="2933" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="2990" end="3002" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403182" start="3101" end="3111" title="Ethel Owen" label="Ethel Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q742551" start="3154" end="3170" title="The Honeymooners" label="The Honeymooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="3434" end="3450" title="Pearl Slaghoople" label="Pearl Slaghoople"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="3480" end="3495" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q614240" start="3533" end="3538" title="Wilma Flintstone" label="Wilma"/>
<link wikidata="Q614889" start="3552" end="3567" title="Fred Flintstone" label="Fred Flintstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493137" start="3584" end="3595" title="Sheila Reid" label="Sheila Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887946" start="3617" end="3625" title="Benidorm (British TV series)" label="Benidorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5859273" start="3701" end="3721" title="Sansevieria trifasciata" label="Dracaena trifasciata"/>
<link wikidata="Q846411" start="3814" end="3829" title="Maternal insult" label="Maternal insult"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917260" start="3838" end="3858" title="Mother-in-Law (song)" label="Mother-in-Law (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q963044" start="3889" end="3904" title="Allen Toussaint" label="Allen Toussaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356912" start="3922" end="3933" title="Ernie K-Doe" label="Ernie K-Doe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99627" wikidata="Q2119" url="?curid=99627" title="Mannheim">
<text>Mannheim (; Palatine German: or ), officially the University City of Mannheim (), is the second-largest city in Baden-Württemberg after Stuttgart, the state capital, and Germany&#x27;s 21st-largest city, with a population of over 315,000. It is located at the border with Rhineland-Palatinate. The city is the cultural and economic centre of the Rhine-Neckar, Germany&#x27;s seventh-largest metropolitan region, with nearly 2.4 million inhabitants.

Mannheim is located at the confluence of the Upper Rhine and the Neckar in the Kurpfalz (Electoral Palatinate) region of northwestern Baden-Württemberg. The city lies in the Upper Rhine Plain, Germany&#x27;s warmest region, between the Palatine Forest and the Oden Forest. Mannheim forms a continuous urban zone of around 500,000 inhabitants with Ludwigshafen am Rhein in the Rhineland-Palatinate, while some northern suburbs lie in Hesse. Hamburg is the only other German city with such a presence in two states other than its own. 

Surrounded by a ring of avenues, central Mannheim&#x27;s streets and avenues are laid out in a grid pattern unusual for German cities, leading to its nickname &quot;Quadratestadt&quot; (&quot;Square City&quot;) and tourism slogan &quot;&quot;Leben im Quadrat&quot; (&quot;Life in the&quot; &quot;Square&quot;&quot;). At the southern base of that system is Mannheim Palace, one of the largest palace complexes in the world. It was the former home of the Prince-elector of the Electoral Palatinate, and now houses the University of Mannheim, which repeatedly receives top marks in business administration and is sometimes known as the &quot;Harvard of Germany&quot;. The Mannheim May Market is the largest regional consumer exhibition of Germany. The civic symbol of Mannheim is the Romanesque Mannheim Water Tower, completed in 1886 and rising to above the highest point of the art nouveau area &quot;Friedrichsplatz&quot;. Mannheim is well-known for its inventions, including the automobile, the bicycle, and the tractor, which is why the city is often called the &quot;city of inventions&quot;. The city is the starting and finishing point of the Bertha Benz Memorial Route, which follows the tracks of the first long-distance automobile trip in history.

A (major city with more than 100,000 inhabitants) since 1896, Mannheim is an important industrial and commercial city, a university town, and a major transportation hub between Frankfurt and Stuttgart, including an ICE interchange (the Mannheim Hauptbahnhof), Germany&#x27;s second-largest marshalling yard (the Mannheim Rangierbahnhof), and Germany&#x27;s largest inland port (the Mannheim Harbour). The city is home to many factories, offices and headquarters of several major corporations such as Roche, ABB, IBM, Siemens, Unilever and more. Mannheim&#x27;s SAP Arena is home to German ice hockey record champions Adler Mannheim as well as the popular handball team Rhein-Neckar Löwen. Since 2014, Mannheim has been a member of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network and holds the title of &quot;UNESCO City of Music&quot;. In 2020, Mannheim was classified as a global city with &#x27;Sufficiency&#x27; status by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC). Mannheim is a smart city; the city&#x27;s electrical grid is installed with a power-line communication network.

==History==
===Early history===
A brick kiln excavated in 1929 in the Seckenheim district, which operated from 74 AD to the early second century, attests to settlement in Roman times.

The name of the city was first recorded as &quot;Mannenheim&quot; in a legal transaction in 766, surviving in a twelfth-century copy in the &quot;Codex Laureshamensis&quot; from Lorsch Abbey. The name is interpreted as &quot;the home of Manno&quot;, a short form of a Germanic name such as &quot;Hartmann&quot; or &quot;Hermann&quot;. Mannheim remained a mere village throughout the Middle Ages.

===Early Modern Age===
In 1606, Frederick IV, Elector Palatine started building the fortress of Friedrichsburg and the adjacent city centre with its grid of streets and avenues. On 24 January 1607, Frederick IV gave Mannheim the status of a &quot;city&quot;, whether it really was one by then or not.

Mannheim was mostly levelled during the Thirty Years&#x27; War around 1622 by the forces of Johan Tilly. After being rebuilt, it was again severely damaged by the French Army in 1689 during the Nine Years&#x27; War (also called “The War of Palatinate Succession” as Philippe I, Duke of Orléans, a younger brother of Louis XIV made a competing claim to the electorate of the Palatinate).

After the rebuilding of Mannheim that began in 1698, the capital of the Electorate of the Palatinate was moved from Heidelberg to Mannheim in 1720 when Karl III Philip, Elector Palatine began construction of Mannheim Palace and the Jesuit Church; they were completed in 1760.

===18th and 19th centuries===
In 1819, Norwich Duff wrote of Mannheim:

During the eighteenth century, Mannheim was the home of the &quot;Mannheim School&quot; of classical music composers. Mannheim was said to have one of the best court orchestras in Europe under the leadership of the conductor Carlo Grua. The royal court of the Palatinate left Mannheim in 1778, as Charles Theodore had become Elector of Bavaria and moved to Munich. Two decades later, in 1802, Mannheim was removed from the Palatinate and given to the Grand Duchy of Baden.

In 1819, August von Kotzebue was assassinated in Mannheim.

The climate crisis of 1816–17 caused famine and the death of many horses in Mannheim. That year Karl Drais invented the first bicycle.

Infrastructure improvements included the establishment of Rhine Harbour in 1828 and the construction of the first Baden railway, which opened from Mannheim to Heidelberg in 1840. Influenced by the economic rise of the middle class, another golden age of Mannheim gradually began. In the March Revolution of 1848, the city was a centre for political and revolutionary activity.

In 1865, Friedrich Engelhorn founded the &quot;Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik&quot; (Baden Aniline and Soda Factory, BASF) in Mannheim, but the factory was constructed across the Rhine in Ludwigshafen because Mannheim residents feared air pollution from its operations. From this dye factory, BASF has developed into the largest chemical company in the world. After opening a workshop in Mannheim in 1871 and patenting engines from 1878, Karl Benz patented the first motor car in 1886. He was born in Mühlburg (now part of Karlsruhe).

===Early 20th century and World War I===
The Schütte-Lanz company, founded by Karl Lanz and Johann Schütte in 1909, built 22 airships. The company&#x27;s main competitor was the Zeppelin works.

When World War I broke out in 1914, Mannheim&#x27;s industrial plants played a key role in Germany&#x27;s war economy. This contributed to the fact that, on 27 May 1915, Ludwigshafen was the world&#x27;s first civilian settlement behind the battle lines to be bombed from the air. French aircraft attacked the BASF plants, thereby killing twelve people. The precedent was set for this attack by Germany&#x27;s repeated air raids against British civilian populations throughout southeastern Britain during the first half of 1915.

When Germany lost the war in 1918, according to the peace terms, the left bank of the Rhine was occupied by French troops. The French occupation lasted until 1930, and some of Ludwigshafen&#x27;s most elegant houses were erected for the officers of the French garrison.

===Inter-war period===
After the First World War, the Heinrich Lanz Company built the Bulldog, an advanced tractor, powered by heavy oil. As a result of the invention of the pre-combustion chamber by Prosper L&#x27;Orange, Benz &amp; Cie. developed the world&#x27;s first compact diesel-powered car at its motor works in Mannheim in 1923. In 1922, the &quot;Grosskraftwerk Mannheim&quot; (Mannheim large power station) was opened. By 1930, the city, along with its sister city of Ludwigshafen, which had developed out of the old Mannheim Rheinschanze, had a population of 385,000.

===World War II===
During World War II, air raids on Mannheim completely destroyed the city centre. Mannheim was heavily damaged during aerial bombing by the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF). Allied bombing raids razed the city centre of Mannheim at night-time area bombing, killing thousands of civilians. In the meantime, 2,262 of Mannheim&#x27;s Jews were sent to Nazi concentration camps. Some sources state that the first deliberate strategic bombing of the war occurred at Mannheim during a Royal Air Force night raid on 16 December 1940. Today around one third of the city consists of buildings from before 1950.

In late March 1945, the Allied ground advance into Germany reached Mannheim, which was potentially well-defended by German forces. However, the German forces abandoned the city and the U.S. 44th Infantry Division entered unopposed on 29 March 1945. There was later a large American military occupation presence in the Mannheim area with up to 10 barracks. The first one shut down in 2007 and the last was closed in 2013 (see &quot;United States military installations&quot; below).

===1950s to 1980s===

Rebuilding of the city began industriously. Mannheim Palace and the water tower (&quot;Wasserturm&quot;) eventually were rebuilt and the National Theatre was replaced by a new building at a new location. At the old location, there is a monument to Friedrich Schiller and the &quot;Zum Zwischen-Akt&quot; pub. The housing shortage led to the development of many new residential areas.

In 1964, the City Hospital (&quot;Städtisches Krankenhaus&quot;) became part of the Heidelberg University for Clinical Medicine in Mannheim. In 1967, the University of Mannheim was established in the city.

In 1975, the Bundesgartenschau (&quot;Federal horticulture show&quot;) was celebrated in Luisen and Herzogenried parks. A number of pieces of infrastructure were developed for the show: the telecommunications tower and a second bridge across the Rhine (the Kurt Schumacher Bridge) were built, the pedestrian zone was established, the new Rosengarten conference centre was opened and the Aerobus was installed as a temporary transport system.

A number of major projects were completed in the 1980s and 1990s: a planetarium, an extension to the art gallery, the new Reiß Museum, Stadthaus, a new May Market ground, synagogue, mosque, State Museum for Technology and Work, Carl-Benz stadium and the Fahrlach tunnel were opened.

Mannheim has lost many industrial jobs, although in the recent past, the city was economically dominated by manufacturing. The city tried in the past to prevent the establishment of service providers by designating some locations as industrial areas. A prime example of the current trend is the construction of the Victoria Tower (Victoria-Turm) in 2001, one of the tallest buildings in the city, on railway land.
===Post-reunification===
Mannheim celebrated its 400th anniversary with a series of cultural and other events throughout 2007. The 400th anniversary proper was in 2006, since Frederick IV, Elector Palatine laid the foundations of Mannheim citadel on 17 March 1606. In preparation for the anniversary, some urban activities were implemented, beginning in 2000: the building of the SAP Arena with access to the city&#x27;s new eastern ring road, the rehabilitation of the pedestrian zone in Breite Straße, the arsenal and the palace, the complete transformation of the old fairground, and the new Schafweide tram line. The concept of the anniversary of the city is aimed at a diverse range of events without a dominant central event. In 2001, the City hospital was officially and legally awarded with the title University Hospital Mannheim. In 2023, Mannheim hosted the Bundesgartenschau 2023 (National Garden Show); the second time after 1975.

== Geography ==

=== Climate ===

Mannheim is located in Germany&#x27;s warmest summer region, the &quot;Rhine shift&quot;. In summer, temperatures sometimes rise up to and higher. The highest recorded temperature was on 7 August 2015. The daily lows during heat waves can be very high for the latitude (around ). In September 2016, the average temperature in Mannheim was 18.6 °C, highest in Baden-Württemberg.

In comparison to other regions of Germany, Mannheim has a higher humidity in summer which causes a higher heat index. Snow is rare, even in the cold months. Precipitation occurs mostly during afternoon thunderstorms during the warmer period (average days of thunderstorms in a year is 40–50). The climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is &quot;Cfb&quot; (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate), bordering closely on a humid subtropical climate (Cfa), with summer months often averaging above 21 degrees (71 F).

==Demographics==

=== Population ===
Mannheim, population 315,000, is the 2nd largest city in Baden-Württemberg. Its location near the Rhine and Neckar rivers spurred Mannheim&#x27;s industrialization and transition into a major city in the early 19th century. The city was heavily damaged during WWII but soon regained prominence as an industrial centre, causing rapid population growth in the 1950s. Many motor, electronic and power plant companies came to Mannheim and other cities in the Rhine-Neckar Region, including Ludwigshafen and Heidelberg, which lies just kilometres up the Neckar. The population of Mannheim started to decline in the 1980s but began to rebound in the 2010s, partially due to its large university population. 

====Nationalities====
The following list shows the most significant groups of foreigners in the city of Mannheim by nationalities. In total 44,7% of all Mannheim inhabitants are from foreign descent. The Neckarstadt-West district has the biggest foreign population with 68,9%, while the Wallstadt district has the smallest one with 23,1%. A large part of the immigrants are from the Balkans and European countries.

==== Religion ====
The distribution of Mannheim&#x27;s population by religious affiliation (as of December 31, 2020) is Roman Catholic 25.4%, Protestant 20.0%, and other/none 54.6%.

== Culture ==
===Theatre===
The National Theatre Mannheim was founded in 1779 and is the oldest &quot;Stage&quot; in Germany. In 1782 the premiere of &quot;Die Räuber&quot;, written by Friedrich Schiller, was shown.

Recently, smaller stages have opened, such as the Oststadt-Theater, the TIG7 (Theater im Quadrat G7), the Theater Oliv, the Freilichtbühne, the Theater31, the Theater ImPuls, the Theater Felina-Areal, the Mannheimer Puppenspiele, the Kleinkunstbühne Klapsmühl&#x27;, Schatzkistl, and zeitraumexit.

===Sport===

There are two nationally renowned football clubs in Mannheim, SV Waldhof Mannheim, who currently are playing in the third tier 3. Liga, but who have played in the top tier, the Bundesliga; and VfR Mannheim, winner of the German championship in 1949, now playing in the sixth tier Verbandsliga Baden.

The Adler Mannheim (formerly MERC, Mannheimer Eis- und Rollsport-Club) is an ice hockey team playing in the professional Deutsche Eishockey Liga, having won the German championship a total of eight times (7 times Deutsche Eishockey Liga and one time the former highest German ice hockey league known as Bundesliga).

The city is home to the Mannheim Tornados, the oldest operational baseball and softball club in Germany. The Tornados play in the first division of the Baseball Bundesliga and have won the championship 11 times, more than any other club.

In 2003, the American football club Rhein-Neckar Bandits was founded. They are playing in the first German Football League which is called GFL1. As of 2018, between 500 and 900 people watch each game.

Rhein-Neckar Löwen are a handball team playing in the professional German Handball League.

The WWE visited Mannheim in 2008. Around 10,000 fans attended the event.

UFC fighter Dennis Siver lives and trains in Mannheim.

Mannheim hosted the European Show Jumping Championships in 1997, and the FEI European Jumping Championships in 2007 14–19 August, in the MVV-riding stadium.

In 2002, Hobby Horse Polo was invented in Mannheim, evoking the classical rivalry towards &quot;polite society&quot; in Heidelberg.

The Maimarkt-Turnier Mannheim is an annual international horse show held during the Mannheimer Maimarkt since 1964.

===Inventions===

According to Forbes magazine, Mannheim is known for its exceptional inventive power and was ranked 11th among the Top 15 of the most inventive cities worldwide.

Many significant inventions were made in Mannheim:
*Karl Drais built the first two-wheeled &quot;draisine&quot; in 1817.
*Karl Benz drove the first automobile on the streets of Mannheim in 1886. At his workshop in Mannheim, he produced a lightweight three-wheeled vehicle powered by a single cylinder petrol/gasoline-fueled engine, first shown in public during 1886. This powered tricycle subsequently came to be widely regarded as the first automobile/motor car powered by an internal combustion engine. Karl&#x27;s wife Bertha Benz undertook the world&#x27;s first road trip by automobile from Mannheim to Pforzheim and back, about 65 miles then, on modern roads about 55 miles, in August 1888.
* The Lanz Bulldog, a popular tractor with a rugged, simple Diesel engine was introduced in 1921.
* Karl Benz developed the world&#x27;s first compact diesel-powered car at the Benz &amp; Cie. motor works in Mannheim in 1923.
* Julius Hatry built the world&#x27;s first rocket plane in 1929.
* Dario Fontanella, an Italian guest worker, invented the first Spaghettieis (spaghetti ice cream) in 1969.
==Education==

The University of Mannheim is one of Germany&#x27;s younger universities. Although founded in 1967, it has its origins in the &quot;Palatine Academy of Sciences&quot;, established in 1763, and the former Handelshochschule (Commercial College), founded in 1907. Situated in Mannheim Palace, it is Germany&#x27;s leading university in the fields of business and economics and attracts students from around the world. Described by &quot;Die Zeit&quot; as the &#x27;Harvard of Germany&#x27;, it is seen as the training grounds of German business leaders. More than 12,000 students were enrolled in the 2013/14 semester.

The university town also houses one of the medical schools of Heidelberg University (at the University Hospital Mannheim), the Hochschule Mannheim, a branch of the Duale Hochschule of the State of Baden-Württemberg and several musical and theatrical academies, including the Pop Academy Mannheim, the Musikhochschule and the Theaterakademie. These institutions draw a large and diverse student body.

Dependents of U.S. military personnel attended Mannheim Elementary School until it closed in June 2012. In the 1980s the school had 2,200 students.

== Government and politics ==
===Mayor===

The mayor is the head of the city council and chairman of the council, being selected by direct suffrage for a term of eight years. The current mayor is from the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). 

In 2023, Specht ran in the election for mayor of Mannheim, in which incumbent Peter Kurz (SPD) did not run again, and was supported by the CDU Mannheim, the and the FDP Mannheim. In the first round of voting on June 18, 2023, he received 45.64% of the vote. On July 9, 2023, he won the second round of voting with 49.9% of the vote, ahead of SPD candidate Thorsten Riehle (48.7%) and independent candidate Uğur Çakir (1.3%). 
Due to an objection to the election results, Specht was initially elected as appointed mayor by the city council. The objection was rejected by the on August 2, 2023, making Specht&#x27;s election valid. He took office on August 4, 2023, making him the first CDU mayor in Mannheim since Josef Braun (1945–1948).
! rowspan=2 colspan=2| Candidate
! rowspan=2| Party
! colspan=2| First round
! colspan=2| Second round
! Votes
! Votes
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christian Specht
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union
| 34,329
| 45.6
| 35,981
| 49.9
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Thorsten Riehle
| align=left| Social Democratic Party
| 22,748
| 30.2
| 35,122
| 48.7
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Raymond Fojkar
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens
| 10,379
| 13.8
| align=center colspan=2| &quot;Withdrew&quot;
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Thomas Bischoff
| align=left| Die PARTEI
| 2,327
| 3.3
| align=center colspan=2| &quot;Withdrew&quot;
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| David Frey
| align=left| Independent
| 1,081
| 1.4
| align=center colspan=2| &quot;Withdrew&quot;
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Tanja Krone
| align=left| Independent
| 903
| 1.2
| align=center colspan=2| &quot;Withdrew&quot;
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Uğur Çakir
| align=left| Independent
| 638
| 0.85
| 947
| 1.3
| colspan=3 align=left| &quot;Others&quot;
| 41
| 0.1
| 70
| 0.1
! colspan=3| Valid votes
! 75,222
! 99.4
! 72,120
! 99.4
! colspan=3| Invalid votes
! 467
! 0.6
! 415
! 0.6
! colspan=3| Total
! 75,689
! 100.0
! 72,535
! 100.0
! colspan=3| Electorate/voter turnout
! 234,942
! 32.2
! 234,861
! 30.9
| colspan=7| Source: City of Mannheim

The city leaders since 1810 are:

* 1810–1820: Johann Wilhelm Reinhardt
* 1820–1832: Valentin Möhl
* 1833–1835: Heinrich Andriano
* 1836–1849: Ludwig Jolly
* 1849–1852: Friedrich Reiß
* 1852–1861: Heinrich Christian Diffené
* 1861–1870: Ludwig Achenbach
* 1870–1891: Eduard Moll
* 1891–1908: Otto Beck
* 1908–1913: Paul Martin
* 1914–1928: Theodor Kutzer
* 1928–1933: Hermann Heimerich (SPD)
* 1933–1945: Carl Renninger (NSDAP)
* 1945–1948: Josef Braun (CDU)
* 1948–1949: Fritz Cahn-Garnier (SPD)
* 1949–1955: Hermann Heimerich (SPD)
* 1956–1972: Hans Reschke (independent)
* 1972–1980: Ludwig Ratzel (SPD)
* 1980–1983: Wilhelm Varnholt (SPD)
* 1983–2007: Gerhard Widder (SPD)
* 2007–2023: Peter Kurz (SPD)
* 2023–present: Christian Specht (CDU)
===City council===

The council has 48 seats and is elected by direct suffrage for five years. In the local elections in Baden-Württemberg, voters are allowed to take advantage of cumulative voting and vote splitting. Since the Second World War the SPD, except in the elections of 1999, 2004, and 2024, has received more votes than the CDU. In the 2019 election, the Greens received the most votes for the first time.

The most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:
! colspan=2| Party
! Votes
! +/-
! Seats
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
| 1,110,883
| 21.6
| 2.5
| 10
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens (Grüne)
| 1,035,384
| 20.1
| 4.3
| 9
| 3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Social Democratic Party (SPD)
| 952,919
| 18.5
| 2.7
| 9
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alternative for Germany (AfD)
| 731,679
| 14.2
| 5.0
| 7
| 3
| 
| align=left| Free Voters/Mannheimer List (ML)
| 346,759
| 6.7
| 0.7
| 3
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Democratic Party (FDP)
| 276,672
| 5.4
| 0.7
| 3
| 0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| The Left (Die Linke)
| 254,373
| 4.9
| 1.1
| 2
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Animal Protection Party (Tierschutz)
| 112,496
| 2.2
| 1.1
| 1
| 0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Die PARTEI (PARTEI)
| 108,638
| 2.1
| 0.9
| 1
| 0
| 
| align=left| Middle-Class for Mannheim (MfM)
| 76,555
| 1.5
| 0.2
| 1
| 0
| 
| align=left| The Mannheimers
| 64,393
| 1.3
| New
| 1
| New
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Climate List Baden-Württemberg (Klima)
| 59,228
| 1.2
| New
| 1
| New
| 
| align=left| Protect the Cars
| 12,632
| 0.2
| New
| 0
| New
! colspan=2| Valid votes
! 5,142,611
! 100.0
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Invalid ballots
! 2,479
! 2.1
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Total ballots
! 120,729
! 100.0
! 48
! ±0
! colspan=2| Electorate/voter turnout
! 238,394
! 51.5
! 1.7
! 
| colspan=7| Source: City of Mannheim

==United States military installations==
A number of U.S. Army Europe installations were located in and near Mannheim during the Cold War. The following locations provided services to and housed the &quot;U.S. Army Garrison Mannheim&quot; and other units of the U.S. Army. The U.S. Army Garrison Mannheim was formally deactivated on 31 May 2011.

* Coleman Barracks and Coleman Army Airfield (Mannheim-Sandhofen): the headquarters of the American Forces Network-Europe, and Also, the location of the United States Army Corrections Facility-Europe.
* Funari Barracks (Mannheim-Käfertal), vacated in 2014.
* Spinelli Barracks (Mannheim-Feudenheim), vacated in 2015, the home of the Army&#x27;s 28th Transportation Battalion. 
* Sullivan Barracks (Mannheim-Käfertal): formerly the headquarters of the U.S. Army&#x27;s 7th Signal Brigade and the 529th Military Police Honor Guard Company&#x27;s 2nd Platoon; vacated in 2014.
* Taylor Barracks (Mannheim-Vogelstang): formerly the headquarters of the U.S. Army&#x27;s 2nd Signal Brigade; vacated in 2011.
* Turley Barracks (Mannheim-Käfertal): in the early 1990s was home to the 181st Transportation Bn, with companies of 40th, 41st, 51st, 590th, TTP, and HHC transportation companies and also the headquarters of the NATO ACE Mobile Force (Land) (AMFL).
* The Benjamin Franklin Village (Mannheim-Käfertal), housing. Also, it was the home of the Mannheim American High School and the Middle School, which closed on 9 June 2011. The last soldier and his family moved out in 2012.

The following locations were part of the &quot;U.S. Army Garrison Heidelberg&quot; but were within the area of the city of Mannheim until they were vacated in 2010 and 2011:
* Friedrichsfeld Service Center (Mannheim-Friedrichsfeld)
* Hammonds Barracks (formerly Loretto Kaserne) (Mannheim-Seckenheim)
* Stem Kaserne (Mannheim-Seckenheim)

All personnel of the U.S. Army military community left Mannheim by 2015, some of them moving to Wiesbaden. With the exception of four barracks, all other barracks formerly occupied by the U.S. military had been returned to the German state for conversion to civilian use in 2011.

==Main sights==
* Fernmeldeturm Mannheim – 217.8-metre-high telecommunication tower, landmark of Mannheim
* – post World War II synagogue
* Yavuz Sultan Selim Mosque
* Luisenpark – named one of the most beautiful parks in Europe with around 1.2 million visitors annually
* Mannheim Palace (&quot;Mannheimer Schloss&quot;) – the city castle, main building of the University of Mannheim and second-largest palace complex in Baroque style after Versailles
* Wasserturm – the town&#x27;s landmark water tower
* Jesuit Church
* SAP Arena – multifunctional indoor arena, home of Mannheim&#x27;s ice-hockey team &quot;Die Adler&quot; (&quot;The Eagles&quot;)
* Breite Strasse, Kunststrasse, and Kapuzinerplanken – Mannheim&#x27;s main shopping destinations
* International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg
*Kunsthalle Mannheim – museum of modern and contemporary art
*Technoseum – technology museum
*Multihalle – multi-purpose hall in Mannheim&#x27;s Herzogenriedpark, the world&#x27;s largest self-supporting wooden lattice-shell construction
* Wildpark and Waldvogelpark am Karlstern
* The city centre – designed in squares (Quadratestadt)
* Reißinsel – a natural area that an honorary citizen of Mannheim, Carl Reiß, bequeathed to the residents of Mannheim
*Reiß-Engelhorn-Museen – museum with four exhibition halls presenting exhibits in archaeology, world cultures, history of art and culture, photography, and history of theater and music
*Maimarkt – largest regional trade fair in Germany
* Marktplatz (Market square) – hosts a farmers&#x27; market every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. Fresh fruit, vegetables, and flowers are sold.
* (Mannheim Fair) – twice a year (spring &amp; autumn), a big fair that takes place on Neuer Messplatz-square

==Economy==
With a gross domestic product (GDP) of €20.921 billion, Mannheim ranks 17th on the list of German cities by GDP as of 2018.

In the 2019 edition of the , the independent city of Mannheim ranked 35nd out of 401 counties and independent cities in Germany, making it one of the places with &quot;high future opportunities&quot;.

Mannheim is among the most attractive business locations in Germany thanks to its competitive business environment and growth opportunities and is considered the economic centre of the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region, which is one of Germany&#x27;s most important business locations.

The New Economy Magazine elected Mannheim under the 20 cities that best represent the world of tomorrow, emphasizing Mannheim&#x27;s positive economic and innovative environment.

The unemployment rate of Mannheim is 7.2% as of 2020.

The successor to the Karl Benz automobile manufacturing companies begun in Mannheim, Daimler AG, has had a large presence in Mannheim. Today, diesel engines and buses are assembled there. The Swiss Hoffmann–La Roche diagnostic group (formerly known as Boehringer Mannheim) has its division headquarters in Mannheim. Additionally, the city also hosts large factories, headquarters and/or offices of ABB, IBM, Alstom, BASF (Ludwigshafen), Bilfinger Berger, Reckitt Benckiser, Unilever, Essity, Phoenix Group, Bombardier, Pepperl+Fuchs, Caterpillar, Fuchs Petrolub, John Deere, Siemens, SCA, Südzucker, and other companies. The University Hospital Mannheim provides health care to the inhabitants of Mannheim and the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region.

With €4.5 billion, Mannheim ranks 22nd on the list of cities by market value of its DAX, TecDAX and MDAX companies.

MVV Energie based in Mannheim is the largest municipal energy supplier in Germany.

== Media ==
In addition to the only local daily newspaper &#x27;, the Ludwigshafen newspaper &quot;Die Rheinpfalz&quot;, the Heidelberg newspaper &#x27; and the &quot;Bild Rhein-Neckar&quot; offer a local section for Mannheim. In addition, the weekly paper &quot;Wochenblatt Mannheim&quot; with its official gazette is published. The &quot;Kommunal-Info Mannheim&quot; is published fortnightly. Free district newspapers are distributed in almost all parts of the city.

==Transport==

===Road transport===
The Mannheim/Ludwigshafen area is surrounded by a ring of motorways connecting it to Frankfurt in the north, Karlsruhe in the south, Saarbrücken in the west and Nuremberg in the east.

===Railway transport===
Mannheim Hauptbahnhof (central station) is at the end of the Mannheim-Stuttgart high-speed rail line and is the most important railway junction in southwestern Germany. It is served by ICE high-speed train system with connections to Frankfurt am Main–Berlin, Karlsruhe–Basel, and Stuttgart–Munich. A new high speed line to Frankfurt also is planned to relieve the existing Mannheim–Frankfurt railway.

===River transport===

Mannheim Harbour is the second-largest river port in Germany and has a size of 1131 hectares. In 2016, 6.9 million tons of goods were handled on the water side. Around 500 companies, with about 20,000 employees, are in the Mannheim Harbour.

===Air transport===

Although Frankfurt International Airport is only to the north, at various times over the years there were daily passenger flights from Mannheim City Airport (IATA code MHG) to London, Dresden, Berlin, Hamburg, Munich, and Saarbrücken. Currently, commercial passenger flights serve Sylt.

===Local public transport===

Local public transport in Mannheim includes the RheinNeckar S-Bahn, eleven tram lines, and numerous bus lines operated by Rhein-Neckar-Verkehr (Rhine-Neckar transport) (RNV).

The RheinNeckar S-Bahn, established in 2003, connects most of the Rhine-Neckar area, including lines into the Palatinate, Odenwald and southern Hesse. All S-Bahn lines run through Mannheim Hauptbahnhof except S5. Other S-Bahn stations are Mannheim-Rangierbahnhof, Mannheim-Seckenheim, and Mannheim-Friedrichsfeld-Süd.

The integrated Mannheim/Ludwigshafen tramway network also extends to Heidelberg. It is operated by RNV, a company that is wholly owned by the three cities mentioned and a couple of municipalities in the Palatinate. RNV is the result of a merger on 1 October 2009 between the region&#x27;s five former municipal transportation companies. Interurban trams are operated by RNV on a triangular route between Mannheim, Heidelberg, and Weinheim that was originally established by the Upper Rhine Railway Company (&quot;Oberrheinische Eisenbahn&quot;, OEG), and the company also operates interurban trams between Bad Dürkheim, Ludwigshafen, and Mannheim. In the 1970s a proposal to build a U-Bahn out of the Mannheim and Ludwigshafen tramways was begun, but only small sections were built due to lack of funds. The only underground station in Mannheim is the Haltestelle Dalbergstraße. U-Bahn planning now has stopped. All public transport is offered at uniform prices set by the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Neckar (Rhine-Neckar Transport Union, VRN).

==Block Numbering==

The city centre uses an addressing system that is unique within Germany. Within a ring of avenues surrounding the city centre, there are squares that are labeled with letters and numbers instead of street names. The practice dates back centuries and is a result of the original use of the city centre as a fort, with the fort&#x27;s internal system being retained when the streets became public.

The codes are laid out in a progressive pattern. A street named Breite Straße goes through the middle of the blocks from south to north, with streets A-K on the west side of the street and L-U on the east. Intersecting streets divide these lettered streets into blocks from 1 to at most 7 based on distance from Breite Straße. Thus, C3 is between C2 and C4 in one direction and B3 and D3 in the other. Further, a number is given to each building: C3, 17 is block C3, building 17. House numbers begin on the south corner nearest Breite Straße and go counterclockwise for A-K and clockwise for L-U.

Those not used to the system will often become lost. It also causes major issues with most mapping software, as the databases that they use are based on the standard street-number system, and so the software cannot accommodate a completely different system for a small area. A variety of fixes have been tried, none with a high level of success. In particular, the systems have issues because an address on a block can be on any of up to four roads and so attempts to fix the issue by giving the roads false names within the database have often failed to give accurate addressing, but such can still be seen on some platforms like Google Maps. Finding an address in the area thus generally requires resorting to asking directions or using one of the many posted public maps.

==Twin towns – sister cities==
Mannheim is twinned with:

*Swansea, Wales, United Kingdom (1957)
*Toulon, France (1959)
*Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf (Berlin), Germany (1961)
*Windsor, Canada (1980)
*Riesa, Germany (1988)
*Chișinău, Moldova (1989)
*Bydgoszcz, Poland (1991)
*Klaipėda, Lithuania (2002)
*Zhenjiang, China (2004)
*Haifa, Israel (2009)
*Qingdao, China (2016)
*Chernivtsi, Ukraine (2022)
==Notable people==
*Josepha von Heydeck (1748–1771), mistress of Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria
*Johann Baptist Cramer (1771–1858), English pianist and composer
*Friedrich Engelhorn (1821–1902), industrialist, founder of BASF
*Marcus Otterbourg (1827–1893), American diplomat, lawyer, and judge
*Richard von Krafft-Ebing (1840–1902), Austro-German psychiatrist
* Carl Benz (1844–1929), engine designer and automotive engineer. He built the first practical motorcar.
*Henry Morgenthau Sr. (1856–1946), American politician and real estate investor
*Robert Kahn (1865–1951), composer and pianist
*Otto Hermann Kahn (1867–1934), investment banker, collector and philanthropist
*Emmy Wehlen (1887–1977), musical comedy actress and silent screen star 
*Sepp Herberger (1897–1977), football player and manager
*Wilhelm Fuchs (1898–1947), Nazi SS officer and Holocaust perpetrator executed for war crimes
*Hedwig Hillengaß (1902–1970), operatic soprano
*Albert Speer (1905–1981), Nazi architect, Minister for Armaments and Munitions during World War II
*Julius Hatry (1906–2000), aircraft designer and builder. He created the world&#x27;s first purpose-built rocket plane.
*Hans Filbinger (1913–2007), politician 
*Samuel Hans Adler (born 1928), German-American composer, conductor and professor
*Claus Leininger (1931–2005), theatre director and manager 
*Wolf Wolfensberger (1934–2011), German-American psychologist
*Roger Fritz (1936–2021), actor
*Rudi Altig (1937–2016), cyclist
*Christiane Schmidtmer (1939–2003), actress
*Fred Breinersdorfer (born 1946), writer
*Karl W Schweizer (born 1946), historian and author
*Kurt Fleckenstein (born 1949), artist/sculptor
*Peter Dani (1956–2002), American footballer
*Norbert Schwefel (1960–2015), musician
*Juergen Adams (born 1961), ice hockey player
*Uwe Rahn (born 1962), footballer
*Christine Lambrecht (born 1965), politician (SPD)
*Franz Jung (born 1966), Roman Catholic bishop
*Steffi Graf (born 1969), tennis player
*Xavier Naidoo (born 1971), pop singer 
*Christian Wörns (born 1972), footballer
*Lexi Alexander (born 1974), director
*Bülent Ceylan (born 1976), German-Turkish comedian
*Jochen Hecht (born 1977), ice hockey player
*Uwe Gensheimer (born 1989), handball player
*Giulia Enders (born 1990), writer and medical researcher
*Pascal Groß (born 1991), footballer
*Hakan Çalhanoğlu (born 1994), Turkish footballer
*Paulina Krumbiegel (born 2000), footballer
==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
==Further reading==

* Wiederkehr, Gustav: Mannheim in Sage und Geschichte, H. Haas&#x27;schen Buchdruckerei, 1907, (Festgabe zur Feier des dreihundertjährigen Bestehens der Stadt).
* David, Manfred: Mannheimer Stadtkunde. Edition Quadrat, Mannheim 1982, .
* Staatl. Archivverwaltung Baden-Württemberg in Verbindung mit d. Städten u. d. Landkreisen Heidelberg u. Mannheim (Hrsg.): Die Stadt- und die Landkreise Heidelberg und Mannheim: Amtliche Kreisbeschreibung. Band 1: Allgemeiner Teil. Karlsruhe 1966, DNB 458203858. Band 3: Die Stadt Mannheim und die Gemeinden des Landkreises Mannheim. Karlsruhe 1970, DNB 366145509.
* Landesarchivdirektion Baden-Württemberg (Hrsg.): Das Land Baden-Württemberg – Amtliche Beschreibung nach Kreisen und Gemeinden. Band V.
* Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart 1976, .
* Huth, Hans: Die Kunstdenkmäler des Stadtkreises Mannheim. München 1982, .
* Oesterreich, Carmen And Volker (Hrsg.): Mannheim, wo es am schönsten ist – 55 Lieblingsplätze. Berlin 2008, .
* Schenk, Andreas: Mannheim und seine Bauten 1907–2007. Hrsg. v. Stadtarchiv Mannheim und Mannheimer Architektur- und Bauarchiv e. V. 5 Bde. Edition Quadrat, Mannheim 2000–2007, .
* Walz, Guido (Red.): Der Brockhaus Mannheim. 400 Jahre Quadratestadt – Das Lexikon. Bibliographisches Institut &amp; F. A. Brockhaus, Mannheim 2006, .
* Naturführer Mannheim. Entdeckungen im Quadrat. Hrsg. von der Stadt Mannheim und der Bezirksstelle für Naturschutz und Landschaftspflege Karlsruhe. Verlag Regionalkultur, Ubstadt-Weiher 2000, .
* Ellrich, Hartmut: Mannheim. Sutton, Erfurt 2007, .
* Nieß, Ulrich and Caroli, Michael (Hrsg.): Geschichte der Stadt Mannheim. Verlag Regionalkultur, Ubstadt-Weiher, Band 1: 2007, . Band 2: 2007, . Band 3: 2009, .
* Mannheimer Altertumsverein/Reiss-Engelhorn-Museen: Mannheim vor der Stadtgründung – Teile I und II. Hrsg. Hansjörg Probst, 4 Bände. Mannheim 2007/08, .
* Vetter, Roland &quot;Kein Stein soll auf dem andern bleiben&quot; Mannheims Untergang während des Pfälzischen Erbfolgekrieges im Spiegel französischer Kriegsberichte .

==External links==

*Official website
*Official tourism site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="0" end="8" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014" start="12" end="27" title="Palatine German language" label="Palatine German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="50" end="77" title="Mannheim" label="University City of Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860674" start="89" end="108" title="List of cities in Baden-Württemberg by population" label="second-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="112" end="129" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="136" end="145" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="151" end="156" title="States of Germany" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="170" end="177" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="185" end="202" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="21st-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="272" end="292" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q559125" start="346" end="358" title="Rhine-Neckar" label="Rhine-Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132300" start="375" end="410" title="Metropolitan regions in Germany" label="seventh-largest metropolitan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q663546" start="495" end="506" title="Upper Rhine" label="Upper Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="515" end="521" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22569" start="529" end="537" title="Kurpfalz (region)" label="Kurpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="539" end="559" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electoral Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="624" end="641" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Upper Rhine Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q707004" start="686" end="701" title="Palatine Forest" label="Palatine Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8359" start="710" end="721" title="Oden Forest" label="Oden Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="797" end="818" title="Ludwigshafen am Rhein" label="Ludwigshafen am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200" start="826" end="846" title="Rhineland-Palatinate" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="883" end="888" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="890" end="897" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q574723" start="1341" end="1356" title="Mannheim Palace" label="Mannheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="1438" end="1452" title="Prince-elector" label="Prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="1501" end="1523" title="University of Mannheim" label="University of Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="1564" end="1587" title="business administration" label="business administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1624" end="1631" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890703" start="1654" end="1673" title="Mannheim May Market" label="Mannheim May Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890718" start="1777" end="1797" title="Mannheim Water Tower" label="Mannheim Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="1862" end="1873" title="Art Nouveau" label="art nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464327" start="1885" end="1900" title="Friedrichsplatz" label="Friedrichsplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="1965" end="1975" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="1981" end="1988" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="1998" end="2005" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q153298" start="2133" end="2159" title="Bertha Benz Memorial Route" label="Bertha Benz Memorial Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="2363" end="2378" title="university town" label="university town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="2419" end="2428" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="2457" end="2460" title="Intercity Express" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q706994" start="2478" end="2499" title="Mannheim Hauptbahnhof" label="Mannheim Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890675" start="2554" end="2577" title="Mannheim Rangierbahnhof" label="Mannheim Rangierbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567807" start="2624" end="2640" title="Mannheim Harbour" label="Mannheim Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="2742" end="2747" title="Roche" label="Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="2749" end="2752" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="2754" end="2757" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="2759" end="2766" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="2768" end="2776" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q125432" start="2803" end="2812" title="SAP Arena" label="SAP Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q358191" start="2859" end="2873" title="Adler Mannheim" label="Adler Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q707826" start="2911" end="2929" title="Rhein-Neckar Löwen" label="Rhein-Neckar Löwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2977" end="2983" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139352" start="2984" end="3007" title="Creative Cities Network" label="Creative Cities Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q56275700" start="3037" end="3057" title="UNESCO City of Music" label="UNESCO City of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="3103" end="3114" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3126" end="3137" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network#Sufficiency" label="Sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="3158" end="3205" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="3228" end="3238" title="smart city" label="smart city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="3256" end="3271" title="electrical grid" label="electrical grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q271870" start="3292" end="3316" title="power-line communication" label="power-line communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q538377" start="3658" end="3678" title="Lorsch codex" label="Codex Laureshamensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157550" start="3690" end="3702" title="Lorsch Abbey" label="Lorsch Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974881" start="3780" end="3793" title="Germanic name" label="Germanic name"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746" start="3941" end="3971" title="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="4251" end="4273" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155534" start="4303" end="4314" title="Johan Tzerclaes, Count of Tilly" label="Johan Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="4374" end="4385" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="4405" end="4425" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q296555" start="4477" end="4504" title="Philippe I, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe I, Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="4527" end="4536" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="4671" end="4699" title="Electorate of the Palatinate" label="Electorate of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q62594" start="4751" end="4784" title="Karl III Philip, Elector Palatine" label="Karl III Philip, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574723" start="4807" end="4822" title="Mannheim Palace" label="Mannheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q538329" start="4831" end="4844" title="Jesuit Church (Mannheim)" label="Jesuit Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061496" start="4915" end="4927" title="Norwich Duff" label="Norwich Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q275647" start="5014" end="5029" title="Mannheim School" label="Mannheim School"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="5039" end="5064" title="European classical music" label="classical music composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q434891" start="5173" end="5183" title="Carlo Grua" label="Carlo Grua"/>
<link wikidata="Q44961" start="5245" end="5261" title="Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria" label="Charles Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q157022" start="5273" end="5291" title="Elector of Bavaria" label="Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="5305" end="5311" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q186320" start="5399" end="5419" title="Grand Duchy of Baden" label="Grand Duchy of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q57242" start="5431" end="5450" title="August von Kotzebue" label="August von Kotzebue"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="5486" end="5511" title="Year Without a Summer" label="climate crisis of 1816–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q77122" start="5578" end="5588" title="Karl Drais" label="Karl Drais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567807" start="5676" end="5689" title="Mannheim Harbour" label="Rhine Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q564867" start="5726" end="5745" title="Mannheim–Karlsruhe–Basel railway" label="first Baden railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="5905" end="5929" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the German states" label="March Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q86159" start="6005" end="6024" title="Friedrich Engelhorn" label="Friedrich Engelhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="6115" end="6119" title="BASF" label="BASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="6233" end="6246" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="6436" end="6445" title="Karl Benz" label="Karl Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q573294" start="6499" end="6507" title="Mühlburg" label="Mühlburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521715" start="6579" end="6599" title="List of Schütte-Lanz airships" label="Schütte-Lanz company"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="6712" end="6720" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6734" end="6745" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7563" end="7578" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q98354" start="7730" end="7751" title="Prosper L&amp;#x27;Orange" label="Prosper L&amp;#x27;Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="7753" end="7768" title="Benz &amp;amp; Cie." label="Benz &amp;amp; Cie."/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8138" end="8150" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q821251" start="8152" end="8173" title="Bombing of Mannheim in World War II" label="air raids on Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="8248" end="8262" title="strategic bombing" label="aerial bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8270" end="8285" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="8300" end="8329" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788547" start="8408" end="8420" title="area bombing" label="area bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="8514" end="8538" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="8585" end="8602" title="strategic bombing" label="strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8644" end="8659" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031422" start="8953" end="8980" title="44th Infantry Division (United States)" label="U.S. 44th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q574723" start="9317" end="9332" title="Mannheim Palace" label="Mannheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890718" start="9341" end="9352" title="Mannheim Water Tower" label="water tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q290852" start="9410" end="9426" title="National Theatre Mannheim" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="9521" end="9539" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698722" start="9742" end="9797" title="Heidelberg University Faculty of Medicine in Mannheim" label="Heidelberg University for Clinical Medicine in Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="9812" end="9834" title="University of Mannheim" label="University of Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q643918" start="9878" end="9895" title="Bundesgartenschau" label="Bundesgartenschau"/>
<link wikidata="Q202120" start="9954" end="9960" title="Luisenpark" label="Luisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244227" start="10055" end="10079" title="Fernmeldeturm Mannheim" label="telecommunications tower"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10122" end="10144" title=":de:Kurt-Schumacher-Brücke (Mannheim)" label="Kurt Schumacher Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q376771" start="10252" end="10259" title="Aerobus" label="Aerobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890703" start="10460" end="10470" title="Mannheim May Market" label="May Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q882079" start="10498" end="10534" title="Technoseum" label="State Museum for Technology and Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q656948" start="10536" end="10553" title="Carl-Benz-Stadion" label="Carl-Benz stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746" start="11181" end="11211" title="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick IV, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125432" start="11386" end="11395" title="SAP Arena" label="SAP Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276773" start="11815" end="11843" title="University Hospital Mannheim" label="University Hospital Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="12055" end="12066" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Rhine shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="12773" end="12802" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12837" end="12840" title="Köppen climate classification#Group C: Temperate/mesothermal climates" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="12874" end="12889" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="12915" end="12940" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="13103" end="13120" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="13144" end="13149" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="13154" end="13160" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910" start="13532" end="13544" title="Ludwigshafen" label="Ludwigshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="13549" end="13559" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="13724" end="13734" title="University of Mannheim" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14285" end="14299" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="14307" end="14317" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="14335" end="14339" title="Irreligion" label="none"/>
<link wikidata="Q290852" start="14380" end="14405" title="National Theatre Mannheim" label="National Theatre Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="14533" end="14551" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q186564" start="14849" end="14861" title="zeitraumexit" label="zeitraumexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170134" start="14939" end="14958" title="SV Waldhof Mannheim" label="SV Waldhof Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q154069" start="15004" end="15011" title="3. Liga" label="3. Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="15054" end="15064" title="Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q666179" start="15070" end="15082" title="VfR Mannheim" label="VfR Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15098" end="15125" title="History of German football#Postwar football" label="German championship in 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q993765" start="15157" end="15175" title="Verbandsliga Baden" label="Verbandsliga Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q358191" start="15182" end="15196" title="Adler Mannheim" label="Adler Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="15255" end="15265" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q169519" start="15299" end="15322" title="Deutsche Eishockey Liga" label="Deutsche Eishockey Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q896155" start="15481" end="15491" title="Eishockey-Bundesliga" label="Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q212484" start="15519" end="15536" title="Mannheim Tornados" label="Mannheim Tornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q520163" start="15647" end="15666" title="Bundesliga (baseball)" label="Baseball Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="15747" end="15764" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147493" start="15770" end="15790" title="Rhein-Neckar Bandits" label="Rhein-Neckar Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q707826" start="15936" end="15954" title="Rhein-Neckar Löwen" label="Rhein-Neckar Löwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="15961" end="15969" title="Team Handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q175762" start="16003" end="16025" title="Bundesliga (handball)" label="German Handball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="16032" end="16035" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q66581" start="16114" end="16126" title="Dennis Siver" label="Dennis Siver"/>
<link wikidata="Q252397" start="16178" end="16213" title="European Show Jumping Championships" label="European Show Jumping Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608428" start="16231" end="16273" title="2007 FEI European Jumping Championship" label="FEI European Jumping Championships in 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q18228296" start="16325" end="16341" title="Hobby Horse Polo" label="Hobby Horse Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19295576" start="16453" end="16478" title="Maimarkt-Turnier Mannheim" label="Maimarkt-Turnier Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="16597" end="16603" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q77122" start="16798" end="16808" title="Karl Drais" label="Karl Drais"/>
<link wikidata="Q209658" start="16843" end="16851" title="draisine" label="draisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="16868" end="16877" title="Karl Benz" label="Karl Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q326248" start="16996" end="17017" title="Benz Patent Motorwagen" label="three-wheeled vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="17047" end="17062" title="gasoline" label="petrol/gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="17070" end="17076" title="internal combustion engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="17188" end="17208" title="automobile" label="automobile/motor car"/>
<link wikidata="Q77117" start="17268" end="17279" title="Bertha Benz" label="Bertha Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739884" start="17313" end="17322" title="road trip" label="road trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046" start="17354" end="17363" title="Pforzheim" label="Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="17620" end="17635" title="Benz &amp;amp; Cie." label="Benz &amp;amp; Cie."/>
<link wikidata="Q74447" start="17671" end="17683" title="Julius Hatry" label="Julius Hatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q644903" start="17766" end="17778" title="Gastarbeiter" label="guest worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756296" start="17799" end="17811" title="Spaghettieis" label="Spaghettieis"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="17862" end="17884" title="University of Mannheim" label="University of Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q574723" start="18131" end="18146" title="Mannheim Palace" label="Mannheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q157142" start="18292" end="18300" title="Die Zeit" label="Die Zeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="18320" end="18327" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="18537" end="18558" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276773" start="18567" end="18595" title="University Hospital Mannheim" label="University Hospital Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q321369" start="18602" end="18621" title="Hochschule Mannheim" label="Hochschule Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262605" start="18639" end="18689" title="Baden-Württemberg Cooperative State University" label="Duale Hochschule of the State of Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="19230" end="19256" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076493" start="19344" end="19354" title="Peter Kurz" label="Peter Kurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="19356" end="19359" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="19431" end="19434" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19979" end="19990" title=":de:Josef Braun" label="Josef Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="20184" end="20210" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="20300" end="20323" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="20412" end="20434" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="20555" end="20565" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="20679" end="20690" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="20805" end="20816" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="20928" end="20939" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="21723" end="21728" title="NSDAP" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363362" start="22228" end="22245" title="cumulative voting" label="cumulative voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318013" start="22250" end="22264" title="Panachage" label="vote splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="22634" end="22660" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="22728" end="22750" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="22819" end="22842" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="22907" end="22930" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="23075" end="23096" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="23160" end="23168" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q492561" start="23238" end="23261" title="Human Environment Animal Protection Party" label="Animal Protection Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="23332" end="23342" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q88395996" start="23551" end="23581" title="Klimaliste" label="Climate List Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181197" start="23997" end="24013" title="U.S. Army Europe" label="U.S. Army Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="24073" end="24081" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q872084" start="24314" end="24335" title="Coleman Army Airfield" label="Coleman Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q464570" start="24382" end="24405" title="American Forces Network" label="American Forces Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889472" start="24444" end="24490" title="United States Army Corrections Facility-Europe" label="United States Army Corrections Facility-Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="24656" end="24665" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644184" start="24742" end="24777" title="7th Signal Brigade (United States)" label="U.S. Army&amp;#x27;s 7th Signal Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689872" start="24867" end="24882" title="Taylor Barracks" label="Taylor Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633908" start="24939" end="24974" title="2nd Signal Brigade (United States)" label="U.S. Army&amp;#x27;s 2nd Signal Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q829732" start="25211" end="25234" title="ACE Mobile Force (Land)" label="ACE Mobile Force (Land)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888676" start="25249" end="25274" title="Benjamin Franklin Village" label="Benjamin Franklin Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="25534" end="25544" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244227" start="26106" end="26128" title="Fernmeldeturm Mannheim" label="Fernmeldeturm Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q573563" start="26228" end="26253" title="Yavuz Sultan Selim Mosque" label="Yavuz Sultan Selim Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q202120" start="26256" end="26266" title="Luisenpark" label="Luisenpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q574723" start="26361" end="26376" title="Mannheim Palace" label="Mannheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="26450" end="26472" title="University of Mannheim" label="University of Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="26510" end="26517" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="26530" end="26540" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q538329" start="26595" end="26608" title="Jesuit Church (Mannheim)" label="Jesuit Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q125432" start="26611" end="26620" title="SAP Arena" label="SAP Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="26646" end="26651" title="arena" label="arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q358191" start="26693" end="26714" title="Adler Mannheim" label="&amp;quot;Die Adler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22546" start="26776" end="26792" title="Kapuzinerplanken" label="Kapuzinerplanken"/>
<link wikidata="Q322144" start="26840" end="26886" title="International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg" label="International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q468458" start="26888" end="26907" title="Kunsthalle Mannheim" label="Kunsthalle Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q882079" start="26949" end="26959" title="Technoseum" label="Technoseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q468496" start="27342" end="27363" title="Reiss Engelhorn Museum" label="Reiß-Engelhorn-Museen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890703" start="27527" end="27535" title="Mannheim May Market" label="Maimarkt"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="27579" end="27589" title="Marktplatz" label="Marktplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="27853" end="27875" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q51135696" start="27929" end="27957" title="list of German cities by GDP" label="list of German cities by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q559125" start="28358" end="28390" title="Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region" label="Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="28643" end="28660" title="Unemployment" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="28779" end="28789" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q212646" start="28892" end="28909" title="Hoffmann–La Roche" label="Hoffmann–La Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q52825" start="29092" end="29095" title="ABB" label="ABB"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="29097" end="29100" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="29102" end="29108" title="Alstom" label="Alstom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="29110" end="29129" title="BASF" label="BASF (Ludwigshafen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q284672" start="29131" end="29147" title="Bilfinger Berger" label="Bilfinger Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190881" start="29149" end="29166" title="Reckitt Benckiser" label="Reckitt Benckiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="29168" end="29176" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q30938280" start="29178" end="29184" title="Essity" label="Essity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186887" start="29186" end="29199" title="Phoenix Group" label="Phoenix Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q333498" start="29201" end="29211" title="Bombardier Inc" label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q871771" start="29213" end="29226" title="Pepperl+Fuchs" label="Pepperl+Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q459965" start="29228" end="29239" title="Caterpillar Inc" label="Caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q878404" start="29241" end="29255" title="Fuchs Petrolub" label="Fuchs Petrolub"/>
<link wikidata="Q496302" start="29257" end="29267" title="John Deere" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="29269" end="29276" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q52601" start="29278" end="29281" title="Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget" label="SCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q474565" start="29283" end="29292" title="Südzucker" label="Südzucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276773" start="29319" end="29347" title="University Hospital Mannheim" label="University Hospital Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q559125" start="29408" end="29440" title="Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region" label="Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q155718" start="29527" end="29530" title="DAX" label="DAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q378967" start="29532" end="29538" title="TecDAX" label="TecDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q595622" start="29543" end="29547" title="MDAX" label="MDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882061" start="29560" end="29571" title="MVV Energie" label="MVV Energie"/>
<link wikidata="Q884463" start="29743" end="29757" title="Die Rheinpfalz" label="Die Rheinpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156203" start="29811" end="29815" title="Bild" label="Bild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29984" end="30006" title="Kommunal-Info Mannheim" label="Kommunal-Info Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="30235" end="30244" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="30259" end="30268" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="30283" end="30294" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="30311" end="30320" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706994" start="30359" end="30380" title="Mannheim Hauptbahnhof" label="Mannheim Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q551240" start="30420" end="30459" title="Mannheim-Stuttgart high-speed rail line" label="Mannheim-Stuttgart high-speed rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="30544" end="30547" title="InterCityExpress" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="30592" end="30609" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="30610" end="30616" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="30618" end="30627" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="30628" end="30633" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="30639" end="30648" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="30649" end="30655" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q466304" start="30663" end="30691" title="Frankfurt–Mannheim high-speed railway" label="high speed line to Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q519477" start="30732" end="30758" title="Mannheim–Frankfurt railway" label="Mannheim–Frankfurt railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567807" start="30784" end="30800" title="Mannheim Harbour" label="Mannheim Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="30823" end="30833" title="river port" label="river port"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="30868" end="30876" title="hectares" label="hectares"/>
<link wikidata="Q46033" start="31056" end="31087" title="Frankfurt International Airport" label="Frankfurt International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q315060" start="31182" end="31203" title="Mannheim City Airport" label="Mannheim City Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19742991" start="31205" end="31214" title="IATA code" label="IATA code"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="31223" end="31229" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="31231" end="31238" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="31240" end="31246" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="31248" end="31255" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="31257" end="31263" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724" start="31269" end="31280" title="Saarbrücken" label="Saarbrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q526319" start="31413" end="31431" title="RheinNeckar S-Bahn" label="RheinNeckar S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="31440" end="31444" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650863" start="31487" end="31507" title="Rhein-Neckar-Verkehr" label="Rhein-Neckar-Verkehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q526319" start="31545" end="31563" title="RheinNeckar S-Bahn" label="RheinNeckar S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="31651" end="31661" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8359" start="31663" end="31671" title="Odenwald" label="Odenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="31685" end="31690" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689624" start="31875" end="31912" title="Trams in Mannheim/Ludwigshafen" label="Mannheim/Ludwigshafen tramway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="32274" end="32284" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050" start="32290" end="32298" title="Weinheim" label="Weinheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010724" start="32338" end="32365" title="Upper Rhine Railway Company" label="Upper Rhine Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q22901" start="32466" end="32478" title="Bad Dürkheim" label="Bad Dürkheim"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32543" end="32549" title="Rapid transit in Germany#U-Bahn" label="U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553051" start="32833" end="32861" title="Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Neckar" label="Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="34547" end="34558" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="34735" end="34742" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="34751" end="34758" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="34790" end="34796" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158095" start="34813" end="34848" title="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf" label="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="34866" end="34873" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8775" start="34890" end="34895" title="Riesa" label="Riesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="34913" end="34921" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="34939" end="34948" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q776965" start="34965" end="34973" title="Klaipėda" label="Klaipėda"/>
<link wikidata="Q57958" start="34993" end="35002" title="Zhenjiang" label="Zhenjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="35018" end="35023" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170322" start="35040" end="35047" title="Qingdao" label="Qingdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q157725" start="35063" end="35073" title="Chernivtsi" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741671" start="35110" end="35129" title="Josepha von Heydeck" label="Josepha von Heydeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="35173" end="35191" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="35193" end="35214" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q86159" start="35258" end="35277" title="Friedrich Engelhorn" label="Friedrich Engelhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="35317" end="35321" title="BASF" label="BASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q118903182" start="35323" end="35340" title="Marcus Otterbourg" label="Marcus Otterbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q77082" start="35392" end="35416" title="Richard von Krafft-Ebing" label="Richard von Krafft-Ebing"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="35459" end="35468" title="Carl Benz" label="Carl Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47946" start="35563" end="35583" title="Henry Morgenthau Sr." label="Henry Morgenthau Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q214129" start="35643" end="35654" title="Robert Kahn (composer)" label="Robert Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q215006" start="35690" end="35707" title="Otto Hermann Kahn" label="Otto Hermann Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373625" start="35770" end="35781" title="Emmy Wehlen" label="Emmy Wehlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157820" start="35843" end="35857" title="Sepp Herberger" label="Sepp Herberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250" start="35900" end="35913" title="Wilhelm Fuchs" label="Wilhelm Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481885" start="35994" end="36010" title="Hedwig Hillengaß" label="Hedwig Hillengaß"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="36042" end="36054" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q74447" start="36142" end="36154" title="Julius Hatry" label="Julius Hatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q690874" start="36262" end="36276" title="Hans Filbinger" label="Hans Filbinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079069" start="36303" end="36320" title="Samuel Adler (composer)" label="Samuel Hans Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437678" start="36385" end="36400" title="Claus Leininger" label="Claus Leininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569669" start="36445" end="36463" title="Wolf Wolfensberger" label="Wolf Wolfensberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q97407" start="36507" end="36518" title="Roger Fritz" label="Roger Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q62204" start="36539" end="36549" title="Rudi Altig" label="Rudi Altig"/>
<link wikidata="Q107630" start="36572" end="36593" title="Christiane Schmidtmer" label="Christiane Schmidtmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113909" start="36616" end="36635" title="Fred Breinersdorfer" label="Fred Breinersdorfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36657" end="36673" title="Karl W Schweizer" label="Karl W Schweizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q870748" start="36709" end="36726" title="Kurt Fleckenstein" label="Kurt Fleckenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173534" start="36757" end="36767" title="Peter Dani" label="Peter Dani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255373" start="36802" end="36818" title="Schwefel" label="Norbert Schwefel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716956" start="36842" end="36855" title="Juergen Adams" label="Juergen Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q47470" start="36888" end="36896" title="Uwe Rahn" label="Uwe Rahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083648" start="36922" end="36941" title="Christine Lambrecht" label="Christine Lambrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q15444755" start="36973" end="36983" title="Franz Jung (bishop)" label="Franz Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q11662" start="37020" end="37031" title="Steffi Graf" label="Steffi Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q178391" start="37060" end="37073" title="Xavier Naidoo" label="Xavier Naidoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q167241" start="37100" end="37115" title="Christian Wörns" label="Christian Wörns"/>
<link wikidata="Q85487" start="37141" end="37155" title="Lexi Alexander" label="Lexi Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q77760" start="37179" end="37192" title="Bülent Ceylan" label="Bülent Ceylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68755" start="37231" end="37243" title="Jochen Hecht" label="Jochen Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q544486" start="37276" end="37290" title="Uwe Gensheimer" label="Uwe Gensheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937497" start="37321" end="37334" title="Giulia Enders" label="Giulia Enders"/>
<link wikidata="Q509489" start="37379" end="37390" title="Pascal Groß" label="Pascal Groß"/>
<link wikidata="Q763465" start="37416" end="37432" title="Hakan Çalhanoğlu" label="Hakan Çalhanoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q97745353" start="37466" end="37484" title="Paulina Krumbiegel" label="Paulina Krumbiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778642" start="38326" end="38343" title="Kohlhammer Verlag" label="Kohlhammer Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q468496" start="39322" end="39344" title="Reiss-Engelhorn-Museen" label="Reiss-Engelhorn-Museen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99628" wikidata="Q353826" url="?curid=99628" title="Tom Vilsack">
<text>Thomas James Vilsack (; born December 13, 1950) is an American politician. He served as the 30th and 32nd United States secretary of agriculture from 2009 to 2017, during the Obama administration, and again from 2021 to 2025 during the Biden administration. A member of the Democratic Party, he served as the 40th governor of Iowa from 1999 to 2007.

On November 30, 2006, he formally launched his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 2008 election, but ended his bid on February 23, 2007. President-elect Barack Obama announced Vilsack&#x27;s selection to be Secretary of Agriculture on December 17, 2008. His nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous consent on January 20, 2009. Until his January 13, 2017 resignation one week prior to the end of Obama&#x27;s second term as president, he had been the only member of the U.S. Cabinet who had served since the day Obama originally took office.

On July 19, 2016, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that Vilsack was on Hillary Clinton&#x27;s two-person shortlist to be her running mate for that year&#x27;s presidential election. U.S. Senator Tim Kaine from Virginia was ultimately selected. On December 10, 2020, President-elect Joe Biden announced his intention to nominate Vilsack to once again serve as secretary of agriculture in the incoming Biden administration. Vilsack was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on February 23, 2021, by a vote of 92–7. Vilsack is the second longest serving Secretary of Agriculture, only surpassed by fellow Iowan James &quot;Tama Jim&quot; Wilson.

==Early life and education==
Vilsack was born on December 13, 1950, in a Roman Catholic orphanage in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where his 23-year-old birth mother (a secretary) had lived since September 1950 under the pseudonym of &quot;Gloria&quot;; he was baptized as &quot;Kenneth&quot;. He was adopted in 1951 by Bud, a real-estate agent and insurance salesman, and Dolly Vilsack. They named him Thomas James.

Vilsack attended Shady Side Academy, a preparatory high school in Pittsburgh. He received a bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1972 from Hamilton College. While at Hamilton, he joined the Delta Upsilon fraternity. He received a Juris Doctor from Albany Law School in 1975.

==Mayor of Mount Pleasant &amp; Iowa Senate==
Vilsack moved to Mount Pleasant, Iowa after marriage. Vilsack raised funds to rebuild an athletic facility for young people; in a 2016 interview, he describes himself &quot;as the Jerry Lewis of Mount Pleasant for a couple days&quot; when he hosted a pledge drive on the local radio station to raise the funds. This led him to involvement in the local Chamber of Commerce and United Way. He and his wife volunteered in the failed 1988 presidential campaign of then senator Joe Biden.

After the mayor of Mount Pleasant was gunned down in December 1986, Vilsack led a fundraising drive to build a memorial fountain. The deceased mayor&#x27;s father asked Vilsack to run for mayor of Mount Pleasant; he was elected and began serving in 1987. Vilsack was elected to the Iowa Senate in 1992. Following his election, he worked on legislation requiring companies who received state tax incentives to provide better pay and benefits. He helped pass a law for workers to receive health coverage when changing jobs and helped redesign Iowa&#x27;s Workforce Development Department. He also wrote a bill to have the State of Iowa assume a 50% share of local county mental health costs.

==Governor of Iowa, 1999-2007==
In 1998, Terry Branstad chose not to seek re-election after 16 years as governor. The Iowa Republican Party nominated Jim Ross Lightfoot, a former U.S. Representative. Vilsack defeated former Iowa Supreme Court Justice Mark McCormick in the Democratic primary and chose Sally Pederson as his running mate. Lightfoot was the odds-on favorite to succeed Branstad and polls consistently showed him in the lead. However, Vilsack narrowly won the general election by 55,444 votes and became the first Democrat to serve as governor of Iowa in thirty years and only the fifth Democrat to hold the office in the 20th century.

During the 2000 contest for the Democratic presidential nomination between Vice President Al Gore and former U.S. Senator Bill Bradley, he remained neutral.

In 2002 he won his second term in office by defeating Republican challenger attorney Doug Gross by 83,837 votes.
In the first year of his second term, Vilsack used a line-item veto, later ruled unconstitutional by the Iowa Supreme Court, to create the Grow Iowa Values Fund, a $503million appropriation designed to boost the Iowa economy by offering grants to corporations and initiatives pledged to create higher-income jobs. He vetoed portions of the bill that would have cut income taxes and eased business regulations. After a special session of the Iowa General Assembly on September 7, 2004, $100million in state money was set aside to honor previously made commitments. The Grow Iowa Values Fund was reinstated at the end of the 2005 session: under the current law, $50million per year will be set aside over the next ten years.

For most of Vilsack&#x27;s tenure as governor, Republicans held effective majorities in the Iowa General Assembly. Following the November 2, 2004, elections, the fifty-member Senate was evenly split between Democrats and Republicans, and Republicans held a 51–49 majority in the House of Representatives.

In July 2005, Vilsack signed an executive order allowing all felons who had served their sentences to vote. Approximately 115,000 felons regained their voting rights. He said: &quot;When you&#x27;ve paid your debt to society, you need to be reconnected and re-engaged to society.&quot; Previously, convicted felons were disenfranchised, but could petition the governor to initiate a process, normally requiring six months, to restore their right to vote.

During the 2005 legislative session, Vilsack signed legislation designed to reduce methamphetamine use. It imposed greater restrictions on products containing the active ingredient pseudoephedrine, requiring them to be sold behind pharmacy counters rather than via open-access. It required purchasers to show identification and sign a logbook. It took effect on May 21, 2005.

Following the U.S. Supreme Court decision in &quot;Kelo v. City of New London&quot; in June 2005, Vilsack vetoed a bill to restrict Iowa&#x27;s use of eminent domain, citing its potential for negative impact on job creation. He said: &quot;You have an interesting balance between job growth, which everybody supports, and restricting the power of government, which a lot of people support.&quot; His veto was overridden by the legislature.

Vilsack is a former member of the National Governors Association Executive Committee. He was chair of the Democratic Governors Association in 2004. He was also chair of the Governors Biotechnology Partnership, the Governors Ethanol Coalition, and the Midwest Governors Conference, and has also been chair and vice-chair of the National Governors Association&#x27;s committee on Natural Resources, where he worked to develop the NGA&#x27;s farm and energy policies.

Vilsack was thought to be high on the list of potential running mates for Kerry in the 2004 presidential election. In 2005, Vilsack established Heartland PAC, a political action committee aimed at electing Democratic governors. In the first report, he raised over half a million dollars. Vilsack left office in 2007; he did not seek a third term and was succeeded by Secretary of State and fellow Democrat Chet Culver.

==2008 U.S. presidential campaign==

On November 30, 2006, Tom Vilsack became the second Democrat (after Mike Gravel) to officially announce intentions to run for the presidency in the 2008 election. In his announcement speech, he said &quot;America&#x27;s a great country, and now I have the opportunity to begin the process, the legal process of filing papers to run for President of the United States.&quot; Vilsack dropped out of the race on February 23, 2007, citing monetary constraints.
Vilsack&#x27;s campaign made significant use of social media by maintaining an active MySpace profile, a collection of viral video clips on YouTube, a Facebook profile, videoblog on blip.tv, and a conference call with the podcast site TalkShoe. On January 27, 2007, Vilsack called into the Regular Guys Show hosted by Kurt Hurner to conduct a 15‑minute interview on his running for the Democratic nomination for 2008. Since then, Vilsack appeared again on the show, now The Kurt Hurner Show at Talk Shoe on August 12, 2008, this time as a supporter of Barack Obama for president taking questions from callers to the program for 30 minutes.

During the campaign, Vilsack joined fellow candidates Hillary Clinton and Joe Biden in supporting the establishment of a U.S. Public Service Academy as a civilian counterpart to the military academies.

Shortly after ending his 2008 bid for the White House, Vilsack endorsed Senator Hillary Clinton and was named the national co-chair for Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaign.

===Views on Iraq===
Vilsack was critical of President Bush&#x27;s execution of the war in Iraq, but he hesitated to call for an immediate and complete pullout of U.S. forces: &quot;I don&#x27;t think we&#x27;re losing in Iraq. It appears to be a draw. People are upset by the fact that their kids are over there and there doesn&#x27;t seem to be any end to this whole process. It&#x27;s not pacifism that makes people think this way. They&#x27;re questioning the credibility and competence of the Commander-in-Chief.&quot;
On December 5, Vilsack announced that he favored withdrawing most U.S. forces from Iraq and leaving a small force in the northern region for a limited period. He said U.S. forces provided the Iraqi government with &quot;both a crutch and an excuse&quot; for inaction. He said U.S. withdrawal &quot;may very well require them to go through some chaotic and very difficult times&quot;, but that he believed it the only way to force the Iraqi government to take control of the country.

===Views on energy security===
The Vilsack Energy Security Agenda set out a strategy to dramatically reduce U.S. reliance on foreign energy and to cut the United States&#x27; carbon emissions. It also called for replacing the Department of Energy with a new Department of Energy Security, to oversee and redefine the federal government&#x27;s role in energy policy. The reorganized department would have acted as an institutional advocate for innovation in energy policy and was intended to ensure accountability as the nation works towards achieving its energy security goals. Through this new department, America&#x27;s overriding objective in energy policy would have been to make America the unquestioned leader in clean energy, enhancing national security and economic strength.

In a 2007 lecture to the Commonwealth Club of California, Vilsack stated:

==Secretary of Agriculture (2009–2017)==
===Appointment===

On December 17, 2008, then-President-elect Barack Obama announced his choice of Vilsack as the nominee to be the 30th Secretary of Agriculture. Vilsack has governed a largely agricultural state as did the previous two Secretaries of Agriculture, Mike Johanns (who was later a United States Senator from Nebraska) (2005–2007) and Ed Schafer (2007–2009).

The Senate confirmed Vilsack&#x27;s nomination for the position by unanimous consent on January 20, 2009.

Reaction to Vilsack&#x27;s nomination from agricultural groups was largely positive and included endorsements from the Corn Refiners Association, the National Grain and Feed Association, the National Farmers Union, the American Farm Bureau Federation, and the Environmental Defense Fund. Vilsack was the founder and former chair of the Governor&#x27;s Biotechnology Partnership, and was named Governor of the Year by the Biotechnology Industry Organization, an industry lobbying group.

===Actions===
Vilsack appointed Shirley Sherrod as the Georgia Director of Rural Development, saying she would be an &quot;important advocate on behalf of rural communities&quot;. Months after the appointment, Vilsack forced her to resign based on accusations of considering race in the handling of her job responsibilities at a private advocacy firm in 1986. Subsequent reports claimed that Vilsack had overreacted to a selectively edited tape of a speech that Sherrod had given to the NAACP. The edited tape had been posted online by conservative blogger Andrew Breitbart. Vilsack expressed his &quot;deep regret&quot; to Sherrod in acting hastily.

On January 24, 2012, Obama appointed Vilsack the designated survivor during the President&#x27;s State of the Union address.

===Beef advocacy===
In March 2012, Vilsack joined three midwest governors in a campaign to defend the use of a processed beef product made from trimmings left after beef carcasses are butchered, dubbed &quot;pink slime&quot; by its critics. He said &quot;it&#x27;s safe, it contains less fat and historically it&#x27;s been less expensive&quot; and that it should be available to consumers and school districts that want to buy it.

===Global warming===
At a Drake University forum on climate change April 22, 2014, Vilsack stated &quot;agriculture tends to take the brunt of criticism about climate change, but the industry contributes only 9percent of the greenhouse gases blamed for a warming planet&quot; and that while there were &quot;challenges globally in terms of agriculture and its contribution to greenhouse gas emissions that&#x27;s not necessarily the case in the United States.&quot;

===Considered resignation===
In 2015, Vilsack told President Obama he was considering resigning from his position. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; reported that he said, &quot;There are days when I have literally nothing to do&quot; as he weighed his decision to quit. Obama asked Vilsack to remain in his position and asked him to look into the problem of opioid addiction.

==Between cabinet tenures==
Shortly after his tenure ended, Vilsack released a statement in support of his succession by Sonny Perdue as the Secretary of Agriculture, making Perdue the only cabinet member nominee to receive a public statement of support from an Obama cabinet member. He was mentioned as a possible candidate for the United States Senate in 2020, for the seat currently held by Republican incumbent Joni Ernst, but subsequently declined to run.

In February 2017, Vilsack became president and CEO of the US Dairy Export Council.

Vilsack endorsed Joe Biden in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries.

==Secretary of Agriculture (2021–2025)==

===Nomination and confirmation===
In December 2020, Biden announced he would nominate Vilsack to again serve as the Secretary of Agriculture. The move was met by some with criticism from black farmers and progressives, because of Vilsack&#x27;s perceived relationship with status quo and corporate agriculture. He appeared before the Senate Agriculture Committee on February 2, 2021, and was unanimously approved. His nomination was confirmed by the Senate on February 23, 2021, by a 92–7 vote. He was sworn into office by Vice President Kamala Harris on February 24, 2021.

=== Tenure ===
The USDA implemented new rules to limit how much sugar can be in school meals.

====Meat production====
During his tenure, Vilsack announced that the USDA would leverage $100 million in funding from the American Rescue Plan Act to expand America&#x27;s meat processing capacity. In 2024, &quot;more than $35 million in grants to 15 independent meat processors in 12 states to increase processing capacity, spur competition to expand market opportunities for U.S. farmers and create jobs in rural areas.&quot;

====Forestry Protection====
The USDA also made investments into state forestry departments across the nation to help &quot;plant and maintain new trees to reduce extreme heat, benefit health and improve access to nature&quot; for $1.25 billion &amp; directed $930 million to reduce wildfires in western states, which was accomplished by clearing trees and underbrush in national forests. In 2024, &quot;The U.S. Department of Agriculture today announced up to $7.7 billion in assistance for fiscal year 2025 to help agricultural and forestry producers adopt conservation practices on working lands. This includes up to $5.7 billion for climate-smart practices, made possible by the Inflation Reduction Act, which is part of President Biden’s Investing in America Agenda and $2 billion in Farm Bill funding.&quot;

====Rural Internet====
Vilsack helped expand high speed internet across the nation, as part of a &quot;$65 billion push for high-speed connectivity&quot; from the 2021 Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.

==Personal life==
Vilsack met his wife, Ann Christine &quot;Christie&quot; Bell, in a cafeteria while at Hamilton College in New York in October 1968. Vilsack approached her and asked, &quot;Are you a Humphrey or a Nixon supporter?&quot; She replied &quot;Humphrey&quot; and they soon began dating. On August 18, 1973, the couple was married in Christie Vilsack&#x27;s hometown of Mount Pleasant, Iowa. Vilsack and his wife moved to Mount Pleasant in 1975, where he joined his father-in-law&#x27;s law practice.

Tom and Christie Vilsack have two sons, Jess and Doug.

In May 2017, Vilsack&#x27;s five-year-old granddaughter, Ella, died of complications from influenza.

Vilsack won $150,000 in the Powerball in 2020.

==Electoral history==

*1992 election for Iowa State Senate, 49th District:
:Democratic Primary
::*Tom Vilsack (D), 100.0%

:1992 General Election:
::*Tom Vilsack (D), 50.1% – 12,544 votes
::*Dave Heaton (R), 42.1% – 10,551 votes
::*Dan Reed (I), 7.8% – 1,945 votes

*1994 election for Iowa State Senate, 49th District:
:Democratic Primary
::*Tom Vilsack (D), 99.9% – 1,201 votes
::*&quot;scattering&quot;, 0.1% – 1 vote

:1994 General Election:
::*Tom Vilsack (D), 98.8% – 12,288 votes
::*&quot;scattering&quot;, 1.2% – 145 votes













==See also==
*List of United States Cabinet members who have served more than eight years

==References==
==External links==

*Biography at the United States Department of Agriculture
*Biography at the United States Department of Agriculture (2009–2017, archived)
*Appearances on &quot;Charlie Rose&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q353826" start="0" end="20" title="Tom Vilsack" label="Thomas James Vilsack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="106" end="144" title="United States secretary of agriculture" label="United States secretary of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379733" start="175" end="195" title="Presidency of Barack Obama" label="Obama administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="236" end="256" title="Biden administration" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="274" end="290" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q878594" start="314" end="330" title="governor of Iowa" label="governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="458" end="471" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="529" end="541" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="666" end="686" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="871" end="883" title="U.S. Cabinet" label="U.S. Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="968" end="987" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="1023" end="1038" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22566827" start="1057" end="1089" title="2016 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="shortlist to be her running mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="1111" end="1132" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="1147" end="1156" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q373094" start="1551" end="1584" title="James Wilson (Secretary of Agriculture)" label="James &amp;quot;Tama Jim&amp;quot; Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1660" end="1674" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160645" start="1675" end="1684" title="orphanage" label="orphanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="1688" end="1712" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460953" start="2018" end="2036" title="Shady Side Academy" label="Shady Side Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="2040" end="2063" title="University-preparatory school" label="preparatory high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113011" start="2129" end="2145" title="Hamilton College (New York)" label="Hamilton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254771" start="2180" end="2193" title="Delta Upsilon" label="Delta Upsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="2220" end="2232" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709336" start="2238" end="2255" title="Albany Law School" label="Albany Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q613167" start="2329" end="2349" title="Mount Pleasant, Iowa" label="Mount Pleasant, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="2492" end="2503" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="2664" end="2683" title="Chamber of Commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050859" start="2688" end="2698" title="United Way" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="2785" end="2794" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494790" start="3079" end="3090" title="Iowa Senate" label="Iowa Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="3466" end="3479" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064765" start="3523" end="3527" title="1998 Iowa gubernatorial election" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q39609" start="3529" end="3543" title="Terry Branstad" label="Terry Branstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271006" start="3638" end="3656" title="Jim Ross Lightfoot" label="Jim Ross Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3667" end="3686" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518077" start="3790" end="3804" title="Sally Pederson" label="Sally Pederson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="4229" end="4236" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q504025" start="4261" end="4273" title="Bill Bradley" label="Bill Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064766" start="4300" end="4304" title="2002 Iowa gubernatorial election" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553022" start="4463" end="4477" title="line-item veto" label="line-item veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768233" start="4515" end="4533" title="Iowa Supreme Court" label="Iowa Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064424" start="4851" end="4872" title="Iowa General Assembly" label="Iowa General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="5979" end="5994" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="6077" end="6092" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="6127" end="6135" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386411" start="6324" end="6350" title="Kelo v. City of New London" label="Kelo v. City of New London"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="6424" end="6438" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="6748" end="6778" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255624" start="6820" end="6852" title="Democratic Governors Association" label="Democratic Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243004" start="7226" end="7249" title="2004 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="potential running mates"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="7267" end="7293" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101438" start="7341" end="7367" title="political action committee" label="political action committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q222940" start="7586" end="7597" title="Chet Culver" label="Chet Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="7705" end="7716" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="7785" end="7798" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="8142" end="8154" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="8180" end="8187" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="8213" end="8224" title="viral video" label="viral video"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="8234" end="8241" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="8245" end="8253" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q674926" start="8263" end="8272" title="videoblog" label="videoblog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037777" start="8276" end="8283" title="blip.tv" label="blip.tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084525" start="8329" end="8337" title="TalkShoe" label="TalkShoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="8789" end="8804" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="8809" end="8818" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891203" start="8856" end="8883" title="U.S. Public Service Academy" label="U.S. Public Service Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="9018" end="9033" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="9167" end="9171" title="George W. Bush" label="Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="9203" end="9207" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153714" start="10930" end="10961" title="Commonwealth Club of California" label="Commonwealth Club of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="11083" end="11095" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="11158" end="11182" title="United States Secretary of Agriculture" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q448880" start="11286" end="11298" title="Mike Johanns" label="Mike Johanns"/>
<link wikidata="Q887102" start="11369" end="11379" title="Ed Schafer" label="Ed Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171037" start="11620" end="11645" title="Corn Refiners Association" label="Corn Refiners Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972571" start="11692" end="11714" title="National Farmers Union (United States)" label="National Farmers Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743741" start="11720" end="11751" title="American Farm Bureau Federation" label="American Farm Bureau Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345899" start="11761" end="11787" title="Environmental Defense Fund" label="Environmental Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915333" start="11922" end="11957" title="Biotechnology Industry Organization" label="Biotechnology Industry Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="11971" end="11979" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498845" start="12020" end="12035" title="Shirley Sherrod" label="Shirley Sherrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="12475" end="12480" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q503917" start="12545" end="12561" title="Andrew Breitbart" label="Andrew Breitbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q596135" start="12689" end="12708" title="designated survivor" label="designated survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="12737" end="12763" title="State of the Union address" label="State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633051" start="12974" end="12984" title="pink slime" label="pink slime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305629" start="13225" end="13241" title="Drake University" label="Drake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="13251" end="13265" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="13424" end="13438" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="13787" end="13806" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639178" start="14023" end="14039" title="opioid addiction" label="opioid addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q525362" start="14163" end="14175" title="Sonny Perdue" label="Sonny Perdue"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835008" start="14399" end="14403" title="2020 United States Senate election in Iowa" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475242" start="14457" end="14467" title="Joni Ernst" label="Joni Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="14605" end="14614" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q38051551" start="14622" end="14666" title="2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="14763" end="14768" title="Joseph R. Biden" label="Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="14827" end="14851" title="Secretary of Agriculture" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891257" start="15045" end="15073" title="Senate Agriculture Committee" label="Senate Agriculture Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="15234" end="15248" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="15249" end="15262" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="15451" end="15455" title="USDA" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q105246837" start="15504" end="15528" title="American Rescue Plan Act of 2021" label="American Rescue Plan Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q107563916" start="16793" end="16831" title="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act" label="Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110713" start="16874" end="16913" title="Christie Vilsack" label="Ann Christine &amp;quot;Christie&amp;quot; Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="17035" end="17043" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="17049" end="17054" title="Richard Nixon" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q613167" start="17215" end="17235" title="Mount Pleasant, Iowa" label="Mount Pleasant, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="17493" end="17502" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614241" start="17533" end="17542" title="Powerball" label="Powerball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228929" start="17745" end="17756" title="Dave Heaton" label="Dave Heaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590618" start="18111" end="18186" title="List of United States Cabinet members who have served more than eight years" label="List of United States Cabinet members who have served more than eight years"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="18241" end="18280" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="18299" end="18338" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q715515" start="18383" end="18395" title="Charlie Rose" label="Charlie Rose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99629" wikidata="Q39609" url="?curid=99629" title="Terry Branstad">
<text>Terry Edward Branstad (born November 17, 1946) is an American politician and former diplomat who served as the United States ambassador to China from 2017 to 2020 under President Donald Trump. A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as the 39th and 42nd governor of Iowa from 1983 to 1999 and from 2011 to 2017, respectively. He is the longest-serving governor in United States history.

Branstad served three terms in the Iowa House of Representatives and one term as the 40th lieutenant governor of Iowa before he was elected governor in 1982. At age 36, he was the youngest governor in Iowa history upon taking office. After 16 years as governor, he served as president of Des Moines University, a private medical osteopathic school, from 2003 to 2009. In 2010, Branstad returned to Iowa politics, running for governor again and defeating Democratic incumbent Chet Culver to become the state&#x27;s 42nd governor. His tenure of 22 years, 4 months, and 13 days makes him the longest-serving governor in American history, having surpassed George Clinton&#x27;s record of 20 years, 11 months, and 2 days on 14 December 2015.

In December 2016, President Donald Trump nominated Branstad to serve as the United States Ambassador to China. Branstad resigned as governor of Iowa on May 24, 2017, and was sworn in as the United States ambassador to China on July 12, 2017. In 2020, Branstad resigned from his post to work on President Trump&#x27;s 2020 reelection campaign.

On January 24, 2023, it was announced that Branstad would become president of the World Food Prize Foundation. He announced his retirement on November 19, 2024, and formally retired in February 2025.

== Early life ==
Branstad was born in Leland, Iowa. His father was Edward Arnold Branstad, a farmer; his mother was Rita (née Garland). Branstad&#x27;s mother was Jewish, and his father was a Norwegian American Lutheran. Branstad was raised Lutheran and later converted to Catholicism.
== Education ==
Branstad received a Bachelor of Arts in political science from the University of Iowa in 1969 and a Juris Doctor from Drake University Law School in 1974. He was drafted after college and served in the United States Army from 1969 to 1971 as a military policeman in the 503rd Military Police Battalion at Fort Bragg. He was awarded the Army Commendation Medal for meritorious service; he once recalled that he arrested actress Jane Fonda for coming onto the post at Arlington National Cemetery, where she was planning to attend an antiwar protest.

==Early political career==
Branstad served three terms in the Iowa House of Representatives from 1973 to 1979 and was the Lieutenant Governor of Iowa from 1979 to 1983, the year he was first elected governor.

== Governor of Iowa ==

===First tenure (1983–1999)===

When he took office as governor at age 36, Branstad became the youngest chief executive in Iowa&#x27;s history. Reelected in 1986, 1990, and 1994, he left office as Iowa&#x27;s longest-serving governor. He served as Chairman of the National Governors Association in 1989–1990, and also was Chair of the Midwestern Governors Association. In 1997 he chaired the Education Commission of the States, the Republican Governors Association, and the Governors&#x27; Ethanol Coalition.

In 1983 Branstad vetoed a bill to establish a state lottery.

Branstad made reinstatement of the death penalty a central focus of his 1994 re-election campaign; however, despite successfully being re-elected, he was unable to implement this policy due to opposition from Democrats in the Iowa State Senate.

Iowa&#x27;s unemployment rate went from 8.5% when Branstad took office to a record low 2.5% by the time he left office in 1999. In his first year as governor, the state budget had a $90 million deficit. It took several years until the budget was balanced. Branstad said he did not have enough support in the legislature to approve budget reforms until 1992. By 1999 Iowa had an unprecedented $900 million budget surplus.

===Inter-gubernatorial career===

Branstad focused most of his efforts outside of politics after leaving office in early 1999. He founded Branstad and Associates, LLC and was also a partner in the firm of Kaufman, Pattee, Branstad &amp; Miller and a financial advisor for Robert W. Baird and Co.

In August 2003 Branstad accepted an offer from Des Moines University to become its president. On October 16, 2009, he announced his retirement from Des Moines University to run again for governor.

President George W. Bush appointed Branstad to chair the President&#x27;s Commission on Excellence in Special Education. The commission was charged with developing a plan to improve the educational performance of students with disabilities. After completing his work with the commission in 2003, Branstad was asked to serve as a member of the National Advisory Council for Positive Action for Teen Health, or PATH. The advisory council encourages action to detect adolescent mental illness. In April 2003 Branstad was named a public member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, which comprises both professional and public members who address a variety of issues related to accounting.

Branstad serves on the boards of Conmed Health Management Inc, American Future Fund, the Iowa Health System, Liberty Bank, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and Living History Farms.

===Second tenure (2011–2017)===

====2010 gubernatorial election====
On August 2, 2009, &quot;The Des Moines Register&quot; reported that Branstad was actively considering seeking the Republican nomination for governor. On October 7, Branstad filed papers to run for governor in the 2010 election. According to a September &quot;Des Moines Register&quot; poll, he maintained a 70% favorability rating from Iowans as compared to Governor Chet Culver&#x27;s rating of 50%.

On June 8, 2010, Branstad won the Republican gubernatorial nomination, but when opposing candidate Bob Vander Plaats conceded, he did not endorse Branstad.

The Des Moines Tea Party gave Branstad a &quot;no&quot; on their report card regarding &quot;criteria for acceptance&quot; and said Branstad had &quot;a history of raising taxes, [was] not a true conservative, increased the size of government every year he held office, [and] built a state-owned phone company.&quot; Former Iowa State Auditor Richard Johnson accused Branstad of keeping &quot;two sets of books&quot; on the state budget while governor. Johnson said Branstad needed to be &quot;transparent&quot; to Iowa voters about the reporting of Iowa&#x27;s finances during his tenure as governor.

====2014 gubernatorial election====
Branstad ran for reelection in 2014. He was opposed in the Republican primary by Tom Hoefling, a political activist and nominee for president in 2012 for both America&#x27;s Party and American Independent Party. Branstad won the primary with 83% of the vote.

In the general election, Branstad faced Democratic nominee State Senator Jack Hatch and won with 59% of the vote.

==== Voting rights ====
Branstad rescinded an executive order signed by governor Tom Vilsack that restored voting rights to approximately 115,000 felons who had completed their sentences. Iowa was the last remaining state to have felons permanently disenfranchised until 2020, when Branstad&#x27;s successor, Kim Reynolds, restored voting rights for some felons who had completed their sentences.

==== Taxes ====
In June 2013, Branstad signed into law a sweeping tax reform bill that had widespread bipartisan support, passing the Iowa Senate by 44 votes to 6 and the Iowa House by 84 votes to 13. The bill, Senate File 295, provided for the state&#x27;s largest tax cut in history, including an estimated $4.4 billion in property tax reform and an estimated $90 million of annual income tax relief, in part in the form of an increase in the earned income tax credit. The bill also included significant reforms to education and health care.

====Job creation ranking====
A June 2013 &quot;Business Journals&quot; analysis of 45 of the country&#x27;s 50 governors ranked Branstad 28th in job creation. The ranking was based on a comparison of the annual private sector growth rate in all 50 states using data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

====Gun rights====
On April 13, 2017, with large Republican majorities in the Iowa legislature, Branstad signed a bill into law expanding gun rights, enacting a stand-your-ground law, expanding the right of citizens to sue if they believe their Second Amendment rights are being infringed, and expanding the gun rights of minors, among several other provisions.

====Bakken pipeline====
Branstad&#x27;s business-friendly appointments to the Iowa Utilities Board were controversial. They have &quot;virtually assured&quot; approval of the Iowa section of the Dakota Access pipeline. His last appointment was that of Richard W. Lozier Jr., who represented a pro-pipeline lobby group and who had to recuse himself one month after he joined in 2017.

====Discrimination lawsuit====
On July 15, 2019, a jury in Polk County, Iowa awarded a gay former state official $1.5 million in damages, finding that Branstad had discriminated against him based on sexual orientation in 2012.

== U.S. Ambassador to China ==
In December 2016 President-elect Donald Trump chose Branstad to serve as US Ambassador to China, succeeding Max Baucus. Branstad accepted the offer within one day after meeting with Trump in New York. Trump cited Branstad&#x27;s decades of experience with China while governor of Iowa. Xi Jinping, China&#x27;s paramount leader, considers Branstad an &quot;old friend&quot;. Branstad&#x27;s relationship with Xi dates to 1985, when Xi, then a young official from Hebei Province, headed a five-man agricultural delegation to Iowa. Branstad&#x27;s hearing before the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee was held on May 2, 2017.

Branstad was confirmed by the Senate on May 22, 2017, in an 82 to 13 vote. He resigned as governor on May 24, 2017, in a ceremony at the Iowa State House, and was immediately sworn in as U.S. Ambassador to China. His appointment marked the third time in a decade that a politician resigned a statewide office to become the Ambassador to China; Jon Huntsman Jr. resigned as governor of Utah in 2009, and Max Baucus resigned as U.S. senator from Montana in 2014.

In October 2018, the &quot;Financial Times&quot; reported that Branstad opposed a proposal by White House Senior Advisor Stephen Miller about stopping providing student visas to Chinese nationals, making it impossible for Chinese citizens to study in the United States. Branstad argued that such a ban would harm US trade to China and hurt small American universities more than the elite ones.

In May 2019, Branstad traveled to Tibet Autonomous Region amid heightening trade tensions between the United States and China. This diplomatic journey was designed to give the United States a better perception of Tibet and its people, cultural practices, and life.

Branstad stepped down as U.S. Ambassador to China in early October 2020, at the request of President Donald Trump to help with his 2020 presidential campaign.

== Personal life ==
Branstad married Christine Johnson on June 17, 1972. They have three children, Eric, Allison, and Marcus, and eight grandchildren. His wife has worked as a medical assistant and as a volunteer at schools and hospitals. Eric Branstad is a political consultant and lobbyist whose lobbying activities on behalf of Chinese firms while Branstad was US Ambassador to China led to charges with conflict of interest. Branstad denied the allegation. Allison moved to Beijing with her father when he was appointed ambassador because she landed a job at the International School of Beijing as a third grade teacher. Marcus was appointed by his father to the Iowa Natural Resources Commission in 2013 and works as a lobbyist for the American Chemistry Council.

Branstad is a member of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry. He received the honor of &quot;Knight Commander of the Court of Honor&quot; in 2015.

In 2015, longtime newspaperman and Iowa historian Mike Chapman published a biography of Branstad, &quot;Iowa&#x27;s Record-Setting Governor: The Terry Branstad Story&quot;. The book details Branstad&#x27;s youth on the family farm, his high school days in Forest City, and his rise in politics.

Branstad is a second cousin of Merrick Garland, who served as United States attorney general under President Joe Biden.

==Electoral history==
* 1972 election for Iowa House of Representatives District 8:
** Terry Branstad (R), 59.0%
** Elmer Selbrand (D), 41.0%
* 1974 election for Iowa House of Representatives District 8:
** Terry Branstad (R), 68.7%
** Jean Haugland (D), 31.3%
* 1976 election for Iowa House of Representatives District 8:
** Terry Branstad (R), 70.4%
** Franklin Banwart (D), 29.6%
* 1978 Republican primary election for Lieutenant Governor of Iowa:
** Terry Branstad, 42.1%
** Hansen, 32.7%
** Oakley, 25.2%
* 1978 election for Lieutenant Governor of Iowa:
** Terry Branstad (R), 57.7%
** William Palmer (D), 42.3%
* 1982 election for Governor of Iowa:
:1982 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 52.8%
::*Roxanne Conlin (D), 46.6%
::*Marcia Farrington (L), 0.3%
::*Jim Bittner (S), 0.3%
* 1986 election for Governor of Iowa:
:1986 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 51.9%
::*Lowell Junkins (D), 48.0%
* 1990 election for Governor of Iowa:
:1990 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 60.6%
::*Donald Avenson (D), 38.8%
::*Bailey/Nelson (SW), 0.4%
* 1994 election for Governor of Iowa:
:Republican Primary
::*Terry Branstad (R), 51.8%
::*Fred Grandy (R), 48.1%

:1994 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 56.8%
::*Bonnie Campbell (D), 41.6%
::*Hughes/Davis (Petition), 0.6%
::*Butler/Stone (NL), 0.4%
::*Olsen/Carey (L), 0.3%
::*Galati/Pena (SW), 0.1%
* 2010 election for Governor of Iowa:
:Republican Primary
::*Terry Branstad (R), 114,290 votes, 50.4%
::*Bob Vander Plaats (R), 92,759, 40.9%
::*Rod Roberts (R), 19,916, 8.8%

:2010 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 52.9%
::*Chet Culver (D), 43.1%
::*Jonathan Narcisse (I), 1.3%
::*Eric Cooper (L), 1.3%
::*James Hughes (I), 0.3%
::*David Rosenfeld (SW), 0.2%
::*Write-Ins, 0.2%
* 2014 election for Governor of Iowa:
:Republican Primary:
:**Terry Branstad (R), 129,752 votes, 79.8%
:**Tom Hoefling (R), 16.2%
:**Write-Ins, 0.2%
:2014 General Election:
::*Terry Branstad (R), 59.1%
::*Jack Hatch (D), 37.3%
::*Lee Deakins Hieb (L), 1.8%
::*Jim Hennager (I), 0.9%
::*Jonathan Narcisse (I), 0.9%
::*Write-ins, 0.1%

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Ambassador Terry Branstad biography
* Terry Branstad for Governor


|-


|-









|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39609" start="0" end="21" title="Terry Branstad" label="Terry Edward Branstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="111" end="144" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to China" label="United States ambassador to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="179" end="191" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="209" end="225" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q878594" start="269" end="285" title="List of governors of Iowa" label="governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702249" start="351" end="375" title="List of longest-serving governors of U.S. states" label="longest-serving governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494785" start="438" end="467" title="Iowa House of Representatives" label="Iowa House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853520" start="493" end="520" title="List of lieutenant governors of Iowa" label="lieutenant governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528092" start="555" end="559" title="1982 Iowa gubernatorial election" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263531" start="691" end="712" title="Des Moines University" label="Des Moines University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064788" start="847" end="856" title="2010 Iowa gubernatorial election" label="defeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q222940" start="878" end="889" title="Chet Culver" label="Chet Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q201646" start="1055" end="1069" title="George Clinton (vice president)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28805633" start="1458" end="1482" title="Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 reelection campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q772112" start="1567" end="1583" title="World Food Prize" label="World Food Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914012" start="1724" end="1736" title="Leland, Iowa" label="Leland, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="1878" end="1896" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1897" end="1905" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="2055" end="2073" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305628" start="2106" end="2133" title="Drake University Law School" label="Drake University Law School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2150" end="2157" title="Conscription in the United States#Vietnam War" label="drafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="2190" end="2208" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q617638" start="2232" end="2250" title="Military Police Corps (United States)" label="military policeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="2293" end="2303" title="Fort Bragg" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986122" start="2324" end="2347" title="Army Commendation Medal" label="Army Commendation Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="2415" end="2425" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q216344" start="2454" end="2481" title="Arlington National Cemetery" label="Arlington National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="2519" end="2534" title="anti-war protest" label="antiwar protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494785" start="2599" end="2628" title="Iowa House of Representatives" label="Iowa House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853520" start="2659" end="2686" title="Lieutenant Governor of Iowa" label="Lieutenant Governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="3035" end="3065" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843465" start="3106" end="3138" title="Midwestern Governors Association" label="Midwestern Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340883" start="3163" end="3197" title="Education Commission of the States" label="Education Commission of the States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314590" start="3203" end="3235" title="Republican Governors Association" label="Republican Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420199" start="3357" end="3391" title="Capital punishment in Iowa" label="reinstatement of the death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494790" start="3569" end="3586" title="Iowa Senate" label="Iowa State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064424" start="3897" end="3908" title="Iowa Legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350638" start="4283" end="4306" title="Robert W. Baird and Co." label="Robert W. Baird and Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q5263531" start="4355" end="4376" title="Des Moines University" label="Des Moines University"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4516" end="4530" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241133" start="4563" end="4625" title="President&amp;#x27;s Commission on Excellence in Special Education" label="President&amp;#x27;s Commission on Excellence in Special Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q465177" start="5053" end="5103" title="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants" label="American Institute of Certified Public Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743871" start="5277" end="5297" title="American Future Fund" label="American Future Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078774" start="5303" end="5321" title="Iowa Health System" label="Iowa Health System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541584" start="5323" end="5335" title="Liberty Bank" label="Liberty Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659142" start="5397" end="5417" title="Living History Farms" label="Living History Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917258" start="5514" end="5537" title="The Des Moines Register" label="The Des Moines Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q222940" start="5857" end="5868" title="Chet Culver" label="Chet Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934270" start="5991" end="6008" title="Bob Vander Plaats" label="Bob Vander Plaats"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="6064" end="6073" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q33125980" start="6378" end="6391" title="State Auditor of Iowa" label="State Auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816212" start="6769" end="6781" title="Tom Hoefling" label="Tom Hoefling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="6833" end="6837" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q465099" start="6872" end="6898" title="American Independent Party" label="American Independent Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112988" start="7021" end="7031" title="Jack Hatch" label="Jack Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842874" start="8053" end="8070" title="The Business Journals" label="Business Journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305384" start="8453" end="8463" title="Gun politics in the United States" label="gun rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q256658" start="8476" end="8497" title="stand-your-ground law" label="stand-your-ground law"/>
<link wikidata="Q210645" start="8560" end="8576" title="Second Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Second Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885396" start="8756" end="8776" title="Iowa Utilities Board" label="Iowa Utilities Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q122079270" start="8930" end="8951" title="Richard W. Lozier Jr." label="Richard W. Lozier Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q485808" start="9121" end="9132" title="Polk County, Iowa" label="Polk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9354" end="9366" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="9394" end="9416" title="United States Ambassador to China" label="US Ambassador to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q470748" start="9429" end="9439" title="Max Baucus" label="Max Baucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="9607" end="9617" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="9632" end="9648" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607" start="10296" end="10312" title="Jon Huntsman Jr." label="Jon Huntsman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q15718082" start="10325" end="10341" title="governor of Utah" label="governor of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q470748" start="10355" end="10365" title="Max Baucus" label="Max Baucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860422" start="10378" end="10390" title="List of former United States senators" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q498692" start="10396" end="10403" title="List of United States Senators from Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="10441" end="10456" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996060" start="10535" end="10549" title="Stephen Miller (political advisor)" label="Stephen Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="10843" end="10866" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="11022" end="11027" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11176" end="11188" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996625" start="11272" end="11289" title="Christine Branstad" label="Christine Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q116250276" start="11334" end="11338" title="Eric Branstad" label="Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q599048" start="11493" end="11513" title="Political consulting" label="political consultant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="11518" end="11526" title="Lobbying" label="lobbyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="11599" end="11621" title="United States Ambassador to China" label="US Ambassador to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799687" start="11802" end="11833" title="International School of Beijing" label="International School of Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743356" start="11976" end="12002" title="American Chemistry Council" label="American Chemistry Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913741" start="12426" end="12437" title="Forest City, Iowa" label="Forest City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922011" start="12497" end="12512" title="Merrick Garland" label="Merrick Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="12528" end="12558" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States attorney general"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="12575" end="12584" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372355" start="13298" end="13312" title="Roxanne Conlin" label="Roxanne Conlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614605" start="13502" end="13536" title="Iowa gubernatorial election, 1990" label="1990 election for Governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152361" start="13650" end="13684" title="Iowa gubernatorial election, 1994" label="1994 election for Governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q653258" start="13738" end="13749" title="Fred Grandy" label="Fred Grandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942304" start="13818" end="13833" title="Bonnie Campbell (lawyer)" label="Bonnie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064788" start="13958" end="13992" title="Iowa gubernatorial election, 2010" label="2010 election for Governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934270" start="14061" end="14078" title="Bob Vander Plaats" label="Bob Vander Plaats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356343" start="14101" end="14112" title="Rod Roberts" label="Rod Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q222940" start="14188" end="14199" title="Chet Culver" label="Chet Culver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064773" start="14344" end="14378" title="Iowa gubernatorial election, 2014" label="2014 election for Governor of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816212" start="14448" end="14460" title="Tom Hoefling" label="Tom Hoefling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112988" start="14547" end="14557" title="Jack Hatch" label="Jack Hatch"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99633" wikidata="Q2077402" url="?curid=99633" title="Aldeburgh">
<text>Aldeburgh ( ) is a coastal town and civil parish in the East Suffolk district, in the county of Suffolk, England, north of the River Alde. Its estimated population was 2,276 in 2019. It was home to the composer Benjamin Britten and remains the centre of the international Aldeburgh Festival of arts at nearby Snape Maltings, which was founded by Britten in 1948. It also hosts an annual poetry festival and several food festivals and other events. 

Aldeburgh, as a port, gained borough status in 1529 under Henry VIII. Its historic buildings include a 16th-century moot hall and a Napoleonic-era Martello Tower. A third of its housing consists of second homes. Visitors are drawn to its Blue Flag beach and fisherman huts, where fresh fish is sold, to Aldeburgh Yacht Club and to its cultural offerings. Two family-run fish and chip shops have been rated among the country&#x27;s best. The independent Aldeburgh bookshop has been in business for more than seventy years, is locally thought to have been the site of the birthplace of George Crabbe (1754–1832) and has organised the annual Aldeburgh Literary Festival since 2002.

==History==

The name &quot;Aldeburgh&quot; derives from the Old English &quot;ald&quot; (old) and &quot;burh&quot; (fortification), although this structure, along with much of the Tudor town, has now been lost to the sea. In the 16th century, Aldeburgh was a leading port and had a flourishing shipbuilding industry. The flagship of the Virginia Company, the &quot;Sea Venture&quot; is believed to have been built here in 1608. Aldeburgh&#x27;s importance as a port declined as the River Alde silted up and larger ships could no longer berth. It survived mainly on fishing until the 19th century, when it also became a seaside resort. Much of its distinctive, whimsical architecture dates from that period. The river is now home to a yacht club and a sailing club.

Between 1959 and 1968, the village was the location of a Royal Observer Corps monitoring bunker, to be used in the event of a nuclear attack. The bunker was later demolished and no trace survives.

==Geography==

Aldeburgh is on the North Sea coast, about north-east of London, north-east of Ipswich and south of Lowestoft. Locally it is south of the town of Leiston and south of the village of Thorpeness. It lies just north of the River Alde, with the narrow shingle spit of Orford Ness all that stops the river meeting the sea at Aldeburgh – instead it flows another to the south-west.

The beach is mainly shingle and wide in places, allowing fishing boats to draw up onto the beach above the high tide, but it narrows at the neck of Orford Ness. The shingle bank allows access to the Ness from the north, passing a Martello tower and two yacht clubs at the site of the former village of Slaughden. Aldeburgh was flooded in the North Sea flood of 1953, after which its flood defences were strengthened. The beach received a Blue Flag rural beach award in 2005.

The town is within the Suffolk Coast and Heaths Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), with a number of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and nature reserves in its locality. The Alde-Ore Estuary SSSI covers the area surrounding the river from Snape to its mouth, including the whole of Orford Ness. This contains several salt marsh and mudflat habitats. The Leiston-Aldeburgh SSSI extends from the northern edge of the town over a range of habitats, including grazing marsh and heathland. It includes Thorpeness Mere and the North Warren RSPB reserve, an area of wildlife and habitat conservation, and nature trails run by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds.

Two smaller geological SSSI units lie on the southern edges. Aldeburgh Brick Pit, of , shows a clear stratigraphy of Red Crag deposits above Corralline Crag. Aldeburgh Hall Pit is a shallow pit in area, featuring a section of Corralline Crag. It is seen as one of the best sites in Britain for Neogene fauna.

The town&#x27;s churches include the pre-Reformation Anglican parish church of St Peter and St Paul and the Catholic Church of Our Lady and St Peter.

==Governance==
Aldeburgh has a town council and lies within the East Suffolk non-metropolitan district. Aldeburgh ward, including Thorpeness and other communities, had a population of 3225 in the 2011 census, when the mean age of the inhabitants was 55 and the median age 61.

The town is located within the Suffolk Coastal parliamentary constituency represented since 2024 by the Labour MP Jenny Riddell-Carpenter. The constituency was previous seen as a safe seat for the Conservatives, having been represented by John Gummer from 1979 to 2010 and Thérèse Coffey from 2010 to 2024. 

Aldeburgh was a parliamentary borough from 1571 and returned two Members of Parliament (MPs), the right to vote being vested in the town&#x27;s freemen. By the mid-18th century it was classed as a rotten borough, as the votes were controlled by a City of London merchant, Thomas Fonnereau: and memorably described as &quot;a venal little borough in Suffolk&quot;. It lost its representation under the Reform Act 1832.

In 1908 Aldeburgh became the first British town to elect a female mayor: Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, whose father, Newson Garrett, had been mayor in 1889. In 2006, Sam Wright became Aldeburgh&#x27;s town crier and mace bearer at 15, and so the youngest in the world.

In 1885 Aldeburgh became a municipal borough which became part of the administrative county of East Suffolk in 1889, the district contained the parish of Aldeburgh. On 1 April 1934 part of Hazlewood parish was added Aldeburgh parish and district from Plomesgate Rural District when Hazlewood was abolished. On 1 April 1974 the district was abolished and became part of Suffolk Coastal in the non-metropolitan county of Suffolk. A successor parish was formed covering the same area as the former district and its parish. In 2019 Aldeburgh became part of East Suffolk district.

==Transport==
Aldeburgh is linked to the A12 by the A1094 road, at Friday Street in Benhall. The B1122 leads to Leiston.

There are direct bus services from the town to Saxmundham, Beccles, Halesworth, Woodbridge and Ipswich. Buses in the area are operated by First Eastern Counties and Borderbus.

Aldeburgh railway station opened in 1860 as the terminus of the Aldeburgh Branch Line from Saxmundham, but was closed in 1966 under the Beeching Axe. Nowadays, the nearest railway station is on the East Suffolk Line, approximately away. Saxmundham station is served by hourly weekday services to , for connections towards London Liverpool Street, and to for connections to .

==Landmarks==
===Lifeboat station===

The RNLI station in the town was operating two lifeboats in 2016.

===Moot Hall===

The Moot Hall is a Grade I listed timber-framed building, used for council meetings for more than 400 years. The Town Clerk&#x27;s office remains there and it houses the local museum. It was built in about 1520 and altered in 1654. The brick and stone infilling of the ground floor is later. The hall was restored and the external staircase and gable ends were rebuilt in 1854–1855 under the direction of R. M. Phipson, chief architect of the Diocese of Norwich, in which Aldeburgh then stood. There are 64 other listed historic buildings and monuments in the town.

===Martello Tower===

A unique quatrefoil Martello Tower stands at the isthmus leading to the Orford Ness shingle spit. It is the largest and northernmost of 103 English defensive towers built in 1808–1812 to resist a threatened Napoleonic invasion. The Landmark Trust now runs it as holiday apartments. From May 2015 to May 2016, an Antony Gormley statue was on display on the roof as part of his LAND art installation.

The Martello Tower is the only surviving building of the fishing village of Slaughden, which had been washed away by the North Sea by 1936. Near the Martello Tower at Slaughden Quay are barely visible remains of the fishing smack &quot;Ionia&quot;. It had become stuck in the treacherous mud of the River Alde and was then used as a houseboat. It was burnt in 1974 after becoming unsafe.

===Fort Green Mill===
The four-storey windmill at the southern end of the town was built in 1824 and converted into a dwelling in 1902.

===WW2 tank trap===
A WW2 tank trap can be seen next to Slaughden Road.
===Aldeburgh Beach Lookout===
The Aldeburgh Beach Lookout is a historic landmark on the Aldeburgh seafront. Grade II listed, it was built in about 1830 as a lookout tower to assist or plunder shipping along the hazardous North Sea coast. The South African writer Laurens van der Post did his writing there for more than thirty years. Since 2010, the lookout has provided an artistic space for residents and tourists, with Antony Gormley sculptures on display between the lookout and the sea.

===Scallop===

On Aldeburgh&#x27;s beach, a short distance north of the town centre, stands a sculpture called &quot;Scallop&quot;, dedicated to Benjamin Britten, who would walk along the beach in the afternoons. Created from stainless steel by the Suffolk-based artist Maggi Hambling, it stands high and was unveiled in November 2003. The piece is made up of two interlocking scallop shells, each broken, the upright shell being pierced by the words, &quot;I hear those voices that will not be drowned,&quot; taken from Britten&#x27;s opera &quot;Peter Grimes&quot;. The sculpture is meant to be enjoyed both visually and in a tactile way: people are encouraged to sit on it and watch the sea.

The upright portion of the shell splits into three sections positioned at different angles. The positioning of these effects a visual transformation, depending on the vantage point from which the sculpture is viewed.

The sculpture is controversial in the local area, with some local residents considering it &quot;spoils the beach&quot;. It has been vandalised with graffiti and paint on thirteen occasions. There have been petitions both for its removal and retention.


==First World War==
A nearby aerodrome, Royal Naval Air Station Aldeburgh, was used in the First World War as a night landing ground and for training observers.

==Notable residents==


*Henry Johnson (c. 1659–1719), the &quot;greatest shipbuilder and shipowner of his day&quot; and MP for Aldeburgh, 1689–1719
*George Crabbe (1754–1832), poet, was born in Aldeburgh, which features in his poems &quot;The Village&quot; and &quot;The Borough&quot;. The latter concerns a fisherman named Peter Grimes, on whose story Benjamin Britten&#x27;s opera of that name was based.
*John Liptrot Hatton (1809–1886) was an internationally celebrated English composer, conductor, pianist and singer who stayed in Aldeburgh for some time and wrote, for the place he loved, an &quot;Aldeburgh Te Deum&quot;.
*Elizabeth Garrett Anderson (1836–1917) was the first woman to qualify as a physician and surgeon in Britain, co-founder of first hospital staffed by women, first female dean of a British medical school, first female Doctor of Medicine in France, first woman in Britain elected to a school board, and as Mayor of Aldeburgh, first female mayor and magistrate in Britain. She is buried in the town churchyard
*Annie Hall Cudlip, (1838–1918) writer, novelist and short story writer, was born in Aldeburgh.
*Agnes Garrett (1845–1935), suffragist and interior designer, founded the Ladies Dwellings Company.
*Dame Millicent Fawcett (1847–1929), suffragist, feminist and writer, was born in Aldeburgh, where she set her one novel, &quot;Janet Doncaster&quot;.
*M. R. James (1862–1936), author, set a story, &quot;A Warning to the Curious&quot;, in &quot;Seaburgh&quot; (Aldeburgh). Landmarks such as the Martello tower and &quot;White Lion Hotel&quot; feature.
*Mabel Lilian Basham, filmmaker, documented daily life and key events in Aldeburgh including the local Women&#x27;s Institute
*Joan Cross (1900–1993), soprano and theatre director who created several Britten opera roles, is buried in the town churchyard.
*Gerry Fiennes (1906–1985), railway manager and author, was Mayor of Aldeburgh in 1976.
*Imogen Holst (1907–1984), composer, conductor, teacher, assistant to Benjamin Britten, and co-director of the Aldeburgh Festival from 1956 to 1977, lived in Aldeburgh from 1952 and is buried in the town churchyard.
*H. T. Cadbury-Brown (1913–2009), architect.
*Benjamin Britten (1913–1976) moved to the town in 1942. He, Eric Crozier (1914–1994) and Peter Pears (1910–1986) founded the Aldeburgh Festival and Aldeburgh Music Club. He moved with Pears into The Red House in 1957. They lie side by side in the town churchyard.
*Ian Tait (1926–2013) was a GP in Aldeburgh (from 1959) and one of the founders of the Aldeburgh Poetry Festival; he is known for his work in the modernisation of general practice.
*Ruth Rendell (1930–2015), author of thrillers and psychological murder mysteries, created Chief Inspector Wexford.
*Reverend Sandy Millar (born 1939), once vicar of Holy Trinity Brompton and co-founder of the Alpha course, lives in Aldeburgh.
*Francis Carnwath (1940–2020), deputy director of the Tate gallery 1990–1994, and co-founder of the Aldeburgh Beach Lookout.
*Sue Lloyd (1939–2011), model and actress, played Barbara Hunter in &quot;Crossroads&quot;.
*Christine Truman (born 1941), Grand Slam tennis event winner, lives in Aldeburgh.
*Malcolm Bowie (1943–2007), Master of Christ&#x27;s College, Cambridge, 2002–2006.
*Peter Sinfield (1943-2024), songwriter with the progressive rock act King Crimson.
*Craig Brown (satirist) (born 1957), journalist, author, Private Eye satirist, is a resident.
*Cevanne Horrocks-Hopayian (living), composer, was born in the area and lives in Aldeburgh, on the border with Thorpeness.
*Roy Keane (born 1971), footballer, became an Aldeburgh resident in 2009 on taking over as manager of Ipswich Town.
*Miranda Raison (born 1977), actress, has a weekend cottage in Aldeburgh and belongs to Aldeburgh Golf Club.
*Isabella Summers (born 1980), songwriter, producer and remixer (Florence and the Machine), is from Aldeburgh.

==Culture==

Outside the town, the Snape Maltings is the venue for the Aldeburgh Festival held every June.

Aldeburgh Music Club, founded by Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears in 1952, has since evolved into one of East Anglia&#x27;s leading choirs, with about 100 members and more than 120 supporting patrons. It rehearses from early September to late May each year and holds three major performances, two of them at Snape Maltings Concert Hall.

The annual Aldeburgh Carnival in August has been held at least since 1892 and possibly since 1832, when &quot;Ye Olde Marine Regatta&quot; was mentioned. The focal point today is a carnival procession featuring locals and visitors dressed in homemade costumes and on floats, often with a topical or local theme. In the evening, a parade with Chinese lanterns and a firework display are traditional. The procession has been led for more than thirty years by Chief Marshal Trevor Harvey, also a Carnival Committee member for more than fifty years.

The Suffolk Craft Society hold an annual themed exhibition in the Peter Pears Gallery over July and August, showing the work of its members.

The town of Aldeburgh, or &quot;Owlbarrow&quot;, is the setting of a series of children&#x27;s illustrated books centred on &quot;Orlando (The Marmalade Cat)&quot; written by Kathleen Hale, who spent holidays in the town. Many illustrations in the books feature landmarks in the town, including the Moot Hall. The town features in the 1989 thriller &quot;Cross of Fire&quot; by novelist Colin Forbes, as do the nearby villages of Dunwich and Snape Maltings. James Herbert based his book &quot;The Jonah&quot; in the area, using several names represented in the local area for characters, including Slaughden.

Aldeburgh (spelt there Aldborough) is the location of a key scene in Wilkie Collins&#x27;s novel &quot;No Name&quot;, where Captain Wragge and Magdalen Vanstone enact their conspiracy against Noel Vanstone and Mrs Lecount. The town&#x27;s Martello Tower is (1862) mentioned as a landmark. Aldeburgh also features in Joseph Freeman&#x27;s novel &quot;Arcadia Lodge&quot; as &quot;Seaburgh&quot;, and in the M. R. James story &quot;A Warning to the Curious&quot;. The Maggi Hambling sculpture appears in an early scene, as do various other landmarks.

===Fishing===
Aldeburgh is notable for its line fishing for amateur anglers; it has been called &quot;a great spot for bass, flounders, sole, dabs, cod, whiting and eels&quot;. However, the &quot;East Anglian Daily Times&quot; says &quot;countless years of commercial over-fishing has all but destroyed many of our [Suffolk&#x27;s] offshore sea fisheries&quot; and traditional, sustainable inshore fishing is under threat, with likely knock-on effects for the coastal community. Local fishermen featured in the &quot;Fish Fight&quot; campaigns of Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall and Greenpeace, supporting small-scale inshore fishermen.

===Rugby===
Aldeburgh is home to Aldeburgh and Thorpeness Rugby Club, based at Kings Field in Aldeburgh. The club runs an adult team in the Eastern Counties Leagues, an Under-15s team, Midi/Mini rugby, and Women&#x27;s touch rugby. The club started out in nearby Thorpeness and moved in 2015 to work with Aldeburgh Town Council and Aldeburgh Community Centre.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia. Television signals are received from the Tacolneston TV transmitter and the local relay transmitter situated north-east of the town. 

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Suffolk, Heart East, Greatest Hits Radio Ipswich &amp; Suffolk and Alde and Blyth Community Radio (ABC), a community radio station.

The town is served by the local newspaper the &quot;East Anglian Daily Times&quot;.

==Other amenities==
These include Aldeburgh Cottage Hospital, a traditional English cottage hospital, the Aldeburgh Library, which also relies on volunteers, and the Aldeburgh cinema, which puts on films and cultural events.

==Arms==
==References==

*Norman Scarfe: &quot;The Shell Guide to Suffolk&quot;, 1976
*Kate Pugh: Return to Suffolk, 2007 Crabbe 1792–1805. Bottesford Living History Community Heritage Project on the poet George Crabbe
*Ray Sturtivant and Gordon Page: &quot; Royal Navy Aircraft Serials and Units 1911–1919&quot;, Air-Britain, 1992, 

==External links==
*The Aldeburgh Museum
*Aldeburgh Past
*Films depicting daily life in Aldeburgh in the East Anglia Film Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2077402" start="0" end="9" title="Aldeburgh" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554266" start="56" end="68" title="East Suffolk District" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="86" end="92" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="96" end="103" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786232" start="127" end="137" title="River Alde" label="River Alde"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="211" end="227" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785987" start="272" end="290" title="Aldeburgh Festival" label="Aldeburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="309" end="323" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="508" end="518" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908719" start="566" end="575" title="moot hall" label="moot hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="597" end="611" title="Martello Tower" label="Martello Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="688" end="697" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980934" start="820" end="838" title="fish and chip shop" label="fish and chip shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q903516" start="1034" end="1047" title="George Crabbe" label="George Crabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1191" end="1202" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="1235" end="1239" title="burh" label="burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="1311" end="1316" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1398" end="1402" title="Seaport" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="1425" end="1437" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="1468" end="1484" title="Virginia Company of London" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953532" start="1496" end="1507" title="Sea Venture" label="Sea Venture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374637" start="1954" end="1974" title="Royal Observer Corps" label="Royal Observer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="2130" end="2139" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2167" end="2173" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="2189" end="2196" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q986007" start="2210" end="2219" title="Lowestoft" label="Lowestoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519667" start="2256" end="2263" title="Leiston" label="Leiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796731" start="2292" end="2302" title="Thorpeness" label="Thorpeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786232" start="2330" end="2340" title="River Alde" label="River Alde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="2374" end="2385" title="Orford Ness" label="Orford Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="2717" end="2731" title="Martello tower" label="Martello tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q504934" start="2829" end="2852" title="North Sea flood of 1953" label="North Sea flood of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q458651" start="2925" end="2934" title="Blue Flag beach" label="Blue Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634537" start="2986" end="3010" title="Suffolk Coast and Heaths" label="Suffolk Coast and Heaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q174945" start="3011" end="3045" title="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="3071" end="3107" title="Sites of Special Scientific Interest" label="Sites of Special Scientific Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587985" start="3156" end="3172" title="Alde-Ore Estuary" label="Alde-Ore Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013826" start="3221" end="3226" title="Snape, Suffolk" label="Snape"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="3299" end="3309" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="3314" end="3321" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598492" start="3438" end="3451" title="grazing marsh" label="grazing marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="3456" end="3465" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262541" start="3503" end="3528" title="North Warren RSPB reserve" label="North Warren RSPB reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481436" start="3554" end="3574" title="habitat conservation" label="habitat conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="3605" end="3646" title="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds" label="Royal Society for the Protection of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303950" start="3766" end="3774" title="Red Crag Formation" label="Red Crag"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511168" start="3790" end="3805" title="Corralline Crag Formation" label="Corralline Crag"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="3943" end="3950" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979481" start="4038" end="4058" title="St Peter and St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church, Aldeburgh" label="St Peter and St Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258293" start="4076" end="4107" title="Church of Our Lady and St Peter, Aldeburgh" label="Church of Our Lady and St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554266" start="4174" end="4186" title="East Suffolk (district)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="4187" end="4212" title="non-metropolitan district" label="non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796731" start="4240" end="4250" title="Thorpeness" label="Thorpeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="4306" end="4317" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="4328" end="4332" title="arithmetical mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="4371" end="4377" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q988194" start="4418" end="4433" title="Suffolk Coastal (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Suffolk Coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4491" end="4497" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q126852565" start="4501" end="4524" title="Jenny Riddell-Carpenter" label="Jenny Riddell-Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="4566" end="4575" title="safe seat" label="safe seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4584" end="4597" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q333635" start="4626" end="4637" title="John Gummer" label="John Gummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q290554" start="4660" end="4674" title="Thérèse Coffey" label="Thérèse Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713497" start="4696" end="4705" title="Aldeburgh (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="4761" end="4782" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="4893" end="4907" title="rotten borough" label="rotten borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463485" start="4968" end="4984" title="Thomas Fonnereau" label="Thomas Fonnereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="5097" end="5112" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q235464" start="5188" end="5214" title="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson" label="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062207" start="5230" end="5244" title="Newson Garrett" label="Newson Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q374808" start="5478" end="5490" title="East Suffolk (county)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259834" start="5572" end="5581" title="Hazlewood, Suffolk" label="Hazlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250906" start="5634" end="5659" title="Plomesgate Rural District" label="Plomesgate Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116371" start="5752" end="5767" title="Suffolk Coastal" label="Suffolk Coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="5775" end="5798" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="5813" end="5829" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648862" start="6001" end="6004" title="A12 road (Great Britain)" label="A12"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648796" start="6012" end="6022" title="A1094 road" label="A1094 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q940336" start="6044" end="6051" title="Benhall" label="Benhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519667" start="6072" end="6079" title="Leiston" label="Leiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450421" start="6129" end="6139" title="Saxmundham" label="Saxmundham"/>
<link wikidata="Q813574" start="6141" end="6148" title="Beccles" label="Beccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570884" start="6150" end="6160" title="Halesworth" label="Halesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021350" start="6162" end="6172" title="Woodbridge, Suffolk" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="6177" end="6184" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454176" start="6220" end="6242" title="First Norfolk &amp;amp; Suffolk" label="First Eastern Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713498" start="6259" end="6284" title="Aldeburgh railway station" label="Aldeburgh railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713496" start="6323" end="6344" title="Aldeburgh Branch Line" label="Aldeburgh Branch Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="6395" end="6407" title="Beeching Axe" label="Beeching Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329453" start="6457" end="6474" title="East Suffolk Line" label="East Suffolk Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801124" start="6581" end="6604" title="Liverpool Street Station" label="London Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="6677" end="6681" title="RNLI" label="RNLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527129" start="6757" end="6770" title="Moot Hall, Aldeburgh" label="The Moot Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328417" start="7162" end="7175" title="Richard Phipson" label="R. M. Phipson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790948" start="7200" end="7218" title="Diocese of Norwich" label="Diocese of Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7348" end="7354" title=":File:DSC 1813-martello-tower.JPG" label="unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413441" start="7355" end="7365" title="quatrefoil" label="quatrefoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q91285" start="7366" end="7380" title="Martello Tower" label="Martello Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="7418" end="7429" title="Orford Ness" label="Orford Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689124" start="7578" end="7592" title="Landmark Trust" label="Landmark Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q360371" start="7658" end="7672" title="Antony Gormley" label="Antony Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="7867" end="7876" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q382586" start="7962" end="7975" title="fishing smack" label="fishing smack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786232" start="8045" end="8055" title="River Alde" label="River Alde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321309" start="8079" end="8088" title="houseboat" label="houseboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="8173" end="8181" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801289" start="8298" end="8307" title="tank trap" label="tank trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559868" start="8378" end="8401" title="Aldeburgh Beach Lookout" label="Aldeburgh Beach Lookout"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="8452" end="8460" title="Listed building" label="Grade II"/>
<link wikidata="Q463233" start="8607" end="8627" title="Laurens van der Post" label="Laurens van der Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q360371" start="8766" end="8780" title="Antony Gormley" label="Antony Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="8982" end="8998" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843128" start="9107" end="9121" title="Maggi Hambling" label="Maggi Hambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311395" start="9214" end="9221" title="scallop" label="scallop"/>
<link wikidata="Q780331" start="9385" end="9397" title="Peter Grimes" label="Peter Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698345" start="10156" end="10165" title="Air observer" label="observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724015" start="10193" end="10206" title="Henry Johnson (politician, died 1719)" label="Henry Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q903516" start="10318" end="10331" title="George Crabbe" label="George Crabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772638" start="10408" end="10419" title="The Village (poem)" label="The Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005869" start="10436" end="10447" title="The Borough (George Crabbe poem)" label="The Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="10522" end="10538" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244929" start="10577" end="10596" title="John Liptrot Hatton" label="John Liptrot Hatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q235464" start="10799" end="10825" title="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson" label="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q566955" start="11206" end="11223" title="Annie Hall Cudlip" label="Annie Hall Cudlip"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670641" start="11302" end="11315" title="Agnes Garrett" label="Agnes Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q442818" start="11407" end="11424" title="Millicent Fawcett" label="Millicent Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q963715" start="11553" end="11564" title="M. R. James" label="M. R. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660565" start="11605" end="11629" title="A Warning to the Curious" label="A Warning to the Curious"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11754" end="11773" title="Mabel Lilian Basham" label="Mabel Lilian Basham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925762" start="11856" end="11878" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179569" start="11880" end="11890" title="Joan Cross" label="Joan Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552733" start="12009" end="12022" title="Gerry Fiennes" label="Gerry Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q444380" start="12097" end="12109" title="Imogen Holst" label="Imogen Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q559473" start="12313" end="12332" title="H. T. Cadbury-Brown" label="H. T. Cadbury-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="12358" end="12374" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q743679" start="12418" end="12430" title="Eric Crozier" label="Eric Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="12447" end="12458" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785987" start="12483" end="12501" title="Aldeburgh Festival" label="Aldeburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559810" start="12553" end="12566" title="The Red House, Aldeburgh" label="The Red House"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643674" start="12623" end="12631" title="Ian Tait" label="Ian Tait"/>
<link wikidata="Q232260" start="12804" end="12816" title="Ruth Rendell" label="Ruth Rendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040972" start="12900" end="12917" title="Inspector Wexford" label="Inspector Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417377" start="12929" end="12941" title="Sandy Millar" label="Sandy Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139545" start="12969" end="12990" title="Holy Trinity Brompton" label="Holy Trinity Brompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q679199" start="13013" end="13025" title="Alpha course" label="Alpha course"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480441" start="13048" end="13064" title="Francis Carnwath" label="Francis Carnwath"/>
<link wikidata="Q430682" start="13101" end="13105" title="Tate" label="Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q944097" start="13173" end="13182" title="Sue Lloyd" label="Sue Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q628071" start="13246" end="13256" title="Crossroads (UK TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q292954" start="13265" end="13281" title="Christine Truman" label="Christine Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886963" start="13348" end="13361" title="Malcolm Bowie" label="Malcolm Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="13385" end="13417" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q471967" start="13431" end="13445" title="Peter Sinfield" label="Peter Sinfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="13479" end="13495" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="13500" end="13512" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180778" start="13515" end="13537" title="Craig Brown (satirist)" label="Craig Brown (satirist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="13571" end="13582" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065746" start="13609" end="13634" title="Cevanne Horrocks-Hopayian" label="Cevanne Horrocks-Hopayian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796731" start="13719" end="13729" title="Thorpeness" label="Thorpeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="13732" end="13741" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="13833" end="13845" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q195828" start="13848" end="13862" title="Miranda Raison" label="Miranda Raison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078096" start="13957" end="13973" title="Isabella Summers" label="Isabella Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217360" start="14021" end="14045" title="Florence and the Machine" label="Florence and the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="14103" end="14117" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785987" start="14139" end="14157" title="Aldeburgh Festival" label="Aldeburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="14484" end="14511" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545439" start="14856" end="14872" title="Paper lantern" label="Chinese lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15065" end="15086" title="Suffolk Craft Society" label="Suffolk Craft Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103028" start="15333" end="15360" title="Orlando (The Marmalade Cat)" label="Orlando (The Marmalade Cat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376733" start="15378" end="15391" title="Kathleen Hale" label="Kathleen Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188472" start="15558" end="15571" title="Cross of Fire" label="Cross of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108453" start="15590" end="15602" title="Colin Forbes (novelist)" label="Colin Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188020" start="15633" end="15640" title="Dunwich" label="Dunwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="15645" end="15659" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110463" start="15661" end="15674" title="James Herbert" label="James Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q210740" start="15882" end="15896" title="Wilkie Collins" label="Wilkie Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044605" start="15916" end="15923" title="No Name (novel)" label="No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="16431" end="16438" title="Fisherman" label="anglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327699" start="16559" end="16583" title="East Anglian Daily Times" label="East Anglian Daily Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="16631" end="16643" title="over-fishing" label="over-fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930731" start="16910" end="16937" title="Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall" label="Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="16942" end="16952" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834810" start="17421" end="17429" title="BBC East" label="BBC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975048" start="17434" end="17444" title="ITV Anglia" label="ITV Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673978" start="17487" end="17498" title="Tacolneston transmitting station" label="Tacolneston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834934" start="17606" end="17623" title="BBC Radio Suffolk" label="BBC Radio Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066880" start="17625" end="17635" title="Heart East" label="Heart East"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853203" start="17637" end="17678" title="Greatest Hits Radio East" label="Greatest Hits Radio Ipswich &amp;amp; Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327699" start="17801" end="17825" title="East Anglian Daily Times" label="East Anglian Daily Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712041" start="17868" end="17894" title="Aldeburgh Cottage Hospital" label="Aldeburgh Cottage Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q59533882" start="18086" end="18099" title="Norman Scarfe" label="Norman Scarfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697614" start="18374" end="18385" title="Air-Britain" label="Air-Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30038826" start="18500" end="18524" title="East Anglian Film Archive" label="East Anglia Film Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99635" wikidata="Q1785987" url="?curid=99635" title="Aldeburgh Festival">
<text>The Aldeburgh Festival of Music and the Arts is an English arts festival devoted mainly to classical music. It takes place each June in the town of Aldeburgh, Suffolk and is centred on Snape Maltings Concert Hall.

==History of the Aldeburgh Festival==

The Festival was founded in 1948 by the composer Benjamin Britten, the singer Peter Pears and the librettist/producer Eric Crozier. Their work with the English Opera Group (which they had founded with designer John Piper in 1947) frequently took them away from home, and it was while they were on tour in Switzerland with &quot;Albert Herring&quot; and &quot;The Rape of Lucretia&quot; in August of that year, that Peter Pears said &quot;Why not make our own Festival? A modest Festival with a few concerts given by friends? Why not have an Aldeburgh Festival?&quot; The English Opera Group would provide a core programme of opera productions, but the vision was soon widened to include readings of poetry, literature, drama, lectures and exhibitions of art. The first festival was held from 5–13 June 1948 and used the Aldeburgh Jubilee Hall, a few doors away from Britten&#x27;s house in Crabbe Street, as its main venue, with performances in other venues such as Aldeburgh&#x27;s fifteenth-century Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. It featured a performance of &quot;Albert Herring&quot; by the English Opera Group; Britten&#x27;s newly written Saint Nicolas; and performances by Clifford Curzon and the Zorian String Quartet.

Over the years the festival grew and took in additional venues in nearby Orford, Blythburgh and Framlingham. However, the lack of a large venue was holding back the further development of the festival until one of the largest mid-nineteenth century maltings in East Anglia, at Snape, a village just outside Aldeburgh, became available. Britten, who had lived in Snape in the 1930s, had the vision that the largest of the malthouses could be converted into a Concert Hall. Most of the building&#x27;s original character, such as the distinctive square malthouse roof-vents, was retained. The new concert hall was opened by the Queen on 2 June 1967, at the start of the twentieth Aldeburgh Festival.

Two years later, on the first night of the 1969 Festival, the concert hall was destroyed by fire. Only the shell of the outer walls remained. For that year the Festival was moved to other local venues and only one performance was lost. By the following year the hall had been rebuilt and once again it was opened in the presence of the Queen, this time at the start of the 1970 Festival. The new Concert Hall at Snape Maltings became the main focus for the Aldeburgh Festival, although performances continued to be held at all the former venues.

For the first six years of the Aldeburgh Festival, the joint Artistic Directors remained Britten, Pears and Crozier; in 1955, Britten and Pears were in sole charge, then the following year they were joined by Imogen Holst, who remained a member of the Artistic Directorate until her death in 1984. After Britten&#x27;s own death in 1976, the artistic direction of the festival was shared; musicians who joined the artistic team included Philip Ledger, Colin Graham, Steuart Bedford, Mstislav Rostropovich, Murray Perahia, Simon Rattle, John Shirley-Quirk and Oliver Knussen.

From the beginning, the Festivals were characterised by an eclectic range of music, from the classics – Bach, Haydn, Mozart – to contemporary work, with young composers in particular being commissioned. By 1982, Britten–Pears archivist Rosamund Strode calculated that the Festival had to that date presented new works by over 75 composers, with world premieres of fifteen operas. Concert goers were over the ensuing years to see new works not only by Britten himself, but by composers such as Lennox Berkeley, Richard Rodney Bennett, Elliott Carter, Hans Werner Henze, Alfred Schnittke, Toru Takemitsu, Michael Tippett, Mark-Anthony Turnage and Malcolm Williamson, many of whom came to the Festival as composer-in-residence.

Imogen Holst introduced early choral music, and soon works by European composers rarely heard at that time in England were in the repertoire, such as Berg, Mahler, Schoenberg, Poulenc, Boulez, and Webern. Later, Copland, Dutilleux, Lutoslawski and Kodály were to come to the Festival. In contrast, John Dankworth and Cleo Laine, Joyce Grenfell, Peggy Ashcroft and actors from the Royal Shakespeare Company made regular appearances; Princess Grace of Monaco came to take part in a poetry recital. Sviatoslav Richter played for Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.

The size and capacity of the Concert Hall enabled the Festival to present full-scale orchestras for the first time, and for many years Simon Rattle brought his City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra to Snape. There was a strong connection with Russian music: Rostropovich and Richter became frequent visitors, and in 1970 Shostakovich&#x27;s 14th Symphony, dedicated to Britten, had its first performance outside the USSR at the Concert Hall.

Peter Pears, in addition to his role as joint Artistic Director, was a regular performer, often accompanied by Britten, and often appearing in up to ten concerts during the Festival. Janet Baker, Julian Bream, Osian Ellis, Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, John Shirley-Quirk and Robert Tear were among the regular performers in the early days, followed later by Alfred Brendel, Ian Bostridge, Thomas Allen, Philip Langridge and Ann Murray.

The Concert Hall proved very capable of being turned into an opera stage. The Royal Opera presented &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; in the first season, and on 16 June 1973, the first performance of Britten&#x27;s final opera, &quot;Death in Venice&quot;, was given at the Concert Hall, with Pears in the role of Aschenbach. In 1976, in what was to be Britten&#x27;s last Festival, Janet Baker sang the premiere of his dramatic cantata &quot;Phaedra&quot; in a festival that included performances by André Previn, Elisabeth Söderström, Sviatoslav Richter and the entire Rostropovich family.

In 1979, Rostropovich conducted the Britten–Pears School in a performance of &quot;Eugene Onegin&quot; (with Pears as guest in the role of M. Triquet, and Eric Crozier as the valet Guillot). In subsequent years, the school regularly performed an opera during the festival.

The 2020 festival was cancelled due to the Covid-19 pandemic and a virtual one was held in its place.

==The festival today==

The organisation responsible for running the Aldeburgh Festival changed its name to Aldeburgh Music in 2006.

Thomas Adès was succeeded as Artistic Director of the Festival by Pierre-Laurent Aimard (2009-16). In 2009, a suite of new spaces at Snape Maltings, including the Hoffmann Building&#x27;s Britten Studio and the Jerwood Kiln Studio, was opened with the premiere performance of Harrison Birtwistle&#x27;s opera &quot;The Corridor&quot;.

The 2012 Festival had Oliver Knussen as Artist in Residence, and the typically eclectic programme included new productions of Knussen&#x27;s &quot;Where the Wild Things Are&quot; and &quot;Higglety Pigglety Pop!&quot;, a concert series exploring the work of Helmut Lachenmann, recitals by Menahem Pressler, Ian Bostridge, Peter Serkin, Miklós Perényi, Dezső Ránki and the Arditti and Keller Quartets, the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra with the UK premiere of a work by Elliott Carter, as well as dramatised performances with film at the Leiston Long Shop Museum, the complete screening with live accompaniment of Britten&#x27;s 1930s film scores, a promenade performance of John Cage&#x27;s Song Books in the Hoffmann Building under the banner of #Faster than Sound, and open-air community events on Aldeburgh Beach.

The centenary of Britten&#x27;s birth was held between November 2012 and November 2013, and the 2013 Festival, the 66th, featured a new production by Tim Albery of Britten&#x27;s opera, &quot;Peter Grimes&quot;, the complete church parables in Orford Church, and new works by Harrison Birtwistle, Wolfgang Rihm, Judith Weir, Magnus Lindberg and Richard Rodney Bennett.

The Aldeburgh Festival retains a unique character, largely due to its location in rural Suffolk. It also continues to emphasise the presentation of new music, new interpretations and the rediscovery of forgotten music. It has seen the premieres of several works by Britten (&quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; in 1960; &quot;Death in Venice&quot; in 1973) and also Harrison Birtwistle&#x27;s &quot;Punch and Judy&quot; in 1968, &quot;The Io Passion&quot; in 2004, &quot;The Corridor&quot; in 2009 and &quot;The Cure&quot; in 2015.

The Aldeburgh Festival has always included the visual arts as well as music, and a number of exhibitions are curated each year to accompany the music programme. The main sites for exhibitions are various venues within the Snape Maltings complex and The Red House in Aldeburgh.

==References==
==External links==
* Aldeburgh Festival
* ITV Local Anglia&#x27;s entertainment show &quot;All Angles&quot; on Aldeburgh Festival June 2008
* &quot;Big Beach Jive&quot; – Video of Aldeburgh Festival event 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1785987" start="4" end="44" title="Aldeburgh Festival" label="Aldeburgh Festival of Music and the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077402" start="148" end="157" title="Aldeburgh" label="Aldeburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="159" end="166" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="185" end="199" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="303" end="319" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="332" end="343" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q743679" start="372" end="384" title="Eric Crozier" label="Eric Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054298" start="406" end="425" title="English Opera Group" label="English Opera Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363211" start="464" end="474" title="John Piper (artist)" label="John Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q577825" start="582" end="596" title="Albert Herring" label="Albert Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q240685" start="613" end="633" title="The Rape of Lucretia" label="The Rape of Lucretia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054298" start="825" end="844" title="English Opera Group" label="English Opera Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979481" start="1255" end="1291" title="St Peter and St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church, Aldeburgh" label="Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q444775" start="1406" end="1419" title="Saint Nicolas (Britten)" label="Saint Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q961193" start="1441" end="1456" title="Clifford Curzon" label="Clifford Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198442" start="1465" end="1486" title="Zorian Quartet" label="Zorian String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486348" start="1562" end="1568" title="Orford, Suffolk" label="Orford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035732" start="1570" end="1580" title="Blythburgh" label="Blythburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q616587" start="1585" end="1596" title="Framlingham" label="Framlingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="1750" end="1761" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013826" start="1766" end="1771" title="Snape, Suffolk" label="Snape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="2080" end="2096" title="Snape Maltings" label="new concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="2111" end="2120" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q444380" start="2944" end="2956" title="Imogen Holst" label="Imogen Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q115974" start="3172" end="3185" title="Philip Ledger" label="Philip Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108470" start="3187" end="3199" title="Colin Graham" label="Colin Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611678" start="3201" end="3216" title="Steuart Bedford" label="Steuart Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q152043" start="3218" end="3239" title="Mstislav Rostropovich" label="Mstislav Rostropovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q326221" start="3241" end="3255" title="Murray Perahia" label="Murray Perahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157814" start="3257" end="3269" title="Simon Rattle" label="Simon Rattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q326394" start="3271" end="3289" title="John Shirley-Quirk" label="John Shirley-Quirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q949003" start="3294" end="3308" title="Oliver Knussen" label="Oliver Knussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="3415" end="3419" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="3421" end="3426" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="3428" end="3434" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q125141166" start="3547" end="3562" title="Rosamund Strode" label="Rosamund Strode"/>
<link wikidata="Q514975" start="3804" end="3819" title="Lennox Berkeley" label="Lennox Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="3821" end="3843" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q318835" start="3845" end="3859" title="Elliott Carter" label="Elliott Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="3861" end="3878" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q158078" start="3880" end="3896" title="Alfred Schnittke" label="Alfred Schnittke"/>
<link wikidata="Q155467" start="3898" end="3912" title="Toru Takemitsu" label="Toru Takemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q356499" start="3914" end="3929" title="Michael Tippett" label="Michael Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q528639" start="3931" end="3951" title="Mark-Anthony Turnage" label="Mark-Anthony Turnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q644392" start="3956" end="3974" title="Malcolm Williamson" label="Malcolm Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="4187" end="4191" title="Alban Berg" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="4193" end="4199" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="4201" end="4211" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191408" start="4213" end="4220" title="Francis Poulenc" label="Poulenc"/>
<link wikidata="Q156193" start="4222" end="4228" title="Pierre Boulez" label="Boulez"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="4234" end="4240" title="Anton Webern" label="Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q192185" start="4249" end="4256" title="Aaron Copland" label="Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q318829" start="4258" end="4267" title="Henri Dutilleux" label="Dutilleux"/>
<link wikidata="Q156472" start="4269" end="4280" title="Witold Lutosławski" label="Lutoslawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q153008" start="4285" end="4291" title="Zoltán Kodály" label="Kodály"/>
<link wikidata="Q498897" start="4335" end="4349" title="John Dankworth" label="John Dankworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q291309" start="4354" end="4364" title="Cleo Laine" label="Cleo Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297498" start="4366" end="4380" title="Joyce Grenfell" label="Joyce Grenfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q230832" start="4382" end="4396" title="Peggy Ashcroft" label="Peggy Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="4417" end="4442" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="4469" end="4493" title="Grace Kelly" label="Princess Grace of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q124890" start="4533" end="4551" title="Sviatoslav Richter" label="Sviatoslav Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="4563" end="4595" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q157814" start="4733" end="4745" title="Simon Rattle" label="Simon Rattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q706774" start="4758" end="4795" title="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra" label="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80135" start="4919" end="4931" title="Dmitri Shostakovich" label="Shostakovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q188073" start="4939" end="4952" title="Symphony No. 14 (Shostakovich)" label="14th Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q241001" start="5224" end="5235" title="Janet Baker" label="Janet Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q453583" start="5237" end="5249" title="Julian Bream" label="Julian Bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106681" start="5251" end="5262" title="Osian Ellis" label="Osian Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q77060" start="5264" end="5288" title="Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau" label="Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau"/>
<link wikidata="Q326394" start="5290" end="5308" title="John Shirley-Quirk" label="John Shirley-Quirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975116" start="5313" end="5324" title="Robert Tear" label="Robert Tear"/>
<link wikidata="Q84148" start="5396" end="5410" title="Alfred Brendel" label="Alfred Brendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q569378" start="5412" end="5425" title="Ian Bostridge" label="Ian Bostridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q953628" start="5427" end="5439" title="Thomas Allen (baritone)" label="Thomas Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387233" start="5441" end="5457" title="Philip Langridge" label="Philip Langridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q462570" start="5462" end="5472" title="Ann Murray" label="Ann Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266459" start="5549" end="5564" title="The Royal Opera" label="The Royal Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q605750" start="5581" end="5611" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (opera)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q630476" start="5719" end="5734" title="Death in Venice (opera)" label="Death in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377940" start="5928" end="5935" title="Phaedra (cantata)" label="Phaedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="5986" end="5998" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q269242" start="6000" end="6020" title="Elisabeth Söderström" label="Elisabeth Söderström"/>
<link wikidata="Q50956" start="6155" end="6180" title="Eugene Onegin (opera)" label="&amp;quot;Eugene Onegin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q743679" start="6233" end="6245" title="Eric Crozier" label="Eric Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="6563" end="6578" title="Aldeburgh Music" label="Aldeburgh Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q439572" start="6589" end="6600" title="Thomas Adès" label="Thomas Adès"/>
<link wikidata="Q561097" start="6655" end="6676" title="Pierre-Laurent Aimard" label="Pierre-Laurent Aimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713494" start="6722" end="6736" title="Snape Maltings" label="Snape Maltings"/>
<link wikidata="Q354335" start="6865" end="6884" title="Harrison Birtwistle" label="Harrison Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727673" start="6904" end="6916" title="The Corridor (opera)" label="The Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q949003" start="6947" end="6961" title="Oliver Knussen" label="Oliver Knussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q549442" start="7183" end="7200" title="Helmut Lachenmann" label="Helmut Lachenmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q70142" start="7214" end="7230" title="Menahem Pressler" label="Menahem Pressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q569378" start="7232" end="7245" title="Ian Bostridge" label="Ian Bostridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361841" start="7247" end="7259" title="Peter Serkin" label="Peter Serkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q942147" start="7261" end="7275" title="Miklós Perényi" label="Miklós Perényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q780748" start="7277" end="7288" title="Dezső Ránki" label="Dezső Ránki"/>
<link wikidata="Q639552" start="7297" end="7304" title="Arditti Quartet" label="Arditti"/>
<link wikidata="Q706774" start="7330" end="7367" title="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra" label="City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q318835" start="7402" end="7416" title="Elliott Carter" label="Elliott Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="7546" end="7553" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q180727" start="7607" end="7616" title="John Cage" label="John Cage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7680" end="7698" title="#Faster than Sound" label="#Faster than Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803070" start="7901" end="7911" title="Tim Albery" label="Tim Albery"/>
<link wikidata="Q780331" start="7943" end="7955" title="Peter Grimes" label="Peter Grimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3256294" start="7976" end="7991" title="church parables" label="church parables"/>
<link wikidata="Q354335" start="8027" end="8046" title="Harrison Birtwistle" label="Harrison Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q77031" start="8048" end="8061" title="Wolfgang Rihm" label="Wolfgang Rihm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411818" start="8063" end="8074" title="Judith Weir" label="Judith Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q503672" start="8076" end="8091" title="Magnus Lindberg (Finnish composer)" label="Magnus Lindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="8096" end="8118" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q605750" start="8401" end="8431" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (opera)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q630476" start="8453" end="8468" title="Death in Venice (opera)" label="Death in Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q354335" start="8493" end="8512" title="Harrison Birtwistle" label="Harrison Birtwistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925583" start="8526" end="8540" title="Punch and Judy (opera)" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742509" start="8562" end="8576" title="The Io Passion" label="The Io Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727673" start="8598" end="8610" title="The Corridor (opera)" label="The Corridor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99636" wikidata="Q130759" url="?curid=99636" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck">
<text>Christoph Willibald ([[Ritter]] von) Gluck (; ; 2 July 1714 – 15 November 1787) was a composer of Italian and French opera in the early classical period. Born in the Upper Palatinate and raised in Bohemia, both at the time part of the Holy Roman Empire, he gained prominence at the Habsburg court at Vienna. There he brought about the practical reform of opera&#x27;s dramaturgical practices for which many intellectuals had been campaigning. With a series of radical new works in the 1760s, among them &quot;Orfeo ed Euridice&quot; and &quot;Alceste&quot;, he broke the stranglehold that Metastasian &quot;opera seria&quot; had enjoyed for much of the century. Gluck introduced more drama by using orchestral recitative and cutting the usually long da capo aria. His later operas have half the length of a typical baroque opera.

The strong influence of French opera encouraged Gluck to move to Paris in November 1773. Fusing the traditions of Italian opera and the French (with rich chorus) into a unique synthesis, Gluck wrote eight operas for the Parisian stage. &quot;Iphigénie en Tauride&quot; (1779) was a great success and is often considered to be his finest work. Though he was extremely popular and widely credited with bringing about a revolution in French opera, Gluck&#x27;s mastery of the Parisian operatic scene was never absolute, and after the poor reception of his &quot;Echo et Narcisse&quot; (1779), he left Paris in disgust and returned to Vienna to live out the remainder of his life.

==Life and career==
===Ancestry and early years===
Gluck&#x27;s earliest known ancestor is his great-grandfather, Simon Gluckh von Rockenzahn, whose name is recorded in the marriage contract (1672) of his son, the forester Johann (Hans) Adam Gluck (c. 1649–1722) and grandfather of Christoph. &#x27;Rockenzahn&#x27; is believed to be Rokycany, located in the central part of western Bohemia (about 70 km southwest of Prague and 16 km east of Pilsen). The family name Gluck (also spelled Gluckh, Klugh, Kluch, etc.) likely comes from the Czech word for boy (&quot;kluk&quot;). In its various spellings, it is repeatedly found in the records of Rokycany. Around 1675 Hans Adam moved to Neustadt an der Waldnaab in the service of Prince Ferdinand August von Lobkowitz, who possessed extensive landholdings in Bohemia as well as the county of Störnstein-Neustadt in the Upper Palatinate.

Gluck&#x27;s father, Alexander, was born in Neustadt an der Waldnaab on 28 October 1683, one of four sons of Hans Adam Gluck who became foresters or gamekeepers. Alexander served in a contingent of about 50 soldiers under Philipp Hyazinth von Lobkowitz, the son of Ferdinand August von Lobkowitz, during the War of Spanish Succession, and, according to Gluck family tradition, rose to the level of gunbearer to the great general of the imperial forces, Eugene of Savoy. In 1711 Alexander settled outside Berching as a forester and hunter in the service of the monastery Seligenporten, Plankstetten Abbey, and the mayors of Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz. He took the vacant position of hunter in Erasbach in 1711 or 1712 (his predecessor had been found shot in the forest).

About Gluck&#x27;s mother, Maria Walburga, almost nothing is known, including her surname, but she probably grew up in the same area as she was named after Saint Walburga, the sister of Saint Willibald, the first bishop of nearby Eichstätt. The couple probably married around 1711. In 1713 Alexander built a house in Erasbach and by 12 September had taken possession of it.

Although there is no documentary record with Gluck&#x27;s birthdate at the time of his birth, he himself gave it as 2 July 1714 on an official document requested by Paris that he signed in 1785 in Vienna in the presence of the French ambassador Emmanuel Marie Louis de Noailles. This has long been the commonly accepted date. He was baptized Christophorus Willibaldus on 4 July 1714 in the village of Weidenwang, a parish that at that time also included Erasbach. Gluck himself never used the name Willibald. The church in Weidenwang was consecrated to Saint Willibald (as was the entire Eichstätt diocese to which it belonged), and the name Willibald is frequently found in the baptismal register, often as a second name. No documents contemporary with Gluck&#x27;s life use the name Willibald. Only in the 19th century did scholars begin using it to distinguish the composer from his father&#x27;s brother Johann Christoph, born in 1700, whose baptism had earlier been confused with that of the composer.

In the year of Gluck&#x27;s birth, the Treaty of Rastatt and the Treaty of Baden ended the War of Spanish Succession and brought Erasbach under Bavarian control. Gluck&#x27;s father had to reapply to retain his position and received no salary until after 1715, when he began receiving 20 gulden. He obtained additional employment in the vicinity of Weidenwang in 1715 as a forester in the service of Seligenporten Monastery, and after 1715, also with Plankstetten Abbey. In 1716 Alexander Gluck was cited for poor performance and warned he might be terminated. He sold his house in August 1717 and voluntarily left Erasbach near the end of September to take up employment as head forester in Reichstadt, serving the Duchess of Tuscany, the wealthy Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe-Lauenburg, since 1708 separated from her husband Gian Gastone de&#x27; Medici, the last duke of Tuscany.

On 1 April 1722 Alexander Gluck took a position as forest-master under Count Philipp Joseph von Kinsky in Böhmisch Kamnitz, where Kinsky had increased his domains. The family moved to the forester&#x27;s house in nearby Oberkreibitz.


In 1727 Alexander moved with his family to Eisenberg (Jezeří in Horní Jiřetín) to take his final post, head forester to Prince Philipp Hyazinth von Lobkowitz. It is not sure if Christoph was sent to the Jesuit college in Chomutov, 20 km southwest.

The Alsatian painter Johann Christian von Mannlich relates in his memoirs, published in 1810, that Gluck told him about his early life in 1774. He quotes Gluck as saying:

In 1727 or 1728, when Gluck was 13 or 14, he went to Prague. A childhood flight from home to Vienna is included in several contemporary accounts of Gluck&#x27;s life, including Mannlich&#x27;s, but some scholars have cast doubt on Gluck&#x27;s picturesque tales of earning food and shelter by his singing as he travelled. Most now feel it is more likely that the object of Gluck&#x27;s travels was not Vienna but Prague. Gluck&#x27;s German biographer Hans Joachim Moser claimed in 1940 to have found documents showing Gluck matriculated in logic and mathematics at the University of Prague in 1731. Gerhard and Renate Croll find this astonishing, and other biographers have been unable to find any documents supporting Moser&#x27;s claim. At the time the University of Prague boasted a flourishing musical scene that included performances of both Italian opera and oratorio. Gluck sang and played violin and cello, and also the organ at Týn Church.

Gluck eventually left Prague without taking a degree, and vanishes from the historical record until 1737. Nevertheless, the memories of his family and indirect references to this period in later documents give good grounds for believing Gluck arrived in Vienna in 1734, where he likely was employed by the Lobkowitz family at their palace in the Minoritenplatz. Philipp Hyazinth Lobkowitz, Gluck&#x27;s father&#x27;s employer, died on 21 December 1734, and his successor, his brother Johann Georg Christian Lobkowicz, is thought to have been Gluck&#x27;s employer in Vienna from 1735 to 1736. Two operas with texts Gluck himself was later to set were performed during this period: Antonio Caldara&#x27;s &quot;La clemenza di Tito&quot; (1734) and &quot;Le cinesi&quot; (1735). It is likely that the Lobkowitz family introduced Gluck to the Milanese nobleman Prince Antonio Maria Melzi, who engaged Gluck to become a player in his orchestra in Milan. The 65-year-old prince married the 16-year-old Maria Renata, Countess of Harrach, on 3 January 1737, and not long after returned with Gluck to Milan.

====Question of Gluck&#x27;s native language====
According to the music historian Daniel Heartz, there has been considerable controversy concerning Gluck&#x27;s native language. Gluck&#x27;s protégé in Vienna, the Italian-born Antonio Salieri, wrote in his memoirs (translated into German by Ignaz von Mosel), that &quot;Gluck, whose native tongue was Czech, expressed himself in German only with effort, and still more so in French and Italian.&quot; Salieri also mentions that Gluck mixed several languages when speaking: German, Italian and French, like Salieri himself. Gluck&#x27;s first biographer, , wrote that Gluck grew up in a German-speaking area, and that Gluck learned to speak Czech, but did not need it in Prague and in his later life. Heartz writes: &quot;More devious manoeuvres have been attempted by Gluck&#x27;s German biographers of this [the 20th] century, while the French ones have, without exception, taken Salieri at his word. His German biographer Max Arend objected that not a single letter written in Czech can be found, to which Jacques-Gabriel Prod&#x27;homme countered that &quot;no letters written by Liszt in Hungarian were known either, but does this make him a German?&quot; Hans Joachim Moser wanted a lyric work in Czech as proof. In fact, the music theorist Laurent Garcin, writing in 1770 (published 1772) before Gluck arrived in Paris, included Gluck in a list of several composers of Czech &quot;opéras-comiques&quot; (although such a work by Gluck has yet to be documented). A presentation by Irene Brandenburg classifying Gluck as a Bohemian composer was considered controversial by her German colleagues.

===Italy===
In 1737 Gluck arrived in Milan, and was introduced to Giovanni Battista Sammartini, who, according to Giuseppe Carpani, taught Gluck &quot;practical knowledge of all the instruments&quot;. Apparently, this relationship lasted for several years. Sammartini was not, primarily, a composer of opera, his main output being of sacred music and symphonies, but Milan boasted a vibrant opera scene, and Gluck soon formed an association with one of the city&#x27;s up-and-coming opera houses, the Teatro Regio Ducale. There his first opera &quot;Artaserse&quot; was performed on 26 December 1741, dedicated to Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun. Set to a libretto by Metastasio, the opera opened the Milanese Carnival of 1742. According to one anecdote, the public would not accept Gluck&#x27;s style until he inserted an aria in the lighter Milanese manner for contrast.

Nevertheless, Gluck composed an opera for each of the next four Carnivals at Milan, with renowned castrato Giovanni Carestini appearing in many of the performances, so the reaction to &quot;Artaserse&quot; was likely to have been reasonably favorable. He also wrote operas for other cities of Northern Italy in between Carnival seasons, including Turin and Venice, where his &quot;Ipermestra&quot; was given during November 1744 at the Teatro San Giovanni Crisostomo. Nearly all of his operas in this period were set to Metastasio&#x27;s texts, despite the poet&#x27;s dislike for his style of composition.

===Travels: 1745–1752===
In 1745 Gluck accepted an invitation from Lord Middlesex to become house composer at London&#x27;s King&#x27;s Theatre, probably travelling to England via Frankfurt and in the company of the violinist Ferdinand Philipp Joseph von Lobkowitz, the son of Phillip Hyazinth. The timing was unfortunate, as the Jacobite Rebellion had caused much panic in London, and for most of the year, the King&#x27;s Theatre was closed. Six trio sonatas were the immediate fruits of his time. Gluck&#x27;s two London operas (&quot;La caduta de&#x27; giganti&quot; and &quot;Artamene&quot;), eventually performed in 1746, borrowed much from his earlier works. Gluck performed works by Galuppi and Lampugnani, who both had worked in London. A more long-term benefit was exposure to the music of Handel – whom he later credited as a great influence on his style – and the naturalistic acting style of David Garrick, an English theatrical reformer. On 25 March, shortly after the production of &quot;Artamene&quot;, Handel and Gluck together gave a concert in the Haymarket Theatre consisting of works by Gluck and an organ concerto by Handel, played by the composer. On 14 April Gluck played on a glassharmonica in Hickford&#x27;s Rooms, a concert hall in Brewer Street, Soho. Handel&#x27;s own experience of Gluck pleased that composer less: Charles Burney reports Handel as saying that &quot;he [Gluck] knows no more of contrapunto, as my cook, Waltz&quot;.

The years 1747 and 1748 brought Gluck two highly prestigious engagements. First came a commission to produce an opera for Pillnitz, performed by Pietro Mingotti&#x27;s troupe, to celebrate a royal double wedding that would unite the ruling families of Bavaria and Saxony. &quot;Le nozze d&#x27;Ercole e d&#x27;Ebe&quot;, a &quot;festa teatrale&quot;, borrowed heavily from earlier works, and even from Gluck&#x27;s teacher Sammartini. The success of this work brought Gluck to the attention of the Viennese court, and, ahead of such a figure as Johann Adolph Hasse, he was selected to set Metastasio&#x27;s &quot;La Semiramide riconosciuta&quot; to celebrate Maria Theresa&#x27;s birthday. Vittoria Tesi took the title role. On this occasion Gluck&#x27;s music was completely original, but the displeasure of the court poet, Metastasio, who called the opera &quot;&quot;archvandalian&quot; music&quot;, probably explains why Gluck did not remain long in Vienna despite the work&#x27;s enormous popular success (it was performed 27 times to great acclaim). For the remainder of 1748 and 1749 Gluck travelled with Mingotti&#x27;s troupe, contracting a venereal disease from the &quot;prima donna&quot; and composing the opera &quot;La contesa de&#x27; numi&quot; for the court at Copenhagen, where he repeated his concert on the glassharmonica.

In 1750 he abandoned Mingotti&#x27;s group for another company established by a former member of the Mingotti troupe, Giovanni Battista Locatelli. The main effect of this was that Gluck returned to Prague on a more consistent basis. For the Prague Carnival of 1750 Gluck composed a new opera, &quot;Ezio&quot; (again set to one of Metastasio&#x27;s works, with the manuscript located at the Lobkowicz Palace). His &quot;Ipermestra&quot; was also performed in the same year. The other major event of Gluck&#x27;s stay in Prague was, on 15 September 1750, his marriage to Maria Anna Bergin, aged 18 years old, the daughter of a rich (but long-dead) Viennese merchant. Gluck seems to have spent most of 1751 commuting between Prague and Vienna.

The year 1752 brought another major commission to Gluck, when he was asked to set Metastasio&#x27;s &quot;La clemenza di Tito&quot; (the specific libretto was the composer&#x27;s choice) for the name day celebrations of King Charles VII of Naples. The opera was performed on 4 November at the Teatro di San Carlo, and the world-famous castrato Caffarelli took the role of Sextus. For Caffarelli Gluck composed the famous, but notoriously difficult, aria &quot;Se mai senti spirarti sul volto&quot;, which provoked admiration and vituperation in equally large measures. Gluck later reworked this aria for his &quot;Iphigénie en Tauride.&quot; According to one account, the Neapolitan composer Francesco Durante claimed that his fellow composers &quot;should have been proud to have conceived and written [the aria]&quot;. Durante simultaneously declined to comment whether or not it was within the boundaries of the accepted compositional rules of the time.

===Vienna===
Gluck finally settled in Vienna, where he became Kapellmeister invited by Prince Joseph of Saxe-Hildburghausen. He wrote &quot;Le cinesi&quot; for a festival in 1754 and &quot;La danza&quot; for the eighth birthday of the future Emperor Leopold II the following year. After his opera &quot;Antigono&quot; was performed in Rome in February 1756, Gluck was made a Knight of the Golden Spur by Pope Benedict XIV. From that time on, Gluck used the title &quot;Ritter von Gluck&quot; or &quot;Chevalier de Gluck&quot;.

Gluck turned his back on Italian opera seria and began to write opéra comiques. In 1761 Gluck produced the groundbreaking ballet-pantomime &quot;Don Juan&quot; in collaboration with the choreographer Gasparo Angiolini; the more radical Jean-Georges Noverre was involved for the first time? The climax of Gluck&#x27;s opéra comique writing was &quot;La rencontre imprévue&quot; (1764). By that time, Gluck created musical drama, based on Greek tragedy, with more compassion, influencing the latest style Sturm und Drang.

Under the teaching of Gluck, Marie Antoinette developed into a good musician. She learned to play the harp, the harpsichord and the flute. She sang during the family&#x27;s evening gatherings, as she had a beautiful voice. All her brothers and sisters were involved in playing Gluck&#x27;s music; on 24 January 1765 her brother Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor directed one of Gluck&#x27;s compositions, &quot;Il Parnaso confuso&quot;.

In Spring 1774, she took under her patronage her former music teacher and introduced him to the Paris public. For that purpose, she asked him to compose a new opera, &quot;Iphigénie en Aulide&quot;. &quot;Mindful of the Querelle des Bouffons between adherents of Italian and French opera, she asked the composer to set the libretto in French.&quot; To get to her goals she was assisted by the singers Rosalie Levasseur and Sophie Arnould. Gluck had gruff ways, demanding strict adherence from the cast when rehearsing. Gluck told the bass-bariton Henri Larrivée to change his ways. The soprano Arnould was replaced. He insisted that the chorus, too, had to act and become a part of the drama – that they could no longer just stand there posing stiffly and without expression while singing their lines. Gluck was assisted by François-Joseph Gossec, director of the Concert Spirituel. The Chevalier de Saint-Georges attended the first performance on 19 April; Jean-Jacques Rousseau was delighted with Gluck&#x27;s melodic style. Marie Antoinette received a large share of the credit.

===Operatic reforms===
Gluck had long pondered the fundamental problem of form and content in opera. He thought both of the main Italian operatic genres, &quot;opera buffa&quot; and &quot;opera seria&quot;, had strayed too far from what opera should really be and seemed unnatural. &quot;Opera buffa&quot; had long lost its original freshness. Its jokes were threadbare and the repetition of the same characters made them seem no more than stereotypes. In &quot;opera seria&quot;, the singing was devoted to superficial effects and the content was uninteresting and fossilised. As in &quot;opera buffa&quot;, the singers were effectively absolute masters of the stage and the music, decorating the vocal lines so floridly that audiences could no longer recognise the original melody. Gluck wanted to return opera to its origins, focusing on human drama and passions and making words and music of equal importance.

Francesco Algarotti&#x27;s &quot;Essay on the Opera&quot; (1755) proved to be an inspiration for Gluck&#x27;s reforms. He advocated that &quot;opera seria&quot; had to return to basics and that all the various elements—music (both instrumental and vocal), ballet, and staging—must be subservient to the overriding drama. Several composers of the period, including Niccolò Jommelli and Tommaso Traetta, attempted to put these ideals into practice (and added more ballets).

In Vienna, Gluck met like-minded figures in the operatic world: Count Giacomo Durazzo, the head of the court theatre, and one of the primary instigators of operatic reform in Vienna ; the librettist Ranieri de&#x27; Calzabigi, who wanted to attack the dominance of Metastasian opera seria; the innovative choreographer Gasparo Angiolini; and the London-trained castrato Gaetano Guadagni.

The first result of the new thinking was Gluck&#x27;s reformist ballet &quot;Don Juan&quot;, but a more important work was soon to follow. On 5 October 1762, &quot;Orfeo ed Euridice&quot; was given its first performance, on a libretto by Calzabigi, set to music by Gluck. Gluck tried to achieve a noble, Neo-Classical or &quot;beautiful simplicity&quot;. The dances were arranged by Angiolini and the title role was taken by Guadagni, a catalytic force in Gluck&#x27;s reform, renowned for his unorthodox acting and singing style. &quot;Orfeo&quot;, which has never left the standard repertory, showed the beginnings of Gluck&#x27;s reforms. His idea was to make the drama of the work more important than the star singers who performed it, and to do away with dry recitative (recitativo secco, accompanied only by continuo) that broke up the action. In 1765, Melchior Grimm published &quot;Poème lyrique&quot;, an influential article for the Encyclopédie on lyric and opera librettos.

Gluck and Calzabigi followed &quot;Orfeo&quot; with &quot;Alceste &quot;(1767) and &quot;Paride ed Elena &quot;(1770), dedicated to his friend João Carlos de Bragança (Duke de Lafões), an expert on music and mythology, pushing their innovations even further. Calzabigi wrote a preface to &quot;Alceste&quot;, which Gluck signed, setting out the principles of their reforms:

* no da capo arias
* no opportunity for vocal improvisation or virtuosic displays of vocal agility or power
* no long melismas
* a more predominantly syllabic setting of the text to make the words more intelligible
* far less repetition of text within an aria
* a blurring of the distinction between recitative and aria, declamatory and lyrical passages, with altogether less recitative
* accompanied rather than secco recitative
* simpler, more flowing melodic lines
* an overture that is linked by theme or mood to the ensuing action

Joseph von Sonnenfels praised Gluck&#x27;s tremendous imagination and the setting after attending a performance of &quot;Alceste&quot;. In 1769 Gluck performed his operas in Parma.

On 2 September 1771 Charles Burney visited Gluck, living in Sankt Marx. Burney thought Gluck&#x27;s preface, in which Gluck gives his “reasons for deviating from the beaten track”, important enough to give it almost in its entirety: &quot;It was my intention to confine music to its true dramatic province, of assisting poetical expression, and of augmenting the interest of the fable; without interrupting the action, or chilling it with useless and superfluous ornaments; for the office of music, when joined to poetry, seemed to me, to resemble that of colouring in a correct and well disposed design, where the lights and shades only seem to animate the figures, without altering the out-line.&quot; On 11 September Burney went to see Gluck to say goodbye; Gluck was still in bed, as he used to work in the night.

===Paris===

As his operas were not appreciated by Frederick II of Prussia, Gluck began to focus on France. Under the patronage of Marie Antoinette, who had married the future French King Louis XVI in 1770, Gluck signed a contract for six stage works with the management of the Paris Opéra. He began with &quot;Iphigénie en Aulide&quot;. The premiere on 19 April 1774 sparked a huge controversy, almost a war, such as had not been seen in the city since the Querelle des Bouffons. Gluck&#x27;s opponents brought the leading Italian composer Niccolò Piccinni to Paris to demonstrate the superiority of Neapolitan opera, and the &quot;whole town&quot; engaged in an argument between &quot;Gluckists&quot; and &quot;Piccinnists&quot;. The composers themselves took no part in the polemics, but when Piccinni was asked to set the libretto to &quot;Roland&quot;, on which Gluck was also known to be working, Gluck destroyed everything he had written for that opera up to that point.

On 2 August 1774 the French version of &quot;Orfeo ed Euridice&quot; was performed, more Rameau-like, with the title role transposed from the castrato to the tenor voice. This time Gluck&#x27;s work was better received by the Parisian public. In the same year, Gluck returned to Vienna, where he was appointed composer to the imperial court (18 October 1774) after 20 years serving as Kapellmeister. Over the next few years, the now internationally famous composer would travel back and forth between Paris and Vienna. He became friends with the poet Klopstock in Karlsruhe. On 23 April 1776, the French version of &quot;Alceste&quot; was given.

During the rehearsals for &quot;Echo et Narcisse&quot; in September 1779, Gluck became dangerously ill. Since the opera itself was a failure, running for only 12 performances, Gluck decided to return to Vienna within two weeks. In that city &quot;Die unvermuthete Zusammenkunft&quot; or &quot;Die Pilgrime von Mekka&quot; (1772), a German version of &quot;La rencontre imprévue&quot;, had been performed 51 times.

His musical heir in Paris was the composer Antonio Salieri, who had been Gluck&#x27;s protégé since he arrived in Vienna in 1767, and later had made friends with Gluck. Gluck brought Salieri to Paris with him and bequeathed him the libretto for &quot;Les Danaïdes&quot; by François-Louis Gand Le Bland Du Roullet and baron de Tschudi. The opera was announced as a collaboration between the two composers; however, after the overwhelming success of its premiere on 26 April 1784, Gluck revealed to the prestigious &quot;Journal de Paris&quot; that the work was wholly Salieri&#x27;s.

===Last years===
In Vienna Gluck wrote a few more minor works, spending the summer with his wife in Perchtoldsdorf, famous for its wine (Heuriger). Gluck suffered from melancholy and high blood pressure. In 1781, he brought out a German version of &quot;Iphigénie en Tauride&quot;. Gluck dominated the season&#x27;s proceedings with 32 performances. On 23 March 1783 he seems to have attended a concert by Mozart who played KV 455, variations on &quot;La Rencontre imprévue&quot; by Gluck (Wq. 32).

On 15 November 1787, lunching with friends, Gluck suffered a heart arrhythmia and died a few hours later, at the age of 73. Usually, it is mentioned Gluck had several strokes and became paralyzed on his right side. Robl, a family doctor, had doubts as Gluck was still able to play his clavichord or piano in 1783. At a formal commemoration on 8 April 1788, his friend, pupil and successor Salieri conducted Gluck&#x27;s &quot;De profundis&quot;, and a Requiem by the Italian composer Niccolò Jommelli was given. His death opened the way for Mozart at court, according to H. C. Robbins Landon. Gluck was buried in the Matzleinsdorfer Friedhof. On 29 September 1890, his remains were transferred to the Zentralfriedhof; a tomb was erected containing the original plaque.

==Legacy==
Although only half of his work survived after a fire in 1809, Gluck&#x27;s musical legacy includes approximately 35 complete full-length operas plus around a dozen shorter operas and operatic introductions, as well as numerous ballets and instrumental works. His reforms influenced Mozart, particularly his opera &quot;Idomeneo&quot; (1781). He left behind a flourishing school of disciples in Paris, who would dominate the French stage throughout the Revolutionary and Napoleonic period. As well as Salieri, they included Sacchini, Cherubini, Méhul and Spontini. His greatest French admirer would be Hector Berlioz, whose epic &quot;Les Troyens&quot; may be seen as the culmination of the Gluckian tradition. Though Gluck wrote no operas in German, his example influenced the German school of opera, particularly Carl Maria von Weber and Richard Wagner, whose concept of music drama was not so far removed from Gluck&#x27;s own.

==Works==

==Notes==
==Sources==
* Arend, Max (1920). &quot;Gluck, eine Biographie&quot;. Berlin: Schuster &amp; Loeffler. Copy at HathiTrust.
* Brown, Bruce Alan (1991). &quot;Gluck and the French Theatre in Vienna&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press. .
* Brown, Bruce Alan; Rushton, Julian (2001). &quot;Gluck, Christoph Willibald, Ritter von&quot;, Grove Music Online, edited by L. Macy (accessed 11 November 2007), grovemusic.com (subscription access).
* Croll, Gerhard (1991). &quot;Gluck, Christoph&quot;, vol. 5, , in &quot;The New Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 15th edition. Chicago. .
* Croll, Gerhard; Croll, Renate (2010). &quot;Gluck. Sein Leben, seine Musik&quot; (in German). Kassel; New York: Bärenreiter. .
* Croll, Gerhard; Croll, Renate (2014). &quot;Gluck. Sein Leben, seine Musik&quot; (2nd edition, in German). Kassel; New York: Bärenreiter. .
* Cronin, Vincent (1989). &quot;Louis and Antoinette&quot;. Collins Harvill .
* Einstein, Alfred (1936). &quot;Gluck&quot;, English translation by Eric Blom, 1964. McGraw-Hill. (1972 paperback edition).
* Garcin, Laurent (1772). &quot;Traité du mélo-drame&quot;. Paris: Chez Vallat-la-Chapelle. . Copy at Gallica.
* Harewood, The Earl of; Peattie, Antony, editors (1997). &quot;The New Kobbé&#x27;s Opera Book&quot;. New York: G. P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons. London: Ebury Press. .
* Hayes, Jeremy; Brown, Bruce Alan; Loppert, Max; Dean, Winton (1992). &quot;Gluck, Christoph Willibald&quot;, vol. 2, , in &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Opera&quot;, edited by Stanley Sadie. London: Macmillan. .
* Heartz, Daniel (1988). &quot;Coming of Age in Bohemia: The Musical Apprenticeships of Benda and Gluck&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Musicology&quot;, vol. 6, no. 4 (Autumn, 1988), pp. 510–27. . Also available here.
* Howard, Patricia (1995). &quot;Gluck: An Eighteenth-Century Portrait in Letters and Documents&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press. .
* Howard, Patricia (2003). &quot;Christoph Willibald Gluck. A Guide to Research&quot;, Second Edition. New York and London: Routledge. 
* Kuhn, Laura (2000). &quot;Baker&#x27;s Dictionary of Opera&quot;. New York: Schirmer. .
* Mosel, Ignaz Franz von (1827). &quot;Ueber das Leben und die Werke des Anton Salieri, K.k. Hofkapellmeister&quot;. Vienna: Wallishausser. Copy at Bavarian State Library website.
* Moser, Hans Joachim (1940). &quot;Christoph Willibald Gluck : die Leistung, der Mann, das Vermächtnis&quot;. Stuttgart: Cotta. .
*Mueller von Asov, Hedwig and E. H., editors (1963). &quot;Collected correspondence and papers of Christoph Willibald Gluck&quot;, translated by Stewart Thomson (copy at Internet Archive). New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
* Prod&#x27;homme, Jacques-Gabriel (1948; revised 1985). &quot;Gluck&quot;. Paris: Société de&#x27;Éditions Françaises et Internationales. . 1985 revision by Marie Fauquet: Paris: Fayard. .
* Robl, Werner (2013). &quot;Christoph Willibald Gluck wurde doch in Weidenwang geboren&quot; (in German).
* Robl, Werner (2015). &quot;Auf den Spuren der Familie Gluck in den Dörfern Weidenwang und Erasbach Fallstricke und Lösungen der regionalen Gluck-Forschung&quot;. Berching.
* (1854). &quot;Christoph Willibald Ritter von Gluck. Dessen Leben und tonkünstlerishes Wirken&quot;. Leipzig: Friedrich Fleischer. Copy at Google Books.

==Further reading==
*Abert, A. A., &quot;Christoph Willibald Gluck&quot; (in German) (Munich, 1959) 
*Felix, W., &quot;Christoph Willibald Gluck&quot; (in German) (Leipzig, 1965) 
*Heartz, D., &quot;From Garrick to Gluck: the Reform of Theatre and Opera in the Mid-Eighteenth Century&quot;, &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Musical Association&quot;, xciv (1967–68), pp. 111–27. .
*Gibbons, W. &quot;Building the Operatic Museum: Eighteenth-Century Opera in Fin-de-siècle Paris&quot;. University of Rochester Press, 2013. 
*Howard, P., &quot;Gluck and the Birth of Modern Opera&quot;. London, 1963 
*Howard, P., &quot;&quot;Orfeo&quot; and &quot;Orphée&quot;&quot;, &quot;The Musical Times&quot;, cviii (1967), pp. 892–94. 
*Howard, P., &quot;Gluck&quot;s Two Alcestes: a Comparison&quot;, &quot;The Musical Times&quot;, cxv (1974), pp. 642–93. 
*Howard, P., &quot;Armide: a Forgotten Masterpiece&quot;, &quot;Opera&quot;, xxx (1982), 572–76. 
*Kerman, Joseph, &quot;Opera as Drama&quot;. New York, 1956, 2/1989. Revised 1989 edition .
*Noiray, M., &quot;Gluck&#x27;s Methods of Composition in his French Operas &quot;Iphigénie en Aulide&quot;, &quot;Orphée&quot;, &quot;Iphigénie en Tauride&quot;. Dissertation, University of Oxford, 1979
*Rushton, J., &quot;Iphigénie en Tauride&quot;: the Operas of Gluck and Piccinni&quot;, &quot;Music &amp; Letters&quot;, liii (1972), pp. 411–30. 
*Rushton, J., &quot;The Musician Gluck&quot;, &quot;The Musical Times&quot;, cxxvi (1987), pp. 615–18. 
*Rushton, J., &quot;&#x27;Royal Agamemnon&#x27;: The Two Versions of Gluck&#x27;s &quot;Iphigénie en Aulide&quot;&quot;, &quot;Music and the French Revolution&quot;, ed. M. Boyd (Cambridge, 1992), pp. 15–36. .
*Saloman, O. F., &quot;Aspects of Gluckian Operatic Thought and Practice in France&quot; (diss., Columbia University, 1970)
*Sternfeld, F. W., &quot;Expression and Revision in Gluck&#x27;s &quot;Orfeo&quot; and &quot;Alceste&quot;, Essays Presented to Egon Wellesz&quot; (Oxford, 1966), pp. 114–29
* Youell, Amber Lynne (2012) &quot;Opera at the Crossroads of Tradition and Reform in Gluck&#x27;s Vienna&quot;, PhD dissertation, Columbia University

==External links==
* 
* Digital catalogue raisoné
* Gluck the Reformer. William Christie &amp; John Eliot Gardiner feature in this documentary on the operas of Christoph Willibald Gluck</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="0" end="19" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Christoph Willibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="21" end="35" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="[[Ritter]] von"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="37" end="42" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="117" end="122" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="136" end="152" title="classical period (music)" label="classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555" start="166" end="182" title="Upper Palatinate" label="Upper Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="197" end="204" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="235" end="252" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="282" end="290" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723776" start="509" end="526" title="Orfeo ed Euridice" label="Orfeo ed Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046495" start="543" end="550" title="Alceste (Gluck)" label="Alceste"/>
<link wikidata="Q29473" start="589" end="600" title="Metastasio" label="Metastasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210675" start="607" end="618" title="opera seria" label="opera seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="710" end="720" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q721644" start="750" end="762" title="da capo aria" label="da capo aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="815" end="828" title="baroque opera" label="baroque opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q662073" start="855" end="867" title="French opera" label="French opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="896" end="901" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q785522" start="945" end="958" title="Italian opera" label="Italian opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q687822" start="1073" end="1093" title="Iphigénie en Tauride" label="Iphigénie en Tauride"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577487" start="1390" end="1406" title="Echo et Narcisse" label="Echo et Narcisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895303" start="1723" end="1731" title="forester" label="forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q986072" start="1843" end="1851" title="Rokycany" label="Rokycany"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="1892" end="1899" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1926" end="1932" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="1951" end="1957" title="Plzeň" label="Pilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q262594" start="2193" end="2217" title="Neustadt an der Waldnaab" label="Neustadt an der Waldnaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q302413" start="2264" end="2273" title="Lobkowitz" label="Lobkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="2315" end="2322" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q503977" start="2348" end="2358" title="Störnstein" label="Störnstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10420" start="2359" end="2367" title="Neustadt an der Waldnaab (district)" label="Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="2702" end="2727" title="War of Spanish Succession" label="War of Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="2847" end="2862" title="Eugene of Savoy" label="Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248062" start="2898" end="2906" title="Berching" label="Berching"/>
<link wikidata="Q319484" start="2979" end="2997" title="Plankstetten Abbey" label="Plankstetten Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14887" start="3017" end="3042" title="Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz" label="Neumarkt in der Oberpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q248062" start="3085" end="3093" title="Erasbach" label="Erasbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q160686" start="3320" end="3334" title="Saint Walburga" label="Saint Walburga"/>
<link wikidata="Q705878" start="3350" end="3365" title="Saint Willibald" label="Saint Willibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q252772" start="3394" end="3403" title="Eichstätt" label="Eichstätt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052789" start="3784" end="3816" title="Emmanuel Marie Louis de Noailles" label="Emmanuel Marie Louis de Noailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="3954" end="3960" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q163236" start="4586" end="4603" title="Treaty of Rastatt" label="Treaty of Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q688939" start="4612" end="4627" title="Treaty of Baden (1714)" label="Treaty of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="4638" end="4663" title="War of Spanish Succession" label="War of Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="4691" end="4699" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873680" start="4835" end="4841" title="Bavarian gulden" label="gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q246837" start="5239" end="5249" title="Zákupy" label="Reichstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q433395" start="5295" end="5333" title="Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe-Lauenburg" label="Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe-Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q256580" start="5373" end="5401" title="Gian Gastone de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Gian Gastone de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q9014654" start="5507" end="5532" title="Philipp Joseph von Kinsky" label="Philipp Joseph von Kinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q340680" start="5536" end="5552" title="Böhmisch Kamnitz" label="Böhmisch Kamnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091181" start="5650" end="5662" title="Oberkreibitz" label="Oberkreibitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q944051" start="5730" end="5743" title="Horní Jiřetín" label="Horní Jiřetín"/>
<link wikidata="Q634614" start="5869" end="5883" title="Jesuit college" label="Jesuit college"/>
<link wikidata="Q146356" start="5887" end="5895" title="Chomutov" label="Chomutov"/>
<link wikidata="Q314950" start="5936" end="5965" title="Johann Christian von Mannlich" label="Johann Christian von Mannlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="6140" end="6146" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="6657" end="6677" title="Charles University in Prague" label="University of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511449" start="6687" end="6694" title="Gerhard Croll" label="Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="6953" end="6961" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453427" start="7025" end="7035" title="Týn Church" label="Týn Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869229" start="7384" end="7398" title="Minoritenplatz" label="Minoritenplatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q677985" start="7522" end="7554" title="Johann Georg Christian, Prince of Lobkowicz" label="Johann Georg Christian Lobkowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q311571" start="7719" end="7734" title="Antonio Caldara" label="Antonio Caldara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600785" start="7748" end="7767" title="La clemenza di Tito (Caldara)" label="La clemenza di Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217453" start="8221" end="8234" title="Daniel Heartz" label="Daniel Heartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51088" start="8366" end="8381" title="Antonio Salieri" label="Antonio Salieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426886" start="8431" end="8446" title="Ignaz von Mosel" label="Ignaz von Mosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="8491" end="8496" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157945" start="9198" end="9229" title="Jacques-Gabriel Prod&amp;#x27;homme" label="Jacques-Gabriel Prod&amp;#x27;homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="9273" end="9278" title="Franz Liszt" label="Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q785479" start="9577" end="9592" title="opéras-comiques" label="opéras-comiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q217435" start="9856" end="9884" title="Giovanni Battista Sammartini" label="Giovanni Battista Sammartini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108009" start="9904" end="9920" title="Giuseppe Carpani" label="Giuseppe Carpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277167" start="10291" end="10310" title="Teatro Regio Ducale" label="Teatro Regio Ducale"/>
<link wikidata="Q663537" start="10404" end="10442" title="Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun" label="Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29473" start="10465" end="10475" title="Metastasio" label="Metastasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="10620" end="10624" title="aria" label="aria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10735" end="10753" title="Carnival in Italy#Others" label="Carnivals at Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210970" start="10769" end="10777" title="castrato" label="castrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275132" start="10778" end="10796" title="Giovanni Carestini" label="Giovanni Carestini"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793890" start="11052" end="11062" title="Ipermestra (Gluck)" label="Ipermestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982047" start="11107" end="11137" title="Teatro San Giovanni Crisostomo" label="Teatro San Giovanni Crisostomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082311" start="11346" end="11360" title="Charles Sackville, 2nd Duke of Dorset" label="Lord Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11403" end="11422" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre#Vanbrugh&amp;#x27;s theatre: 1705–1789" label="King&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="11609" end="11627" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344616" start="11817" end="11843" title="La caduta de&amp;#x27; giganti" label="La caduta de&amp;#x27; giganti"/>
<link wikidata="Q208338" start="11970" end="11977" title="Galuppi" label="Galuppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q739019" start="11982" end="11992" title="Giovanni Battista Lampugnani" label="Lampugnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="12079" end="12085" title="George Frideric Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222390" start="12184" end="12197" title="David Garrick" label="David Garrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="12346" end="12363" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q917571" start="12480" end="12494" title="glassharmonica" label="glassharmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069665" start="12498" end="12518" title="Hickford&amp;#x27;s Room" label="Hickford&amp;#x27;s Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962664" start="12539" end="12552" title="Brewer Street" label="Brewer Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="12626" end="12640" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="12705" end="12716" title="Counterpoint" label="contrapunto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282810" start="12730" end="12735" title="Gustavus Waltz" label="Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8946" start="12866" end="12874" title="Pillnitz" label="Pillnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193008" start="12889" end="12904" title="Pietro Mingotti" label="Pietro Mingotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162838" start="13022" end="13057" title="Le nozze d&amp;#x27;Ercole e d&amp;#x27;Ebe" label="Le nozze d&amp;#x27;Ercole e d&amp;#x27;Ebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743988" start="13073" end="13087" title="festa teatrale" label="festa teatrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q164732" start="13289" end="13308" title="Johann Adolph Hasse" label="Johann Adolph Hasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840318" start="13357" end="13383" title="La Semiramide riconosciuta" label="La Semiramide riconosciuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="13403" end="13416" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626989" start="13434" end="13447" title="Vittoria Tesi" label="Vittoria Tesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172891" start="14206" end="14233" title="Giovanni Battista Locatelli (opera director)" label="Giovanni Battista Locatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423296" start="14387" end="14391" title="Ezio (Gluck)" label="Ezio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047086" start="14479" end="14495" title="Lobkowicz Palace" label="Lobkowicz Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344619" start="14937" end="14956" title="La clemenza di Tito (Gluck)" label="La clemenza di Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="15056" end="15077" title="Charles VII of Naples" label="Charles VII of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q628491" start="15124" end="15143" title="Teatro di San Carlo" label="Teatro di San Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q210970" start="15166" end="15174" title="castrato" label="castrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q527738" start="15175" end="15185" title="Caffarelli (castrato)" label="Caffarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q314221" start="15523" end="15540" title="Francesco Durante" label="Francesco Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="15851" end="15864" title="Kapellmeister" label="Kapellmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q213998" start="15876" end="15912" title="Prince Joseph of Saxe-Hildburghausen" label="Prince Joseph of Saxe-Hildburghausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q750785" start="15929" end="15938" title="Le cinesi" label="Le cinesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344627" start="15978" end="15986" title="La danza (Gluck)" label="La danza"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="16031" end="16049" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q93716" start="16164" end="16189" title="Order of the Golden Spur" label="Knight of the Golden Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q126711" start="16193" end="16210" title="Pope Benedict XIV" label="Pope Benedict XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q210675" start="16350" end="16361" title="opera seria" label="opera seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q785479" start="16381" end="16394" title="opéra comique" label="opéra comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292866" start="16462" end="16470" title="Don Juan (ballet)" label="Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495308" start="16517" end="16534" title="Gasparo Angiolini" label="Gasparo Angiolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q365581" start="16553" end="16573" title="Jean-Georges Noverre" label="Jean-Georges Noverre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994690" start="16666" end="16687" title="La rencontre imprévue" label="La rencontre imprévue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34620" start="16754" end="16767" title="Greek tragedy" label="Greek tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207741" start="16820" end="16835" title="Sturm und Drang" label="Sturm und Drang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="16867" end="16883" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="16940" end="16944" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="16950" end="16961" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="16970" end="16975" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="17166" end="17196" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351020" start="17246" end="17264" title="Il Parnaso confuso" label="Il Parnaso confuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q248892" start="17445" end="17464" title="Iphigénie en Aulide" label="Iphigénie en Aulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186899" start="17493" end="17514" title="Querelle des Bouffons" label="Querelle des Bouffons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442215" start="17674" end="17691" title="Rosalie Levasseur" label="Rosalie Levasseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q435935" start="17696" end="17710" title="Sophie Arnould" label="Sophie Arnould"/>
<link wikidata="Q16857804" start="17820" end="17834" title="Henri Larrivée" label="Henri Larrivée"/>
<link wikidata="Q313667" start="18097" end="18119" title="François-Joseph Gossec" label="François-Joseph Gossec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123913" start="18137" end="18154" title="Concert Spirituel" label="Concert Spirituel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726953" start="18160" end="18186" title="Chevalier de Saint-Georges" label="Chevalier de Saint-Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="18231" end="18252" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q208080" start="18516" end="18527" title="opera buffa" label="opera buffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210675" start="18544" end="18555" title="opera seria" label="opera seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q439081" start="19271" end="19290" title="Francesco Algarotti" label="Francesco Algarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q312891" start="19635" end="19651" title="Niccolò Jommelli" label="Niccolò Jommelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q266084" start="19656" end="19671" title="Tommaso Traetta" label="Tommaso Traetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105050" start="19814" end="19829" title="Giacomo Durazzo" label="Giacomo Durazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310912" start="19943" end="19969" title="Ranieri de&amp;#x27; Calzabigi" label="Ranieri de&amp;#x27; Calzabigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495308" start="20063" end="20080" title="Gasparo Angiolini" label="Gasparo Angiolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q210970" start="20105" end="20113" title="castrato" label="castrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094278" start="20114" end="20130" title="Gaetano Guadagni" label="Gaetano Guadagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292866" start="20210" end="20218" title="Don Juan (ballet)" label="Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q723776" start="20297" end="20314" title="Orfeo ed Euridice" label="Orfeo ed Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="20359" end="20367" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="20437" end="20450" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neo-Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="20897" end="20907" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="20947" end="20955" title="Figured bass" label="continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61852" start="20992" end="21006" title="Melchior Grimm" label="Melchior Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q447" start="21075" end="21087" title="Encyclopédie" label="Encyclopédie"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="21091" end="21096" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="21107" end="21115" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046495" start="21177" end="21184" title="Alceste (Gluck)" label="Alceste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810521" start="21208" end="21223" title="Paride ed Elena" label="Paride ed Elena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311300" start="21262" end="21302" title="João Carlos de Bragança (Duke de Lafões)" label="João Carlos de Bragança (Duke de Lafões)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721644" start="21499" end="21511" title="da capo aria" label="da capo aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049625" start="21540" end="21553" title="Musical improvisation" label="improvisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214970" start="21557" end="21566" title="Virtuoso" label="virtuosic"/>
<link wikidata="Q248255" start="21612" end="21619" title="melisma" label="melisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q178122" start="21749" end="21753" title="aria" label="aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="21794" end="21804" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21883" end="21894" title="Recitative#Accompagnato (or obbligato)" label="accompanied"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21907" end="21923" title="Recitative#Secco" label="secco recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q202287" start="21967" end="21975" title="overture" label="overture"/>
<link wikidata="Q215122" start="22031" end="22052" title="Joseph von Sonnenfels" label="Joseph von Sonnenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030906" start="22105" end="22112" title="set construction" label="setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="22205" end="22210" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="22233" end="22247" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="23083" end="23106" title="Frederick II of Prussia" label="Frederick II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="23220" end="23229" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q248892" start="23343" end="23362" title="Iphigénie en Aulide" label="Iphigénie en Aulide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186899" start="23490" end="23511" title="Querelle des Bouffons" label="Querelle des Bouffons"/>
<link wikidata="Q310687" start="23573" end="23589" title="Niccolò Piccinni" label="Niccolò Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q208080" start="23633" end="23649" title="Opera buffa" label="Neapolitan opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439921" start="23876" end="23882" title="Roland (Lully)" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145" start="24100" end="24106" title="Rameau" label="Rameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="24396" end="24409" title="Kapellmeister" label="Kapellmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q154367" start="24562" end="24571" title="Klopstock" label="Klopstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577487" start="24690" end="24706" title="Echo et Narcisse" label="Echo et Narcisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51088" start="25116" end="25131" title="Antonio Salieri" label="Antonio Salieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751750" start="25324" end="25336" title="Les Danaïdes" label="Les Danaïdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083494" start="25346" end="25385" title="François-Louis Gand Le Bland Du Roullet" label="François-Louis Gand Le Bland Du Roullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163785" start="25390" end="25406" title="Jean-Baptiste-Louis-Théodore de Tschudi" label="baron de Tschudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186842" start="25592" end="25608" title="Journal de Paris" label="Journal de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q671367" start="25757" end="25771" title="Perchtoldsdorf" label="Perchtoldsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q686899" start="25794" end="25802" title="Heuriger" label="Heuriger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="25825" end="25835" title="Depression (mood)" label="melancholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="26063" end="26069" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q162478" start="26081" end="26083" title="Köchel catalogue" label="KV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="26218" end="26234" title="heart arrhythmia" label="heart arrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191823" start="26442" end="26452" title="clavichord" label="clavichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q582050" start="26583" end="26595" title="Psalm 130" label="De profundis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51616" start="26609" end="26616" title="Requiem" label="Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q312891" start="26641" end="26657" title="Niccolò Jommelli" label="Niccolò Jommelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q526080" start="26728" end="26748" title="H. C. Robbins Landon" label="H. C. Robbins Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q666587" start="26774" end="26798" title="Matzleinsdorf Protestant Cemetery" label="Matzleinsdorfer Friedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q240744" start="26858" end="26873" title="Vienna Central Cemetery" label="Zentralfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="27220" end="27226" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q723559" start="27257" end="27265" title="Idomeneo" label="Idomeneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q366727" start="27461" end="27469" title="Antonio Sacchini" label="Sacchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20721" start="27471" end="27480" title="Luigi Cherubini" label="Cherubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q364020" start="27482" end="27487" title="Étienne Méhul" label="Méhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q168485" start="27492" end="27500" title="Gaspare Spontini" label="Spontini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="27539" end="27553" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472325" start="27572" end="27583" title="Les Troyens" label="Les Troyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q154812" start="27752" end="27772" title="Carl Maria von Weber" label="Carl Maria von Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="27777" end="27791" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q279272" start="27810" end="27821" title="music drama" label="music drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="28000" end="28010" title="HathiTrust" label="HathiTrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977050" start="28014" end="28031" title="Brown, Bruce Alan" label="Brown, Bruce Alan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="28100" end="28115" title="Clarendon Press" label="Clarendon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753675" start="28140" end="28155" title="Rushton, Julian" label="Rushton, Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="28216" end="28234" title="Grove Music Online" label="Grove Music Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511449" start="28323" end="28337" title="Gerhard Croll" label="Croll, Gerhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="28395" end="28426" title="The New Encyclopædia Britannica" label="The New Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q659697" start="28715" end="28726" title="Bärenreiter" label="Bärenreiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q60197" start="28810" end="28826" title="Einstein, Alfred" label="Einstein, Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="29035" end="29042" title="Gallica" label="Gallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q336609" start="29046" end="29067" title="Harewood, 7th Earl of" label="Harewood, The Earl of"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520368" start="29108" end="29139" title="The New Kobbé&amp;#x27;s Opera Book" label="The New Kobbé&amp;#x27;s Opera Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399454" start="29256" end="29268" title="Dean, Winton" label="Dean, Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764725" start="29336" end="29369" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Opera" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="29387" end="29400" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217453" start="29425" end="29439" title="Heartz, Daniel" label="Heartz, Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426886" start="29996" end="30018" title="Mosel, Ignaz Franz von" label="Mosel, Ignaz Franz von"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157945" start="30531" end="30563" title="Prod&amp;#x27;homme, Jacques-Gabriel" label="Prod&amp;#x27;homme, Jacques-Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="31140" end="31152" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q73808" start="31176" end="31188" title="Anna Amalie Abert" label="Abert, A. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q5217453" start="31336" end="31346" title="Daniel Heartz" label="Heartz, D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1757371" start="31825" end="31842" title="The Musical Times" label="The Musical Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917826" start="32098" end="32112" title="Joseph Kerman" label="Kerman, Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q56753675" start="32394" end="32405" title="Julian Rushton" label="Rushton, J."/>
<link wikidata="Q15708875" start="32487" end="32506" title="Music &amp;amp; Letters" label="Music &amp;amp; Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="33283" end="33302" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99639" wikidata="Q258741" url="?curid=99639" title="Anna Sewell">
<text>Anna Sewell (; 30 March 1820 – 25 April 1878) was an English novelist who wrote the 1877 novel &quot;Black Beauty&quot;, her only published work. It is considered one of the top ten best-selling novels for children, although the author intended it for adults. Sewell died only five months after the publication of &quot;Black Beauty&quot;, but long enough to see her only novel become a success.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Sewell was born on March 30, 1820, in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, into a devout Quaker family. Her father was Isaac Phillip Sewell (1793–1879), and her mother, Mary Wright Sewell (1798–1884), was a successful author of children&#x27;s books. She had one sibling, a younger brother named Philip. The children were largely educated at home by their mother due to a lack of money for schooling.

In 1822, Isaac&#x27;s business, a small shop, failed and the family moved to Dalston, London. Life was difficult for the family, and Isaac and Mary frequently sent Philip and Anna to stay with Mary&#x27;s parents in Buxton, Norfolk.

In 1832, when she was twelve, the family moved to Stoke Newington and Sewell attended school for the first time. At fourteen, Sewell slipped and severely injured her ankles. For the rest of her life, she could not stand without a crutch or walk for any length of time. For greater mobility, she frequently used horse-drawn carriages, which contributed to her love of horses and concern for the humane treatment of animals.

=== Adult life ===
In 1836, Sewell&#x27;s father took a job in Brighton, in the hope that the climate there would help cure her. At about the same time, both Sewell and her mother left the Society of Friends to join the Church of England, though both remained active in evangelical circles. Her mother expressed her religious faith most noticeably by writing a series of evangelical children&#x27;s books, which Sewell helped to edit, though all the Sewells, and Mary Sewell&#x27;s family, the Wrights, engaged in many other good works. Sewell assisted her mother, for example, to establish a working men&#x27;s club, and worked with her on temperance and abolitionist campaigns.

In 1845, the family moved to Lancing, and Sewell&#x27;s health began to deteriorate. She travelled to Europe the following year to seek treatment. On her return, the family continued to relocate – to Abson near Wick in 1858 and to Bath in 1864.

In 1866, Sewell&#x27;s brother Philip&#x27;s wife died, leaving him with seven young children to care for, and the following year the Sewells moved to Old Catton, a village outside the city of Norwich in Norfolk, to support him.

===&quot; Black Beauty&quot;===
While living in Old Catton, Sewell wrote the manuscript of &quot;Black Beauty&quot; – in the period between 1871 and 1877. During this time her health was declining; she was often so weak that she was confined to her bed. Writing was a challenge. She dictated the text to her mother and from 1876 began to write on slips of paper which her mother then transcribed.

The book is considered to be one of the first English novels to be written from the perspective of an animal, in this case a horse. Although it is considered a children&#x27;s classic, Sewell originally wrote it for those who worked with horses. She said &quot;a special aim was to induce kindness, sympathy, and an understanding treatment of horses&quot;. In many respects the book can be read as a guide to horse husbandry, stable management and humane training practices for colts. It is considered to have had an effect on reducing cruelty to horses; for example, the use of bearing reins, which are particularly painful for a horse, was one of the practices highlighted in the novel. In the years after the book&#x27;s publication, they eventually fell out of favour.

Sewell sold the novel to Norwich publisher Jarrolds on 24 November 1877, when she was 57 years old. She received a single payment of £40 (£3,456 or US$4,630 in 2017) and the book was published the same year.

===Death===
After the publication of her only novel, &quot;Black Beauty&quot;, Sewell fell seriously ill. She was in extreme pain, discomfort and completely bedridden for the following months, and she died on April 25, 1878, aged 58 of hepatitis or tuberculosis, only five months after the publication of &quot;Black Beauty&quot;. She was buried on 30 April 1878 at Quaker burial ground in Lamas near Buxton, Norfolk, not far from Norwich.

==Memorials and monuments==

Sewell&#x27;s birthplace in Church Plain, Great Yarmouth has been the home to a museum and a tea shop and is leased by Redwings Horse Sanctuary. The house in Old Catton where she wrote &quot;Black Beauty&quot; is known as Anna Sewell House.

There is an Anna Sewell memorial fountain and horse trough outside the public library in Ansonia, Connecticut, in the United States of America. It was donated by Caroline Phelps Stokes, a philanthropist known for her work supporting animal welfare, in 1892.

A memorial fountain to Sewell is located at the junction of Constitution Hill and St. Clement&#x27;s Hill in Norwich, which also marks the entrance to Sewell Park. The fountain was placed in 1917 by Sewell&#x27;s niece Ada Sewell.

On 1 September 1984, the graveyard at Lamas was bulldozed by contractors under the direction of Mrs Wendy Forsey without prior warning or permission. Tombstones, graves and cypress trees were removed and dumped at the edge of the burial ground. The act was condemned by locals and Council Chairman John Perkins, who said: &quot;I know the land belongs to a private person but I would almost say it was as bad as vandalism. I know Quaker ground is not consecrated, but for anybody to just pull down gravestones of any Quaker, whether it&#x27;s Anna Sewell or not, well, I think it&#x27;s despicable&quot;. The gravestones of Anna, her parents and maternal grandparents were subsequently placed in a flint-and-brick wall outside the old Lammas Quaker meeting house.

In 2020, a street in Chichester, West Sussex, was named in Sewell&#x27;s honour on the Keepers Green estate.

==See also==
*Sewell Park, Norwich
*Sewell Barn Theatre
*Sewell Park Academy

==References==
==External links==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q258741" start="0" end="11" title="Anna Sewell" label="Anna Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="61" end="69" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q880092" start="101" end="113" title="Black Beauty" label="Black Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="466" end="480" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="482" end="489" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="505" end="511" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780991" start="585" end="603" title="Mary Wright Sewell" label="Mary Wright Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499366" start="895" end="902" title="Dalston" label="Dalston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003259" start="1034" end="1049" title="Buxton, Norfolk" label="Buxton, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="1102" end="1117" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="1419" end="1424" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="1539" end="1547" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1665" end="1683" title="Society of Friends" label="Society of Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1696" end="1713" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034980" start="2069" end="2092" title="working men&amp;#x27;s club" label="working men&amp;#x27;s club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020014" start="2186" end="2193" title="Lancing, West Sussex" label="Lancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303624" start="2357" end="2372" title="Abson" label="Abson near Wick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="2388" end="2392" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305561" start="2554" end="2564" title="Old Catton" label="Old Catton"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="2596" end="2603" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q127445" start="3610" end="3623" title="Overcheck" label="bearing reins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161111" start="3848" end="3856" title="Jarrolds" label="Jarrolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="4250" end="4259" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="4263" end="4275" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682506" start="4404" end="4409" title="Lamas, Norfolk" label="Lamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003259" start="4415" end="4430" title="Buxton, Norfolk" label="Buxton, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306467" start="4603" end="4627" title="Redwings Horse Sanctuary" label="Redwings Horse Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305561" start="4642" end="4652" title="Old Catton" label="Old Catton"/>
<link wikidata="Q570044" start="4815" end="4835" title="Ansonia, Connecticut" label="Ansonia, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q18398279" start="4888" end="4910" title="Caroline Phelps Stokes" label="Caroline Phelps Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458226" start="5136" end="5147" title="Sewell Park, Norwich" label="Sewell Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207639" start="6003" end="6013" title="Chichester" label="Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23287" start="6015" end="6026" title="West Sussex" label="West Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458226" start="6106" end="6126" title="Sewell Park, Norwich" label="Sewell Park, Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458217" start="6128" end="6147" title="Sewell Barn Theatre" label="Sewell Barn Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458227" start="6149" end="6168" title="Sewell Park Academy" label="Sewell Park Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99643" wikidata="Q629427" url="?curid=99643" title="Caister-on-Sea">
<text>Caister-on-Sea, also known colloquially as Caister, is a large village, seaside resort and civil parish in the English county of Norfolk.

Caister is located north of Great Yarmouth and east of Norwich.

==History==
Caister&#x27;s history dates back to Roman times. In around 200 CE a fort was built here as a base for a unit of the Roman army and navy. However its role as a fort appears to have been reduced following the construction of the Saxon Shore fort at Burgh Castle on the southern side of the estuary in the latter part of the third century.

The name &quot;Caister&quot; derives from the Anglo-Saxon word &quot;ceaster&quot;, meaning &quot;Roman fort&quot;.

In the 1950s, a building near the south gate at Caister was excavated in advance of a housing development. These buildings do not appear to be military as they include a hypocaust and painted wall plaster as well as female jewellery, and it has been suggested that this building may have been an officer&#x27;s house, or possibly a ‘seamen&#x27;s hostel’ which may be a polite name for a brothel. The site appears to have been abandoned in the 5th century, but 150 Saxon burials have been found to the south of the enclosure. The remains excavated in the 1950s are now managed by English Heritage and are open free of charge to the public as Caister Roman Site.

In the Fifteenth Century, Caister Castle was built as a residence for Sir John Fastolf. The castle has an attached Motoring Museum and is still open to visitors.

There has been an offshore lifeboat in the area since 1791. It was used by a beach company to salvage ships wrecked on the sand banks. Between 1856 and 1969 lifeboats were operated by the RNLI. In the 1901 Caister lifeboat disaster, nine crew were lost while attempting a rescue during heavy seas. At the time it was said, &quot;If they had to keep at it &#x27;til now, they would have sailed about until daylight to help her. Going back is against the rules when we see distress signals like that&quot;. A monument to the men lost in the disaster bearing the inscription &quot;Caister men never turn back&quot; stands in the village cemetery, unveiled in 1903 and was listed Grade II by Historic England in 2020. A pub called the &quot;Never Turn Back&quot; is named after the incident.

The village was served by Caister-on-Sea railway station until it was closed in 1959. The nearest railway station is now , to the south.

Today, Caister is also host to a National Coastwatch Institution (NCI) Station.

== Geography ==
According to the 2021 census, Caister-on-Sea has a population of 8,616 people which shows a decrease from the 8,901 people recorded in the 2011 census.

==Amenities==
There is a Haven caravan and holiday park near the coast. The oldest holiday camp in the United Kingdom, it began as the &quot;Caister Socialist Camp&quot; in 1906. In the 1950s and early 1960s, it used to be on both sides of the road. Opposite the beach was a dining room, paper shop, sports facilities and tourist chalets. These facilities were sold to a property developer who turned it into housing in the 1970s. In the 1980s a new holiday camp was opened, under the ownership of Ladbrokes, which was sold to Warners in the 1990s.

Caister FC is the village football team, who play at the King George V playing field.

The wind farm at Scroby Sands has thirty 2–megawatt wind turbines, offshore.

== Church of the Holy Trinity ==
Caister&#x27;s parish church is dedicated to the Holy Trinity and dates back to the Thirteenth Century. The Church of the Holy Trinity is located on Ormesby Road and has been Grade II listed since 1947. The church was heavily restored in the late-Nineteenth Century and is home to East Anglia&#x27;s largest Medieval font. Stained glass in the church includes a memorial to the men killed in the Caister lifeboat disaster by Paul Woodroffe as well as a depiction of Christ the Shepherd by Alfred Wilkinson. Furthermore, there is a set of royal arms that are dated from the reign of King George III, though they could be a repurposed work from the reign of King Charles I.

== Notable Residents ==

* Sir John Fastolf KG – (1380–1459) knight and landowner, lived and died in Caister.
* Sarah Martin – (1791–1843) prison reformer and philanthropist, lived in Caister.
* James Haylett – (1825–1907) lifeboatman, lived in Caister.
* John Healing – (1873–1933) Gloucestershire cricketer, died in Caister.
* Len Holland – (b.1888–???) golfer, brought-up in Caister.
* Ron Hansell – (1930–2013) Norwich City and Chester, died in Caister.
* Terry Anderson – (1944–1980) Norwich City and Arsenal footballer, landlord of the Castle Hotel, Caister.
* Dale Gordon – (b.1967) Norwich City and Rangers footballer, born in Caister.

== Governance ==
Caister-on-Sea is divided into the electoral wards of Caister North and Caister South for local elections and is part of the district of Great Yarmouth.

The village&#x27;s national constituency is Great Yarmouth which has been represented by the Reform UK&#x27;s Rupert Lowe MP since 2024.

==War Memorial==
Caister-on-Sea&#x27;s war memorial are several brass plaques inside Holy Trinity Church. The conflicts of the Twentieth Century had an extremely heavy toll on Caister, the fallen from the First World War are listed below:

And: Walter E. Haylett. And, the following for the Second World War:
==References==

http://kepn.nottingham.ac.uk/map/place/Norfolk/Caister%20next%20Yarmouth

==External links==
* Great Yarmouth - the Golden Mile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629427" start="0" end="14" title="Caister-on-Sea" label="Caister-on-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q629427" start="43" end="50" title="Caister-on-Sea" label="Caister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="72" end="86" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="91" end="103" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="111" end="118" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="129" end="136" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="167" end="181" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="194" end="201" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="444" end="455" title="Saxon Shore" label="Saxon Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098453" start="464" end="476" title="Burgh Castle" label="Burgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="601" end="612" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q731794" start="842" end="851" title="hypocaust" label="hypocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="1252" end="1268" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735346" start="1314" end="1332" title="Caister Roman Site" label="Caister Roman Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017844" start="1361" end="1375" title="Caister Castle" label="Caister Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q71125" start="1405" end="1421" title="Sir John Fastolf" label="Sir John Fastolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017846" start="1525" end="1533" title="Caister Lifeboat" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166873" start="1686" end="1690" title="Royal National Lifeboat Institution" label="RNLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557845" start="1699" end="1729" title="1901 Caister lifeboat disaster" label="1901 Caister lifeboat disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604421" start="2186" end="2202" title="Historic England" label="Historic England"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099397" start="2235" end="2250" title="Never Turn Back" label="Never Turn Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017839" start="2313" end="2343" title="Caister-on-Sea railway station" label="Caister-on-Sea railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="2539" end="2550" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="2661" end="2672" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683682" start="2700" end="2705" title="Haven and British Holidays" label="Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799875" start="3173" end="3182" title="Ladbrokes" label="Ladbrokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411592" start="3282" end="3309" title="King George&amp;#x27;s Fields" label="King George V playing field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439264" start="3329" end="3341" title="Scroby Sands wind farm" label="Scroby Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="3472" end="3484" title="Holy trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="3740" end="3744" title="Baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557845" start="3819" end="3844" title="1901 Caister lifeboat disaster" label="Caister lifeboat disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154473" start="3848" end="3862" title="Paul Woodroffe" label="Paul Woodroffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="4005" end="4020" title="George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4079" end="4093" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q71125" start="4123" end="4142" title="John Fastolf" label="Sir John Fastolf KG"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503096" start="4208" end="4220" title="Sarah Martin" label="Sarah Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135772" start="4291" end="4304" title="James Haylett" label="James Haylett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144882" start="4352" end="4364" title="John Healing" label="John Healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735265" start="4379" end="4394" title="Gloucestershire County Cricket Club" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061827" start="4425" end="4436" title="Len Holland" label="Len Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363874" start="4485" end="4496" title="Ron Hansell" label="Ron Hansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4511" end="4523" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041933" start="4528" end="4535" title="Chester F.C." label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704060" start="4556" end="4570" title="Terry Anderson (footballer)" label="Terry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4585" end="4597" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="4602" end="4609" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210458" start="4663" end="4674" title="Dale Gordon" label="Dale Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4686" end="4698" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="4703" end="4710" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="4793" end="4808" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="4883" end="4891" title="Non-metropolitan district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q894085" start="4895" end="4909" title="Great Yarmouth (district)" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072660" start="4956" end="4970" title="Great Yarmouth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="5005" end="5021" title="Reform UK" label="Reform UK&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380323" start="5022" end="5036" title="Rupert Lowe" label="Rupert Lowe MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5255" end="5270" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5341" end="5357" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99645" wikidata="Q115690473" url="?curid=99645" title="Early modern human">
<text>Early modern human (EMH), or anatomically modern human (AMH), are terms used to distinguish &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; (sometimes &quot;Homo sapiens sapiens&quot;) that are anatomically consistent with the range of phenotypes seen in contemporary humans, from extinct archaic human species (of which some are at times also identified with, but only one, prefix &quot;sapiens&quot;). This distinction is useful especially for times and regions where anatomically modern and archaic humans co-existed, for example, in Paleolithic Europe. Among the oldest known remains of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; are those found at the Omo-Kibish I archaeological site in south-western Ethiopia, dating to about 233,000 to 196,000 years ago, the Florisbad Skull founded at the Florisbad archaeological and paleontological site in South Africa, dating to about 259,000 years ago, and the Jebel Irhoud site in Morocco, dated about 315,000 years ago.

Extinct species of the genus &quot;Homo&quot; include &quot;Homo erectus&quot; (extant from roughly 2 to 0.1 million years ago) and a number of other species (by some authors considered subspecies of either &quot;H. sapiens&quot; or &quot;H. erectus&quot;). The divergence of the lineage leading to &quot;H. sapiens&quot; out of ancestral &quot;H. erectus&quot; (or an intermediate species such as &quot;Homo antecessor&quot;) is estimated to have occurred in Africa roughly 500,000 years ago. The earliest fossil evidence of early modern humans appears in Africa around 300,000 years ago, with the earliest genetic splits among modern people, according to some evidence, dating to around the same time. Sustained archaic human admixture with modern humans is known to have taken place both in Africa and (following the recent Out-Of-Africa expansion) in Eurasia, between about 100,000 and 30,000 years ago.

==Name and taxonomy==

The binomial name &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; was coined by Linnaeus, 1758. The Latin noun &quot;&quot; (genitive &quot;hominis&quot;) means &quot;human being&quot;, while the participle &quot;&quot; means &quot;discerning, wise, sensible&quot;.

The species was initially thought to have emerged from a predecessor within the genus &quot;Homo&quot; around 300,000 to 200,000 years ago. A problem with the morphological classification of &quot;anatomically modern&quot; was that it would not have included certain extant populations. For this reason, a lineage-based (cladistic) definition of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; has been suggested, in which &quot;H. sapiens&quot; would by definition refer to the modern human lineage following the split from the Neanderthal lineage. Such a cladistic definition would extend the age of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; to over 500,000 years.

Estimates for the split between the Homo sapiens line and combined Neanderthal/Denisovan line range from between 503,000 and 565,000 years ago; between 550,000 and 765,000 years ago; and (based on rates of dental evolution) possibly more than 800,000 years ago.

Extant human populations have historically been divided into subspecies, but since around the 1980s all extant groups have tended to be subsumed into a single species, &quot;H. sapiens&quot;, avoiding division into subspecies altogether.

Some sources show Neanderthals (&quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot;) as a subspecies (&quot;H. sapiens neanderthalensis&quot;). Similarly, the discovered specimens of the &quot;H. rhodesiensis&quot; species have been classified by some as a subspecies (&quot;H. sapiens rhodesiensis&quot;), although it remains more common to treat these last two as separate species within the genus &quot;Homo&quot; rather than as subspecies within &quot;H. sapiens&quot;.

All humans are considered to be a part of the subspecies &quot;H. sapiens sapiens&quot;, a designation which has been a matter of debate since a species is usually not given a subspecies category unless there is evidence of multiple distinct subspecies.

== Age and speciation process ==
=== Derivation from &quot;H. erectus&quot; ===
The divergence of the lineage that would lead to &quot;H. sapiens&quot; out of archaic human varieties derived from &quot;H. erectus&quot;, is estimated as having taken place over 500,000 years ago (marking the split of the &quot;H. sapiens&quot; lineage from ancestors shared with other known archaic hominins). But the oldest split among modern human populations (such as the Khoisan split from other groups) has been recently dated to between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago, and the earliest known examples of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; fossils also date to about that period, including the Jebel Irhoud remains from Morocco (ca. 300,000 or 350–280,000 years ago), the Florisbad Skull from South Africa (ca. 259,000 years ago), and the Omo remains from Ethiopia (ca. 195,000, or, as more recently dated, ca. 233,000 years ago).

An mtDNA study in 2019 proposed an origin of modern humans in Botswana (and a Khoisan split) of around 200,000 years. However, this proposal has been widely criticized by scholars, with the recent evidence overall (genetic, fossil, and archaeological) supporting an origin for &quot;H. sapiens&quot; approximately 100,000 years earlier and in a broader region of Africa than the study proposes.

In September 2019, scientists proposed that the earliest &quot;H. sapiens&quot; (and last common human ancestor to modern humans) arose between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago through a merging of populations in East and South Africa.

An alternative suggestion defines &quot;H. sapiens&quot; cladistically as including the lineage of modern humans since the split from the lineage of Neanderthals, roughly 500,000 to 800,000 years ago.

The time of divergence between archaic &quot;H. sapiens&quot; and ancestors of Neanderthals and Denisovans caused by a genetic bottleneck of the latter was dated at 744,000 years ago, combined with repeated early admixture events and Denisovans diverging from Neanderthals 300 generations after their split from &quot;H. sapiens&quot;, as calculated by Rogers et al. (2017).

The derivation of a comparatively homogeneous single species of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; from more diverse varieties of archaic humans (all of which were descended from the early dispersal of &quot;H. erectus&quot; some 1.8 million years ago) was debated in terms of two competing models during the 1980s: &quot;recent African origin&quot; postulated the emergence of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; from a single source population in Africa, which expanded and led to the extinction of all other human varieties, while the &quot;multiregional evolution&quot; model postulated the survival of regional forms of archaic humans, gradually converging into the modern human varieties by the mechanism of clinal variation, via genetic drift, gene flow and selection throughout the Pleistocene.

Since the 2000s, the availability of data from archaeogenetics and population genetics has led to the emergence of a much more detailed picture, intermediate between the two competing scenarios outlined above: The recent Out-of-Africa expansion accounts for the predominant part of modern human ancestry, while there were also significant admixture events with regional archaic humans.

Since the 1970s, the Omo remains, originally dated to some 195,000 years ago, have often been taken as the conventional cut-off point for the emergence of &quot;anatomically modern humans&quot;. Since the 2000s, the discovery of older remains with comparable characteristics, and the discovery of ongoing hybridization between &quot;modern&quot; and &quot;archaic&quot; populations after the time of the Omo remains, have opened up a renewed debate on the age of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; in journalistic publications. &quot;H. s. idaltu&quot;, dated to 160,000 years ago, has been postulated as an extinct subspecies of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; in 2003. &quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot;, which became extinct about 40,000 years ago, was also at one point considered to be a subspecies, &quot;H. s. neanderthalensis&quot;.

&quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot;, dated 600,000 to 300,000 years ago, has long been thought to be a likely candidate for the last common ancestor of the Neanderthal and modern human lineages. However, genetic evidence from the Sima de los Huesos fossils published in 2016 seems to suggest that &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot; in its entirety should be included in the Neanderthal lineage, as &quot;pre-Neanderthal&quot; or &quot;early Neanderthal&quot;, while the divergence time between the Neanderthal and modern lineages has been pushed back to before the emergence of &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot;, to close to 800,000 years ago, the approximate time of disappearance of &quot;H. antecessor&quot;.

===Early &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;===
The term Middle Paleolithic is intended to cover the time between the first emergence of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; (roughly 300,000 years ago) and the period held by some to mark the emergence of full behavioral modernity (roughly by 50,000 years ago, corresponding to the start of the Upper Paleolithic).

Many of the early modern human finds, like those of Jebel Irhoud, Omo, Herto, Florisbad, Skhul, and Peștera cu Oase exhibit a mix of archaic and modern traits. Skhul V, for example, has prominent brow ridges and a projecting face. However, the brain case is quite rounded and distinct from that of the Neanderthals and is similar to the brain case of modern humans. It is uncertain whether the robust traits of some of the early modern humans like Skhul V reflects mixed ancestry or retention of older traits.

The &quot;gracile&quot; or lightly built skeleton of anatomically modern humans has been connected to a change in behavior, including increased cooperation and &quot;resource transport&quot;.

There is evidence that the characteristic human brain development, especially the prefrontal cortex, was due to &quot;an exceptional acceleration of metabolome evolution ... paralleled by a drastic reduction in muscle strength. The observed rapid metabolic changes in brain and muscle, together with the unique human cognitive skills and low muscle performance, might reflect parallel mechanisms in human evolution.&quot; The Schöningen spears and their correlation of finds are evidence that complex technological skills already existed 300,000 years ago, and are the first obvious proof of an active (big game) hunt. &quot;H. heidelbergensis&quot; already had intellectual and cognitive skills like anticipatory planning, thinking and acting that so far have only been attributed to modern man.

The ongoing admixture events within anatomically modern human populations make it difficult to estimate the age of the matrilinear and patrilinear most recent common ancestors of modern populations (Mitochondrial Eve and Y-chromosomal Adam). Estimates of the age of Y-chromosomal Adam have been pushed back significantly with the discovery of an ancient Y-chromosomal lineage in 2013, to likely beyond 300,000 years ago. There have, however, been no reports of the survival of Y-chromosomal or mitochondrial DNA clearly deriving from archaic humans (which would push back the age of the most recent patrilinear or matrilinear ancestor beyond 500,000 years).

Fossil teeth found at Qesem Cave (Israel) and dated to between 400,000 and 200,000 years ago have been compared to the dental material from the younger (120,000–80,000 years ago) Skhul and Qafzeh hominins.

== Dispersal and archaic admixture ==
Dispersal of early &quot;H. sapiens&quot; begins soon after its emergence, as evidenced by the North African Jebel Irhoud finds (dated to around 315,000 years ago). There is indirect evidence for &quot;H. sapiens&quot; presence in West Asia around 270,000 years ago.

The Florisbad Skull from Florisbad, South Africa, dated to about 259,000 years ago, has also been classified as representing early &quot;H. sapiens&quot;.

In September 2019, scientists proposed that the earliest &quot;H. sapiens&quot; (and last common human ancestor to modern humans) arose between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago through a merging of populations in East and South Africa.

Among extant populations, the Khoi-San (or &quot;Capoid&quot;) hunters-gatherers of Southern Africa may represent the human population with the earliest possible divergence within the group &quot;Homo sapiens sapiens&quot;. Their separation time has been estimated in a 2017 study to be between 350 and 260,000 years ago, compatible with the estimated age of early &quot;H. sapiens&quot;. The study states that the deep split-time estimation of 350 to 260 thousand years ago is consistent with the archaeological estimate for the onset of the Middle Stone Age across sub-Saharan Africa and coincides with archaic &quot;H. sapiens&quot; in southern Africa represented by, for example, the Florisbad skull dating to 259 (± 35) thousand years ago.

&quot;H. s. idaltu&quot;, found at Middle Awash in Ethiopia, lived about 160,000 years ago, and &quot;H. sapiens&quot; lived at Omo Kibish in Ethiopia about 233,000-195,000 years ago. Two fossils from Guomde, Kenya, dated to at least (and likely more than) 180,000 years ago and (more precisely) to 300–270,000 years ago, have been tentatively assigned to &quot;H. sapiens&quot; and similarities have been noted between them and the Omo Kibbish remains. Fossil evidence for modern human presence in West Asia is ascertained for 177,000 years ago, and disputed fossil evidence suggests expansion as far as East Asia by 120,000 years ago.

In July 2019, anthropologists reported the discovery of 210,000 year old remains of a &quot;H. sapiens&quot; and 170,000 year old remains of a &quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot; in Apidima Cave, Peloponnese, Greece, more than 150,000 years older than previous &quot;H. sapiens&quot; finds in Europe.

A significant dispersal event, within Africa and to West Asia, is associated with the African megadroughts during MIS 5, beginning 130,000 years ago. A 2011 study located the origin of basal population of contemporary human populations at 130,000 years ago, with the Khoi-San representing an &quot;ancestral population cluster&quot; located in southwestern Africa (near the coastal border of Namibia and Angola).
While early modern human expansion in Sub-Saharan Africa before 130 kya persisted, early expansion to North Africa and Asia appears to have mostly disappeared by the end of MIS5 (75,000 years ago), and is known only from fossil evidence and from archaic admixture. Eurasia was re-populated by early modern humans in the so-called &quot;recent out-of-Africa migration&quot; post-dating MIS5, beginning around 70,000–50,000 years ago. In this expansion, bearers of mt-DNA haplogroup L3 left East Africa, likely reaching Arabia via the Bab-el-Mandeb, and in the Great Coastal Migration spread to South Asia, Maritime South Asia and Oceania between 65,000 and 50,000 years ago, while Europe, East and North Asia were reached by about 45,000 years ago. Some evidence suggests that an early wave of humans may have reached the Americas by about 40,000–25,000 years ago.

Evidence for the overwhelming contribution of this &quot;recent&quot; (L3-derived) expansion to all non-African populations was established based on mitochondrial DNA, combined with evidence based on physical anthropology of archaic specimens, during the 1990s and 2000s, and has also been supported by Y DNA and autosomal DNA. The assumption of complete replacement has been revised in the 2010s with the discovery of admixture events (introgression) of populations of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; with populations of archaic humans over the period of between roughly 100,000 and 30,000 years ago, both in Eurasia and in Sub-Saharan Africa. Neanderthal admixture, in the range of 1–4%, is found in all modern populations outside of Africa, including in Europeans, Asians, Papua New Guineans, Australian Aboriginals, Native Americans, and other non-Africans. This suggests that interbreeding between Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans took place after the recent &quot;out of Africa&quot; migration, likely between 60,000 and 40,000 years ago. Recent admixture analyses have added to the complexity, finding that Eastern Neanderthals derive up to 2% of their ancestry from anatomically modern humans who left Africa some 100 . The extent of Neanderthal admixture (and introgression of genes acquired by admixture) varies significantly between contemporary racial groups, being absent in Africans, intermediate in Europeans and highest in East Asians. Certain genes related to UV-light adaptation introgressed from Neanderthals have been found to have been selected for in East Asians specifically from 45,000 years ago until around 5,000 years ago. The extent of archaic admixture is of the order of about 1% to 4% in Europeans and East Asians, and highest among Melanesians (the last also having Denisova hominin admixture at 4% to 6% in addition to neanderthal admixture). Cumulatively, about 20% of the Neanderthal genome is estimated to remain present spread in contemporary populations.

In September 2019, scientists reported the computerized determination, based on 260 CT scans, of a virtual skull shape of the last common human ancestor to modern humans/&quot;H. sapiens&quot;, representative of the earliest modern humans, and suggested that modern humans arose between 350,000 and 260,000 years ago through a merging of populations in East and South Africa while North-African fossils may represent a population which introgressed into Neandertals during the LMP.

According to a study published in 2020, there are indications that 2% to 19% (or about ≃6.6 and ≃7.0%) of the DNA of four West African populations may have come from an unknown archaic hominin which split from the ancestor of humans and Neanderthals between 360 kya to 1.02 mya.

== Anatomy ==
Generally, modern humans are more lightly built (or more &quot;gracile&quot;) than the more &quot;robust&quot; archaic humans. Nevertheless, contemporary humans exhibit high variability in many physiological traits, and may exhibit remarkable &quot;robustness&quot;. There are still a number of physiological details which can be taken as reliably differentiating the physiology of Neanderthals vs. anatomically modern humans.

=== Anatomical modernity ===
The term &quot;anatomically modern humans&quot; (AMH) is used with varying scope depending on context, to distinguish &quot;anatomically modern&quot; &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; from archaic humans such as Neanderthals and Middle and Lower Paleolithic hominins with transitional features intermediate between &quot;H. erectus&quot;, Neanderthals and early AMH called &quot;archaic Homo sapiens&quot;. In a convention popular in the 1990s, Neanderthals were classified as a subspecies of &quot;H. sapiens&quot;, as &quot;H. s. neanderthalensis&quot;, while AMH (or European early modern humans, EEMH) was taken to refer to &quot;Cro-Magnon&quot; or &quot;H. s. sapiens&quot;. Under this nomenclature (Neanderthals considered &quot;H. sapiens&quot;), the term &quot;anatomically modern &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;&quot; (AMHS) has also been used to refer to EEMH (&quot;Cro-Magnons&quot;). It has since become more common to designate Neanderthals as a separate species, &quot;H. neanderthalensis&quot;, so that AMH in the European context refers to &quot;H. sapiens&quot;, but the question is by no means resolved.

In this more narrow definition of &quot;H. sapiens&quot;, the subspecies &quot;Homo sapiens idaltu&quot;, discovered in 2003, also falls under the umbrella of &quot;anatomically modern&quot;. The recognition of &quot;H. sapiens idaltu&quot; as a valid subspecies of the anatomically modern human lineage would justify the description of contemporary humans with the subspecies name &quot;Homo sapiens sapiens&quot;. However, biological anthropologist Chris Stringer does not consider &quot;idaltu&quot; distinct enough within &quot;H. sapiens&quot; to warrant its own subspecies designation.

A further division of AMH into &quot;early&quot; or &quot;robust&quot; vs. &quot;post-glacial&quot; or &quot;gracile&quot; subtypes has since been used for convenience. The emergence of &quot;gracile AMH&quot; is taken to reflect a process towards a smaller and more fine-boned skeleton beginning around 50,000–30,000 years ago.

=== Braincase anatomy ===
The cranium lacks a pronounced occipital bun in the neck, a bulge that anchored considerable neck muscles in Neanderthals. Modern humans, even the earlier ones, generally have a larger fore-brain than the archaic people, so that the brain sits above rather than behind the eyes. This will usually (though not always) give a higher forehead, and reduced brow ridge. Early modern people and some living people do however have quite pronounced brow ridges, but they differ from those of archaic forms by having both a supraorbital foramen or notch, forming a groove through the ridge above each eye. This splits the ridge into a central part and two distal parts. In current humans, often only the central section of the ridge is preserved (if it is preserved at all). This contrasts with archaic humans, where the brow ridge is pronounced and unbroken.

Modern humans commonly have a steep, even vertical forehead whereas their predecessors had foreheads that sloped strongly backwards. According to Desmond Morris, the vertical forehead in humans plays an important role in human communication through eyebrow movements and forehead skin wrinkling.

Brain size in both Neanderthals and AMH is significantly larger on average (but overlapping in range) than brain size in &quot;H. erectus&quot;. Neanderthal and AMH brain sizes are in the same range, but there are differences in the relative sizes of individual brain areas, with significantly larger visual systems in Neanderthals than in AMH.

===Jaw anatomy===
Compared to archaic people, anatomically modern humans have smaller, differently shaped teeth. This results in a smaller, more receded dentary, making the rest of the jaw-line stand out, giving an often quite prominent chin. The central part of the mandible forming the chin carries a triangularly shaped area forming the apex of the chin called the mental Trigon, not found in archaic humans. Particularly in living populations, the use of fire and tools requires fewer jaw muscles, giving slender, more gracile jaws. Compared to archaic people, modern humans have smaller, lower faces.

===Body skeleton structure===
The body skeletons of even the earliest and most robustly built modern humans were less robust than those of Neanderthals (and from what little we know from Denisovans), having essentially modern proportions. Particularly regarding the long bones of the limbs, the distal bones (the radius/ulna and tibia/fibula) are nearly the same size or slightly shorter than the proximal bones (the humerus and femur). In ancient people, particularly Neanderthals, the distal bones were shorter, usually thought to be an adaptation to cold climate. The same adaptation is found in some modern people living in the polar regions.

Height ranges overlap between Neanderthals and AMH, with Neanderthal averages cited as and for males and females, respectively, which is largely identical to pre-industrial average heights for AMH. Contemporary national averages range between in males and in females. Neanderthal ranges approximate the contemporary height distribution measured among Malay people, for one.

==Recent evolution==

Following the peopling of Africa some 130,000 years ago, and the recent Out-of-Africa expansion some 70,000 to 50,000 years ago, some sub-populations of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; had been essentially isolated for tens of thousands of years prior to the early modern Age of Discovery. Combined with archaic admixture this has resulted in significant genetic variation, which in some instances has been shown to be the result of directional selection taking place over the past 15,000 years, i.e., significantly later than possible archaic admixture events.

Some climatic adaptations, such as high-altitude adaptation in humans, are thought to have been acquired by archaic admixture. Introgression of genetic variants acquired by Neanderthal admixture have different distributions in European and East Asians, reflecting differences in recent selective pressures. A 2014 study reported that Neanderthal-derived variants found in East Asian populations showed clustering in functional groups related to immune and haematopoietic pathways, while European populations showed clustering in functional groups related to the lipid catabolic process. A 2017 study found correlation of Neanderthal admixture in phenotypic traits in modern European populations.

Physiological or phenotypical changes have been traced to Upper Paleolithic mutations, such as the East Asian variant of the &quot;EDAR&quot; gene, dated to c. 35,000 years ago.

Recent divergence of Eurasian lineages was sped up significantly during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), the Mesolithic and the Neolithic, due to increased selection pressures and due to founder effects associated with migration. Alleles predictive of light skin have been found in Neanderthals, but the alleles for light skin in Europeans and East Asians, associated with KITLG and ASIP, are () thought to have not been acquired by archaic admixture but recent mutations since the LGM. Phenotypes associated with the &quot;white&quot; or &quot;Caucasian&quot; populations of Western Eurasian stock emerge during the LGM, from about 19,000 years ago. Average cranial capacity in modern human populations varies in the range of 1,200 to 1,450 cm3 for adult males. Larger cranial volume is associated with climatic region, the largest averages being found in populations of Siberia and the Arctic. Both Neanderthal and EEMH had somewhat larger cranial volumes on average than modern Europeans, suggesting the relaxation of selection pressures for larger brain volume after the end of the LGM.

Examples for still later adaptations related to agriculture and animal domestication including East Asian types of ADH1B associated with rice domestication, or lactase persistence, are due to recent selection pressures.

An even more recent adaptation has been proposed for the Austronesian Sama-Bajau, developed under selection pressures associated with subsisting on freediving over the past thousand years or so.

==Behavioral modernity==
Behavioral modernity, involving the development of language, figurative art and early forms of religion (etc.) is taken to have arisen before 40,000 years ago, marking the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic (in African contexts also known as the Later Stone Age).

There is considerable debate regarding whether the earliest anatomically modern humans behaved similarly to recent or existing humans. Behavioral modernity is taken to include fully developed language (requiring the capacity for abstract thought), artistic expression, early forms of religious behavior, increased cooperation and the formation of early settlements, and the production of articulated tools from lithic cores, bone or antler. The term Upper Paleolithic is intended to cover the period since the rapid expansion of modern humans throughout Eurasia, which coincides with the first appearance of Paleolithic art such as cave paintings and the development of technological innovation such as the spear-thrower. The Upper Paleolithic begins around 50,000 to 40,000 years ago, and also coincides with the disappearance of archaic humans such as the Neanderthals.
The term &quot;behavioral modernity&quot; is somewhat disputed. It is most often used for the set of characteristics marking the Upper Paleolithic, but some scholars use &quot;behavioral modernity&quot; for the emergence of &quot;H. sapiens&quot; around 200,000 years ago, while others use the term for the rapid developments occurring around 50,000 years ago. It has been proposed that the emergence of behavioral modernity was a gradual process.

===Examples of behavioural modernity===
The equivalent of the Eurasian Upper Paleolithic in African archaeology is known as the Later Stone Age, also beginning roughly 40,000 years ago. While most clear evidence for behavioral modernity uncovered from the later 19th century was from Europe, such as the Venus figurines and other artefacts from the Aurignacian, more recent archaeological research has shown that all essential elements of the kind of material culture typical of contemporary San hunter-gatherers in Southern Africa was also present by at least 40,000 years ago, including digging sticks of similar materials used today, ostrich egg shell beads, bone arrow heads with individual maker&#x27;s marks etched and embedded with red ochre, and poison applicators. There is also a suggestion that &quot;pressure flaking best explains the morphology of lithic artifacts recovered from the c. 75-ka Middle Stone Age levels at Blombos Cave, South Africa. The technique was used during the final shaping of Still Bay bifacial points made on heat‐treated silcrete.&quot; Both pressure flaking and heat treatment of materials were previously thought to have occurred much later in prehistory, and both indicate a behaviourally modern sophistication in the use of natural materials. Further reports of research on cave sites along the southern African coast indicate that &quot;the debate as to when cultural and cognitive characteristics typical of modern humans first appeared&quot; may be coming to an end, as &quot;advanced technologies with elaborate chains of production&quot; which &quot;often demand high-fidelity transmission and thus language&quot; have been found at the South African Pinnacle Point Site 5–6. These have been dated to approximately 71,000 years ago. The researchers suggest that their research &quot;shows that microlithic technology originated early in South Africa by 71 kya, evolved over a vast time span (c. 11,000 years), and was typically coupled to complex heat treatment that persisted for nearly 100,000 years. Advanced technologies in Africa were early and enduring; a small sample of excavated sites in Africa is the best explanation for any perceived &#x27;flickering&#x27; pattern.&quot; Increases in behavioral complexity have been speculated to have been linked to an earlier climatic change to much drier conditions between 135,000 and 75,000 years ago. This might have led to human groups who were seeking refuge from the inland droughts, expanded along the coastal marshes rich in shellfish and other resources. Since sea levels were low due to so much water tied up in glaciers, such marshlands would have occurred all along the southern coasts of Eurasia. The use of rafts and boats may well have facilitated exploration of offshore islands and travel along the coast, and eventually permitted expansion to New Guinea and then to Australia.

In addition, a variety of other evidence of abstract imagery, widened subsistence strategies, and other &quot;modern&quot; behaviors has been discovered in Africa, especially South, North, and East Africa, predating 50,000 years ago (with some predating 100,000 years ago). The Blombos Cave site in South Africa, for example, is famous for rectangular slabs of ochre engraved with geometric designs. Using multiple dating techniques, the site was confirmed to be around 77,000 and 100,000–75,000 years old. Ostrich egg shell containers engraved with geometric designs dating to 60,000 years ago were found at Diepkloof, South Africa. Beads and other personal ornamentation have been found from Morocco which might be as much as 130,000 years old; as well, the Cave of Hearths in South Africa has yielded a number of beads dating from significantly prior to 50,000 years ago, and shell beads dating to about 75,000 years ago have been found at Blombos Cave, South Africa. Specialized projectile weapons as well have been found at various sites in Middle Stone Age Africa, including bone and stone arrowheads at South African sites such as Sibudu Cave (along with an early bone needle also found at Sibudu) dating approximately 72,000–60,000 years ago some of which may have been tipped with poisons, and bone harpoons at the Central African site of Katanda dating ca. 90,000 years ago. Evidence also exists for the systematic heat treating of silcrete stone to increase its flake-ability for the purpose of toolmaking, beginning approximately 164,000 years ago at the South African site of Pinnacle Point and becoming common there for the creation of microlithic tools at about 72,000 years ago.

In 2008, an ochre processing workshop likely for the production of paints was uncovered dating to ca. 100,000 years ago at Blombos Cave, South Africa. Analysis shows that a liquefied pigment-rich mixture was produced and stored in the two abalone shells, and that ochre, bone, charcoal, grindstones and hammer-stones also formed a composite part of the toolkits. Evidence for the complexity of the task includes procuring and combining raw materials from various sources (implying they had a mental template of the process they would follow), possibly using pyrotechnology to facilitate fat extraction from bone, using a probable recipe to produce the compound, and the use of shell containers for mixing and storage for later use.&lt;ref name=&quot;Washington Post-2011/10/12/gIQApyHrhL&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Modern behaviors, such as the making of shell beads, bone tools and arrows, and the use of ochre pigment, are evident at a Kenyan site by 78,000-67,000 years ago. Evidence of early stone-tipped projectile weapons (a characteristic tool of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;), the stone tips of javelins or throwing spears, were discovered in 2013 at the Ethiopian site of Gademotta, and date to around 279,000 years ago.

Expanding subsistence strategies beyond big-game hunting and the consequential diversity in tool types have been noted as signs of behavioral modernity. A number of South African sites have shown an early reliance on aquatic resources from fish to shellfish. Pinnacle Point, in particular, shows exploitation of marine resources as early as 120,000 years ago, perhaps in response to more arid conditions inland. Establishing a reliance on predictable shellfish deposits, for example, could reduce mobility and facilitate complex social systems and symbolic behavior. Blombos Cave and Site 440 in Sudan both show evidence of fishing as well. Taphonomic change in fish skeletons from Blombos Cave have been interpreted as capture of live fish, clearly an intentional human behavior.

Humans in North Africa (Nazlet Sabaha, Egypt) are known to have dabbled in chert mining, as early as ≈100,000 years ago, for the construction of stone tools.

Evidence was found in 2018, dating to about 320,000 years ago at the site of Olorgesailie in Kenya, of the early emergence of modern behaviors including: the trade and long-distance transportation of resources (such as obsidian), the use of pigments, and the possible making of projectile points. The authors of three 2018 studies on the site observe that the evidence of these behaviors is roughly contemporary with the earliest known &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; fossil remains from Africa (such as at Jebel Irhoud and Florisbad), and they suggest that complex and modern behaviors began in Africa around the time of the emergence of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;.

In 2019, further evidence of Middle Stone Age complex projectile weapons in Africa was found at Aduma, Ethiopia, dated 100,000–80,000 years ago, in the form of points considered likely to belong to darts delivered by spear throwers.

==Pace of progress during &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; history==

&quot;Homo sapiens&quot; technological and cultural progress appears to have been very much faster in recent millennia than in &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; early periods. The pace of development may indeed have accelerated, due to massively larger population (so more humans extant to think of innovations), more communication and sharing of ideas among human populations, and the accumulation of thinking tools. However it may also be that the pace of advancements always looks relatively faster to humans in the time they live, because previous advances are unrecognised.

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

== External links ==
* Human Timeline (Interactive) – Smithsonian, National Museum of Natural History (August 2016).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="0" end="18" title="Early modern human" label="Early modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="20" end="23" title="Early modern human" label="EMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="29" end="54" title="Early modern human" label="anatomically modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="56" end="59" title="Early modern human" label="AMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="98" end="110" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="118" end="127" title="Homo sapiens sapiens" label="sometimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999" start="171" end="183" title="Human anatomy" label="anatomically"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406385" start="204" end="223" title="Human variability" label="range of phenotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="266" end="279" title="Archaic humans" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127167" start="514" end="532" title="Paleolithic Europe" label="Paleolithic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627142" start="616" end="628" title="Omo remains" label="Omo-Kibish I"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="666" end="674" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417258" start="726" end="741" title="Florisbad Skull" label="Florisbad Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461901" start="757" end="806" title="Florisbad archaeological and paleontological site" label="Florisbad archaeological and paleontological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="867" end="879" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646992" start="929" end="944" title="Lists of extinct species" label="Extinct species"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="964" end="968" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="989" end="1001" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="1115" end="1125" title="Human subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310846" start="1333" end="1348" title="Homo antecessor" label="Homo antecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1486" end="1492" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="1643" end="1685" title="archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="archaic human admixture with modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="1749" end="1779" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="recent Out-Of-Africa expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1865" end="1878" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1918" end="1926" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="1928" end="1932" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="1758"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1938" end="1943" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="2426" end="2435" title="cladistic" label="cladistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="2796" end="2807" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="2808" end="2817" title="Denisovan" label="Denisovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="3053" end="3063" title="Human subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131464" start="3404" end="3419" title="Homo rhodesiensis" label="H. rhodesiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="3749" end="3767" title="Homo sapiens sapiens" label="H. sapiens sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="4100" end="4113" title="archaic human" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="4399" end="4406" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="4610" end="4622" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417258" start="4688" end="4703" title="Florisbad Skull" label="Florisbad Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627142" start="4755" end="4766" title="Omo remains" label="Omo remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="5454" end="5458" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="5463" end="5475" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="5535" end="5548" title="Cladistics" label="cladistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="5627" end="5638" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q815715" start="5799" end="5817" title="genetic bottleneck" label="genetic bottleneck"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="5914" end="5923" title="Denisovan" label="Denisovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="6174" end="6188" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887504" start="6227" end="6242" title="Out of Africa I" label="early dispersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="6366" end="6387" title="recent African origin" label="recent African origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509795" start="6575" end="6598" title="multiregional evolution" label="multiregional evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502105" start="6702" end="6724" title="human genetic variation" label="modern human varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="6745" end="6761" title="cline (population genetics)" label="clinal variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="6767" end="6780" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q143089" start="6782" end="6791" title="gene flow" label="gene flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="6796" end="6805" title="Natural selection" label="selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q636489" start="6882" end="6897" title="archaeogenetics" label="archaeogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="6902" end="6921" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="7049" end="7069" title="recent African origin" label="recent Out-of-Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="7174" end="7190" title="Archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="admixture events"/>
<link wikidata="Q923894" start="8265" end="8283" title="Sima de los Huesos" label="Sima de los Huesos"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="8787" end="8805" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="8976" end="8996" title="behavioral modernity" label="behavioral modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="9061" end="9078" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="9134" end="9146" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627142" start="9148" end="9151" title="Omo remains" label="Omo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686" start="9153" end="9158" title="Homo sapiens idaltu" label="Herto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417258" start="9160" end="9169" title="Florisbad Skull" label="Florisbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245186" start="9171" end="9176" title="Skhul remains" label="Skhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q946978" start="9182" end="9197" title="Peștera cu Oase" label="Peștera cu Oase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148039" start="9326" end="9336" title="Neurocranium" label="brain case"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="9547" end="9561" title="Archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="mixed ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q903667" start="9935" end="9945" title="metabolome" label="metabolome"/>
<link wikidata="Q320796" start="10212" end="10229" title="Schöningen spears" label="Schöningen spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904849" start="10388" end="10403" title="Big game hunting" label="(big game) hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q221674" start="10783" end="10800" title="Mitochondrial Eve" label="Mitochondrial Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q351265" start="10805" end="10823" title="Y-chromosomal Adam" label="Y-chromosomal Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q24252" start="11265" end="11275" title="Qesem Cave" label="Qesem Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245186" start="11422" end="11447" title="Skhul and Qafzeh hominins" label="Skhul and Qafzeh hominins"/>
<link wikidata="Q846913" start="11597" end="11609" title="Jebel Irhoud" label="Jebel Irhoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417258" start="11760" end="11775" title="Florisbad Skull" label="Florisbad Skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="12122" end="12126" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12131" end="12143" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="12176" end="12184" title="Khoi-San" label="Khoi-San"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350471" start="12195" end="12201" title="Capoid" label="Capoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q499030" start="12927" end="12939" title="Middle Awash" label="Middle Awash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15067212" start="13708" end="13720" title="Apidima Cave" label="Apidima Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="13722" end="13733" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="13735" end="13741" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808361" start="13922" end="13933" title="megadrought" label="megadrought"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352740" start="13942" end="13947" title="Marine Isotope Stage 5" label="MIS 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="14220" end="14227" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="14232" end="14238" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="14279" end="14297" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="14487" end="14504" title="archaic admixture" label="archaic admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="14571" end="14613" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="&amp;quot;recent out-of-Africa migration&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="14704" end="14724" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="mt-DNA haplogroup L3"/>
<link wikidata="Q83318" start="14774" end="14787" title="Bab-el-Mandeb" label="Bab-el-Mandeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455077" start="14800" end="14823" title="Great Coastal Migration" label="Great Coastal Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="14921" end="14927" title="European early modern humans" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="14929" end="14933" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27329" start="14938" end="14948" title="North Asia" label="North Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="15058" end="15070" title="Pleistocene peopling of the Americas" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584176" start="15177" end="15179" title="Haplogroup L3 (mtDNA)" label="L3"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="15255" end="15272" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="15306" end="15327" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075980" start="15339" end="15348" title="Biological specimen" label="specimens"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="15409" end="15414" title="Y DNA" label="Y DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q186380" start="15419" end="15432" title="autosome" label="autosomal DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="15525" end="15541" title="archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="admixture events"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094405" start="15543" end="15556" title="introgression" label="introgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="15742" end="15763" title="Neanderthal admixture" label="Neanderthal admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455077" start="16065" end="16107" title="Southern Dispersal" label="recent &amp;quot;out of Africa&amp;quot; migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="16350" end="16371" title="Neanderthal admixture" label="Neanderthal admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094405" start="16377" end="16390" title="introgression" label="introgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762752" start="16872" end="16883" title="Melanesians" label="Melanesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="16906" end="16922" title="Denisova hominin" label="Denisova hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="17186" end="17193" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="17209" end="17220" title="Human skull" label="skull shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="17455" end="17459" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="17464" end="17476" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="17483" end="17496" title="North Africa" label="North-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="17707" end="17718" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="17990" end="18004" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18053" end="18093" title="Human physical appearance#Physiological differences" label="variability in many physiological traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="18261" end="18273" title="Neanderthals" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="18516" end="18530" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="18567" end="18584" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="18806" end="18816" title="human subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="18897" end="18925" title="European early modern humans" label="European early modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="18961" end="18971" title="Cro-Magnon" label="Cro-Magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686" start="19524" end="19543" title="Homo sapiens idaltu" label="Homo sapiens idaltu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146890" start="19691" end="19707" title="human subspecies" label="valid subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q761415" start="19896" end="19910" title="Chris Stringer" label="Chris Stringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591616" start="20147" end="20154" title="gracile" label="gracile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075698" start="20425" end="20438" title="occipital bun" label="occipital bun"/>
<link wikidata="Q331321" start="20747" end="20757" title="supraorbital ridge" label="brow ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q639039" start="20909" end="20929" title="supraorbital foramen" label="supraorbital foramen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41055" start="21297" end="21305" title="forehead" label="forehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q311132" start="21392" end="21406" title="Desmond Morris" label="Desmond Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43748" start="21495" end="21502" title="eyebrow" label="eyebrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="21543" end="21553" title="Brain size" label="Brain size"/>
<link wikidata="Q82714" start="22257" end="22270" title="Chin" label="mental Trigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178492" start="22809" end="22815" title="Radius (bone)" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q199507" start="22816" end="22820" title="ulna" label="ulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="22825" end="22830" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="22831" end="22837" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q162595" start="22913" end="22920" title="humerus" label="humerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="22925" end="22930" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q476112" start="23144" end="23150" title="Human height" label="Height"/>
<link wikidata="Q16128414" start="23342" end="23372" title="List of average human height worldwide" label="Contemporary national averages"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="23495" end="23507" title="Malay people" label="Malay people"/>
<link wikidata="Q858288" start="23555" end="23573" title="peopling of Africa" label="peopling of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455077" start="23606" end="23626" title="Coastal migration" label="recent Out-of-Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="23738" end="23746" title="geographic isolation" label="isolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="23804" end="23820" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="23836" end="23853" title="Archaic human admixture with modern humans" label="archaic admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502105" start="23887" end="23904" title="human genetic variation" label="genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q764759" start="23965" end="23986" title="directional selection" label="directional selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029588" start="24130" end="24164" title="high-altitude adaptation in humans" label="high-altitude adaptation in humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094405" start="24222" end="24235" title="Introgression" label="Introgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="24268" end="24289" title="Neanderthal admixture" label="Neanderthal admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="24322" end="24330" title="Caucasoid" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="24335" end="24346" title="Mongoloid" label="East Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="24540" end="24546" title="Complement system" label="immune"/>
<link wikidata="Q919283" start="24551" end="24574" title="Haematopoiesis" label="haematopoietic pathways"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="24657" end="24680" title="Catabolism" label="lipid catabolic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785541" start="24716" end="24737" title="Neanderthal admixture" label="Neanderthal admixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035943" start="24923" end="24927" title="EDAR" label="EDAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="25047" end="25067" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="25079" end="25089" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="25098" end="25107" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q504568" start="25157" end="25171" title="founder effect" label="founder effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q858288" start="25189" end="25198" title="prehistoric migrations" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211423" start="25222" end="25232" title="light skin" label="light skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624902" start="25252" end="25264" title="Neanderthal genome" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="Q909331" start="25343" end="25348" title="KITLG" label="KITLG"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102066" start="25353" end="25357" title="Agouti signalling peptide" label="ASIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="25494" end="25499" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="25515" end="25524" title="Caucasian race" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030681" start="25629" end="25645" title="cranial capacity" label="cranial capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="25842" end="25849" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="25858" end="25864" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="25871" end="25882" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="25887" end="25891" title="EEMH" label="EEMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="26110" end="26121" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326504" start="26126" end="26146" title="animal domestication" label="animal domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="26157" end="26167" title="East Asian race" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17710244" start="26177" end="26182" title="ADH1B" label="ADH1B"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26199" end="26217" title="Oryza sativa#Continental East Asia" label="rice domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468973" start="26222" end="26241" title="lactase persistence" label="lactase persistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q804127" start="26353" end="26363" title="Sama-Bajau" label="Sama-Bajau"/>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="26431" end="26441" title="freediving" label="freediving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="26504" end="26524" title="Behavioral modernity" label="Behavioral modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="26555" end="26563" title="origin of language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842924" start="26565" end="26579" title="Paleolithic Art" label="figurative art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359199" start="26599" end="26607" title="Paleolithic religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="26693" end="26710" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575630" start="26750" end="26765" title="Later Stone Age" label="Later Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="26904" end="26924" title="Behavioral modernity" label="Behavioral modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="26961" end="26969" title="Origin of language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="26998" end="27014" title="abstract thought" label="abstract thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q755548" start="27017" end="27036" title="Art of the Upper Paleolithic" label="artistic expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359199" start="27053" end="27071" title="Paleolithic religion" label="religious behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669978" start="27180" end="27191" title="lithic core" label="lithic core"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="27219" end="27236" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455077" start="27279" end="27294" title="Coastal migration" label="rapid expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q755548" start="27377" end="27392" title="Paleolithic art" label="Paleolithic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="27401" end="27415" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q492883" start="27476" end="27489" title="spear-thrower" label="spear-thrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="27627" end="27638" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q575630" start="28218" end="28233" title="Later Stone Age" label="Later Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="28394" end="28408" title="Venus figurine" label="Venus figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221901" start="28439" end="28450" title="Aurignacian" label="Aurignacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="28582" end="28585" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="28606" end="28621" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28969642" start="28727" end="28738" title="ostrich egg" label="ostrich egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="28757" end="28762" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="28833" end="28838" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="29023" end="29035" title="Blombos Cave" label="Blombos Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814354" start="29788" end="29802" title="Pinnacle Point" label="Pinnacle Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="29931" end="29953" title="microlithic technology" label="microlithic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="30165" end="30171" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="30708" end="30715" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q200433" start="30807" end="30811" title="raft" label="raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="30970" end="30979" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="31363" end="31372" title="geometric" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666120" start="31591" end="31600" title="Diepkloof Rock Shelter" label="Diepkloof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322486" start="32120" end="32131" title="Sibudu Cave" label="Sibudu Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891476" start="33850" end="33859" title="Gademotta" label="Gademotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814354" start="34159" end="34173" title="Pinnacle Point" label="Pinnacle Point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34706" end="34719" title="Nazlet Sabaha" label="Nazlet Sabaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="34721" end="34726" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="34757" end="34762" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="34763" end="34769" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="34827" end="34837" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881916" start="34918" end="34930" title="Olorgesailie" label="Olorgesailie"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="35923" end="35961" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="&amp;quot;Homo sapiens&amp;quot; early periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="36501" end="36512" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="36514" end="36548" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99647" wikidata="Q161092" url="?curid=99647" title="Vladimir Kramnik">
<text>Vladimir Borisovich Kramnik (; born 25 June 1975) is a Russian chess grandmaster. He was the Classical World Chess Champion from 2000 to 2006, and the 14th undisputed World Chess Champion from 2006 to 2007.

In 2000, Kramnik defeated Garry Kasparov and became the Classical World Chess Champion. He defended his title in 2004 against Peter Leko, and defeated the reigning FIDE World Champion Veselin Topalov in a unification match in 2006. As a result, Kramnik became the first undisputed World Champion, holding both the FIDE and Classical titles, since Kasparov split from FIDE in 1993.

In 2007, Kramnik lost the title to Viswanathan Anand, who won the World Chess Championship 2007 tournament ahead of Kramnik. He challenged Anand at the World Chess Championship 2008 to regain his title, but lost. He remained a top player, playing in four more Candidates tournaments between 2012 and 2018, very nearly winning in 2013. Kramnik publicly announced his retirement as a professional chess player in January 2019 to focus on projects relating to chess for children and education. 

Kramnik reached a peak rating of 2817 in October 2016, which makes him the joint-eighth-highest-rated player of all time. He is widely recognized for his contributions to opening theory. 

== Early career ==

Vladimir Kramnik was born in the town of Tuapse, on the shores of the Black Sea. His father&#x27;s birth name was Boris Sokolov, but he took his stepfather&#x27;s surname when his mother (Vladimir&#x27;s grandmother) remarried. His mother Irina Fedorovna is Ukrainian and is a music teacher, his biological father Boris Sokolov is Russian painter and sculptor. As a child, Vladimir Kramnik studied in the chess school established by Mikhail Botvinnik. His first notable result in a major tournament was his gold medal win as first reserve for the Russian team in the 1992 Chess Olympiad in Manila. His selection for the team caused some controversy in Russia at the time, as he was only a FIDE Master. However, his selection was supported by Garry Kasparov. He scored eight wins, one draw, and no losses, a performance of 2958, which won a gold medal for best rating performance.

The following year, Kramnik played in the very strong tournament in Linares. He finished fifth, beating the then world number three, Vasyl Ivanchuk, along the way. He followed this up with a string of good results, but had to wait until 1995 for his first major tournament win at normal time controls, when he won the strong Dortmund tournament, finishing it unbeaten.

In 1995, Kramnik served as a second for Kasparov in the Classical World Chess Championship 1995 match against challenger Viswanathan Anand. Kasparov won the match 10½–7½.

In January 1996, Kramnik became the world number-one rated player; although having the same FIDE rating as Kasparov (2775), Kramnik became number one by having played more games during the rating period in question. This was the first time since December 1985 that Kasparov was not world number one, and Kramnik&#x27;s six-month stretch (January through June 1996) as world number one would be the only time from January 1986 through March 2006 where Kasparov was not world number one. By becoming number one, Kramnik became the youngest ever to reach world number one, breaking Kasparov&#x27;s record; this record would stand for 14 years until being broken by Magnus Carlsen in January 2010.

Kramnik continued to produce good results, including winning at Dortmund (outright or tied) ten times from 1995 to 2011. He is the second of only fifteen chess players to have reached a rating of 2800 (the first being Kasparov).

During his reign as world champion, Kramnik never regained the world number-one ranking, doing so only in January 2008 after he had lost the title to Viswanathan Anand; as in 1996, Kramnik had the same FIDE rating as Anand (2799) but became number one due to more games played within the rating period. Kramnik&#x27;s 12 years between world number-one rankings is the longest since the inception of the FIDE ranking system in 1971.

== Chess career ==

=== Early attempts ===
In the mid- and late 1990s, Kramnik, although considered one of the strongest players in the world, suffered several setbacks in his attempts to qualify for a World Championship match. In 1994, he lost a quarterfinal candidates match for the PCA championship to Gata Kamsky 1½–4½, and later that year, lost a semifinal candidates match for the FIDE championship to Boris Gelfand with the score 3½–4½. In 1998, Kramnik faced Alexei Shirov in a Candidates match for the right to play Garry Kasparov for the Classical World Chess Championship, and lost 3½–5½. In 1999, Kramnik participated in the FIDE knockout championship in Las Vegas, and lost in the quarterfinals to Michael Adams 2–4.

=== 2000 World Championship ===
Suitable sponsorship was not found for a Kasparov–Shirov match, and it never took place. It appears Shirov refused to play for what he considered too small a prize fund. Kasparov decided to try to arrange a match with the highest rated-player according to FIDE&#x27;s rating list. At the time Anand was the highest-rated player, but Anand refused the match. Therefore, in March 2000 Kasparov announced he would play a match against Kramnik, who at the time was third in the rating list behind Kasparov and Anand (Shirov was fourth). This was somewhat controversial, especially since he had lost the qualifier to Shirov. It made Kramnik the first player since 1935 to play a world championship match without qualifying.

In 2000, Kramnik played a 16-game match against Garry Kasparov in London, for the Classical Chess World Championship. Kramnik began the match as underdog, but his adoption of the Berlin Defence to Kasparov&#x27;s Ruy Lopez opening was very effective. With the white pieces, Kramnik pressed Kasparov hard, winning Games 2 and 10 and overlooking winning continuations in Games 4 and 6. Kasparov put up little fight thereafter, agreeing to short draws with the white pieces in Games 9 and 13. Kramnik won the match 8½–6½ without losing a game. This was only the second time in history that a World Champion had lost a match without winning a single game, the other time being Lasker in 1921. It also marked the first time Kasparov had lost a World Championship match.

Kramnik&#x27;s performance won him the Chess Oscar for 2000; this was the first time he had received the award.

=== After London ===
In October 2002, Kramnik competed in Brains in Bahrain, an eight-game match against the chess computer Deep Fritz in Bahrain. Kramnik started well, taking a 3–1 lead after four games. However, in game five, Kramnik made what was described as the worst blunder of his career, losing a knight in a position which was probably drawn. He quickly resigned. He also resigned game six after making a speculative sacrifice, although subsequent analysis showed that he had drawing chances in the final position. The last two games were drawn, and the match ended tied at 4–4.

In February 2004 Kramnik won the Tournament of Linares outright for the first time (he had tied for first with Kasparov in 2000), finishing undefeated with a +2 score, ahead of Garry Kasparov, the world&#x27;s highest-rated player at the time.

=== 2004 title defense ===
From 25 September 2004 until 18 October 2004, Kramnik retained his title as Classical World Chess Champion against challenger Péter Lékó at Brissago, Switzerland, by barely drawing the match in the last game. The 14-game match was poised in favor of Lékó right up until Kramnik won the final game, thus forcing a 7–7 draw and ensuring that Kramnik remained world champion. The prize fund was 1 million Swiss francs, which was about USD $770,000 at the time. Because of the drawn result, the prize was split between the two players.

=== 2006 Reunification match ===
When Garry Kasparov broke with FIDE, the federation governing professional chess, to play the 1993 World Championship with Nigel Short, he created a rift in the chess world. In response, FIDE sanctioned a match between Anatoly Karpov and Jan Timman for the FIDE World Championship, which Karpov won. Subsequently, the chess world had seen two &quot;champions&quot;: the &quot;classical&quot; championship, claiming lineage dating back to Steinitz; and the FIDE-endorsed champion.

When Kramnik defeated Kasparov and inherited Kasparov&#x27;s title, he also inherited some controversies. At FIDE World Chess Championship 2005, Kramnik refused to participate, but indicated his willingness to play a match against the winner to unify the world championship. After the tournament, negotiations began for a reunification match between Kramnik and the new FIDE World Champion—Veselin Topalov of Bulgaria.

In April 2006, FIDE announced a reunification match between Kramnik and Topalov—the FIDE World Chess Championship 2006. The match took place in Elista, Kalmykia. After the first four games, Kramnik led 3–1 (out of a maximum of 12). After the fourth game, however, Topalov&#x27;s coach/manager Silvio Danailov protested that Kramnik was using the toilet suspiciously frequently, implying that he was somehow receiving outside assistance whilst doing so. Topalov said that he would refuse to shake hands with Kramnik in the remaining games. The Appeals committee decided that the players&#x27; toilets be locked and that they be forced to use a shared toilet, accompanied by an assistant arbiter.

Kramnik refused to play the fifth game unless the original conditions agreed for the match were adhered to. As a result, the point was awarded to Topalov, reducing Kramnik&#x27;s lead to 3–2. Kramnik stated that the appeals committee was biased and demanded that it be replaced. As a condition to continue the match, Kramnik insisted on playing the remaining games under the original conditions of the match contract, which allows use of the bathroom at the players&#x27; discretion.

The controversy resulted in a heavy volume of correspondence to &quot;Chessbase&quot; and other publications. The balance of views from fans was in support of Kramnik. Prominent figures in the chess world, such as John Nunn, Yasser Seirawan, and Bessel Kok also sided with Kramnik.
The Russian and Bulgarian Chess Federations supported their respective players.

After twelve regular games the match was tied 6–6, although Kramnik continued to dispute the result of the unplayed fifth game until the end of the match. On 13 October 2006 the result of this disputed game became irrelevant as Kramnik won the rapid tie-break by a score of 2½–1½.

Kramnik&#x27;s victory helped him win the Chess Oscar for 2006, the second of his career.

=== 2007 World Championship tournament in Mexico ===

When Kramnik won the 2006 unification match, he also won Topalov&#x27;s berth in the 2007 World Championship as the incumbent FIDE champion. Although the rationale behind his (and Garry Kasparov&#x27;s) &quot;classical&quot; title is that the title should change hands by challenge match rather than by tournament, Kramnik stated that he would recognize the winner of this tournament as being the world champion.

In the tournament, held in September 2007, Kramnik and Anand drew both of their games but Kramnik finished second. The tournament, and the world championship, was won by Viswanathan Anand.

=== 2008 match ===
Pursuant to the agreement reached before the 2007 tournament Kramnik and Anand played a match of the World Championship title in 2008 in Bonn. He fell victim to Anand&#x27;s superior preparation, and lost three of the first six games (two with the white pieces). Kramnik&#x27;s play gradually improved, and although he managed a 29-move victory in game 10, he did not win any other game, and lost the match to Anand by a score of 6½ to 4½ (three wins to Anand, one win to Kramnik, seven draws).

=== 2009 ===

Kramnik had exceptionally good results in 2009, winning once again in Dortmund and then winning the Category 21 (average Elo = 2763) Tal Memorial in Moscow with 6/9 and a 2883 rating performance ahead of world champion Anand, Vasyl Ivanchuk, Magnus Carlsen, Levon Aronian, Boris Gelfand, former FIDE world champion Ruslan Ponomariov, Peter Leko, Peter Svidler and Alexander Morozevich. At the time, the average Elo rating of the field made it the strongest tournament in history. Following this result, Kramnik stated that his goal was to regain the World Championship title.

He also participated in the London Chess Classic in December, finishing second to Magnus Carlsen, losing their head-to-head encounter on the Black side of the English Opening. Kramnik&#x27;s performance in 2009 allowed his rating (average of July 2009 and January 2010 ratings) to be high enough to qualify for the Candidates Tournament to determine the challenger for the World Chess Championship 2012.

=== 2010 ===

Kramnik began 2010 at the Corus chess tournament in the Netherlands, during which he defeated new world number one Carlsen with the Black pieces in their head-to-head encounter, ending Carlsen&#x27;s 36-game unbeaten streak. A late loss to Viswanathan Anand knocked him out of first place, and Kramnik finished with 8/13, tying for second place with Alexei Shirov behind Carlsen&#x27;s 8½ points.

In May 2010 it was revealed that Kramnik had aided Viswanathan Anand in preparation for the World Chess Championship 2010 against challenger Veselin Topalov. Anand won the match 6½–5½ to retain the title.

In April–May 2010 he tied for 1st–3rd with Shakhriyar Mamedyarov and Gata Kamsky in the President&#x27;s Cup in Baku and won the event on tie-break after all finished on 5/7.

Kramnik also participated in Dortmund, but had a subpar showing, losing to eventual champion Ruslan Ponomariov and finishing in joint third place with 5/10.

He then participated in the Grand Slam Chess Masters preliminary tournament in Shanghai from 3 to 8 September, where he faced world number four Levon Aronian, Alexei Shirov, and Wang Hao; the top two scorers qualified for the Grand Slam final supertournament from 9 to 15 October in Bilbao against Carlsen and Anand. Scoring 3/6, Kramnik tied for second place with Aronian behind the winner Shirov&#x27;s 4½/6. In the blitz playoff, Kramnik defeated Aronian to qualify along with Shirov for the Grand Slam final.

Shortly after qualifying for the last stage of the Grand Slam, Kramnik played on board one for the Russian team in the 2010 Olympiad. He scored +2–0=7.

Following the Olympiad, Kramnik participated in the Grand Slam Chess Masters final in Bilbao where he competed against Anand, Carlsen and Shirov. The average rating of the field was 2789, the highest in history. After defeating world number one Carlsen for the second consecutive time, and then Shirov in his first two games, Kramnik drew his final four games to finish in clear first with 4/6. This gave Kramnik the distinction of having won the two strongest tournaments in chess history.

Kramnik&#x27;s attempt to defend his 2009 title at the Tal Memorial in Moscow ended with a 7th place, while he finished 5th in the London Chess Classic in England.

=== 2011 ===

2011 brought varied results. In Wijk aan Zee Kramnik shared fifth with Maxime Vachier-Lagrave, and in the Candidates he was eliminated by Alexander Grischuk. He won Dortmund for the tenth time, with Lê Quang Liêm in second place, and shared third behind Peter Svidler and Alexander Morozevich in the Russian Superfinal. Kramnik won the third London Chess Classic with four wins and four draws, and a rating performance over 2900 Elo. Hikaru Nakamura came second. However, in the earlier 6th Tal Memorial 2011 Moscow he came 8th out of 10, with 2 losses (to Nepomniachtchi and Svidler) and 7 draws, with Magnus Carlsen winning the overall tournament on tiebreak from Levon Aronian.

=== 2012 ===

Kramnik played a friendly match against Levon Aronian, which finished 3–3 (with a win for Aronian in a rapid game that didn&#x27;t count as tiebreak). In Tal Memorial he shared fourth place behind Magnus Carlsen, Fabiano Caruana and Teimour Radjabov. He finished second in the London Chess Classic behind Carlsen.

===2013===
Kramnik played in the 2013 Candidates Tournament, which took place in London, from 15 March to 1 April. He finished with 8½ points, sharing the first place with Magnus Carlsen, who won due to having better tiebreaks.

In the 2013 Alekhine Memorial tournament, held from 20 April to 1 May, Kramnik finished seventh, with +2−2=5.

In the 2013 Tal Memorial tournament, held from 13 to 23 June, Kramnik finished tenth out of ten, with +0−3=6.

In the Chess World Cup 2013, held in Norway from 11 August to 2 September, Kramnik finished in first place, defeating Dmitry Andreikin in the four-game final match 2½–1½.

===2014===

Kramnik&#x27;s win at the Chess World Cup 2013 qualified him for the Candidates Tournament 2014. He finished equal third on 7 out of 14, and took third place on tie breaks.

===2015===
Kramnik did not succeed in defending his title in the Chess World Cup. In the third round he was defeated by Andreikin. He narrowly missed out on qualifying by rating for the Candidates Tournament 2016. This was the first Candidates Tournament Kramnik had missed, since their re-introduction in the 2012 World Championship cycle.

He participated as one of 130 grandmasters at the combined World Rapid and Blitz Championships in Berlin that was organized by FIDE from 10 to 14 October. In the World Rapid Championship he remained unbeaten, winning five games of 15 and reaching the 6th place.

Kramnik finished third in the World Blitz Championship in Berlin with 15 / 21. He was a half-point behind the winner Alexander Grischuk and lost second place on tiebreak to Maxime Vachier-Lagrave.

===2016===
Kramnik competed in the Dortmund Sparkassen Chess Meeting, held from 917 July and finished joint second with 4/7.

He played in the Tal Memorial (a ten-player round-robin tournament) in Moscow from 26 September6 October. He finished sixth with 4.5/9 in the opening blitz round-robin on 25 September, meaning that he was given one more game to play with the black pieces than with the white in the classical tournament. He finished joint fifth in the classical tournament, again with 4.5/9.

He participated in three of the four events of the Grand Chess Tour (he withdrew from the Sinquefield Cup due to health issues and was replaced by Svidler): Kramnik played the Paris Grand Chess Tour speed chess tournament, the Your Next Move Grand Chess Tour speed chess tournament, and the London Chess Classic classical chess tournament. All the events of the Grand Chess Tour were 10-player round robin tournaments.

The Paris Grand Chess Tour tournament was held from 912 June and was composed of a mixture of rapid and blitz games. Kramnik finished ninth with 5.5/18, above only comparatively low-rated wildcard player Laurent Fressinet.

The Your Next Move Grand Chess Tour tournament was held from 1720 June in Leuven, Belgium. Like the Paris GCT, it was composed of a combination of rapid and blitz games. Kramnik finished joint eighth with 2.5/9.

The London Chess Classic was held from 918 December. Kramnik finished joint third with 5/9.

=== 2017 ===
Kramnik was still a 2800+ player for most of 2017 and therefore still competing at the highest levels. He finished second in the Gashimov Memorial tournament (5/9) behind Shakriyar Mamedyarov (5.5/9), third in Norway Chess behind Nakamura and Aronian. He finished fourth in the Dortmund Sparkassen. He was knocked out by Vasyl Ivanchuk in the World Cup of 2017 in the third round. In December he performed in a simultaneous exhibition on 30 chessboards in Geneva, winning by 29,5-0,5.

=== 2018 ===

Kramnik seemed set to again narrowly miss qualifying for the Candidates on rating, but in late 2017 he was awarded the wild-card entry to the Candidates Tournament 2018. Kramnik started the Candidates tournament well, including a brilliant win with black against Levon Aronian in Round 3. But he faded and finished equal fifth out of eight, on 6.5 points of 14.

=== 2019 ===
Kramnik competed in the 81st Tata Steel Chess Tournament in January, where he finished last with a score of 4½/13 (+2–6=5). He subsequently announced his retirement from professional chess: &quot;I already decided to finish my professional chess career a couple of months ago and now, after having played my last tournament, I would like to announce it publicly.&quot; He said he might still participate in rapid and blitz events and hold simultaneous exhibitions. He stated that he intends to focus on chess for children and education.

=== Online chess ===
Kramnik has been active on the online chess platform Chess.com where he frequently plays blitz games and participates in tournaments. He regularly participates in the Titled Tuesday tournament and has expressed concerns over cheating in online chess, including numerous high-profile cases. In November 2023, Kramnik made a statement on his Chess.com profile purportedly insinuating that an unnamed high-level player was cheating. Hikaru Nakamura believed this post was targeted towards him, and he responded with a statement on X reading: &quot;Vladimir appears to be referencing my record...is he really accusing me of cheating??? .&quot; Nakamura also expressed disappointment with Ian Nepomniachtchi for reposting Kramnik&#x27;s claims. In December 2023, Kramnik&#x27;s conduct prompted online chess website Chess.com to close his blog and mute his account. After he accused multiple more players of cheating in the time after his first major accusation, Kramnik himself was found to be violating Chess.com&#x27;s terms of service and banned from prize tournaments after he was caught playing on Denis Khismatullin’s account. Kramnik then took to X to blame the whistleblower, IM Matvey Galchenko, calling him, in Russian, &quot;a YouTuber posing as a chess player&quot; and to blame him for the fact he would no longer be streaming Titled Tuesday.

== Deep Fritz match ==
Kramnik played a six-game match against the computer program Deep Fritz in Bonn, Germany, from 25 November to 5 December 2006, losing 2–4 to the machine, with 2 losses and 4 draws. He received 500,000 Euros for playing and would have received twice as much had he won the match. Deep Fritz version 10 ran on a computer containing two Intel Core 2 Duo CPUs. Kramnik received a copy of the program in mid-October for testing, but the final version included an updated opening book. Except for limited updates to the opening book, the program was not allowed to be changed during the course of the match. The endgame tablebases used by the program were restricted to five pieces even though a complete six-piece tablebase was widely available.

The first game ended in a draw. A number of commentators claimed that Kramnik missed a win. The second game was won by Deep Fritz due to a mistake by Kramnik, who failed to defend against a threatened mate-in-one. Susan Polgar called it the &quot;blunder of the century&quot;. The third, fourth and fifth games of the match ended in draws. In the last game, Kramnik played the aggressive Sicilian Defense in an attempt to win with black and hence even the match, but he was outplayed by Fritz. Kramnik was forced to resign, and Fritz won the match 4–2.

This match turned out to be the last major human–computer match. According to one expert at the time, &quot;I don&#x27;t know what one could get out of [a further match] at this point. The science is done.&quot;

== Personal life ==
On 30 December 2006 Kramnik married French journalist Marie-Laure Germon. Their wedding took place in the Alexander Nevsky Cathedral in Paris. They have two children: daughter Daria, and son Vadim Vladimirovich. They reside in Geneva.

In Dortmund, 2002, Kramnik faced former heavyweight boxer, Vitali Klitschko in a chess match

Kramnik has been diagnosed with ankylosing spondylitis, an uncommon form of arthritis. It causes him great physical discomfort while playing. In January 2006, Kramnik announced that he would skip the Corus Chess Tournament in Wijk aan Zee to seek out treatment for his arthritis. He returned from treatment in June 2006, playing in the 37th Chess Olympiad. He scored a +4 result, achieving the highest rating performance (2847) of the 1307 participating players.

== Notable tournament victories ==

*1990 Russian Championship, Kuibyshev (classical) I
*1991 World Championship (U18), Guarapuava (classical) I
*1992 Chalkidiki (classical) 7½/11 I
*1994 Overall result PCA Intel Grand Prix&#x27;94 I
*1995 Dortmund (classical) 7/9 I
*1995 Horgen (classical) 7/10 I–II
*1995 Belgrade (classical) 8/11 I–II
*1996 Monaco 16/22 I
*1996 Dos Hermanas (classical) 6/9 I–II
*1996 Dortmund (classical) 7/9 I–II
*1997 Dos Hermanas (classical) 6/9 I–II
*1997 Dortmund (classical) 6½/9 I
*1997 Tilburg (classical) 8/11 I–III
*1998 Wijk aan Zee (classical) 8½/13 I–II
*1998 Dortmund (classical) 6/9 I–III
*1998 Monaco (blindfold and rapidplay) 15/22 I
*1999 Monaco (blindfold and rapidplay) 14½/22 I
*2000 Linares (classical) 6/10 I–II
*2000 Dortmund (classical) 6/9 I–II
*2001 Match Kramnik vs. Leko (rapidplay) 7–5
*2001 Match Botvinnik memorial Kramnik vs. Kasparov (classical) 2–2
*2001 Match Botvinnik memorial Kramnik vs Kasparov (rapidplay) 3–3
*2001 Monaco (blindfold and rapidplay) 15/22 I–II
*2001 Match Kramnik vs. Anand (rapidplay) 5–5
*2001 Dortmund (classical) 6½/10 I–II
*2002 Match Advanced Chess Kramnik vs. Anand (León) 3½–2½
*2003 Linares (classical) 7/12 I–II
*2003 Cap d&#x27;Agde (France) 
*2004 Handicap Simul (classical) 
*2004 Kramnik vs. National Team of Germany 2½–1½
*2004 Linares (classical) 7/12 I
*2004 Monaco (overall result) 14½/22 I–II
*2006 Gold medal at Turin Olympiad with overall best performance (2847) 7/10
*2006 Dortmund (classical) 4½/7 I
*2007 Monaco (blindfold and rapidplay) 15½/22 I
*2007 Dortmund (classical) 5/7 I
*2007 Tal Memorial 6½/9 I
*2009 Dortmund 6½/9 I
*2009 Zürich (rapidplay) 5/7 I
*2009 Tal Memorial 6/9 I
*2010 President&#x27;s Cup in Baku (rapidplay) 5/7 I–III
*2010 Bilbao Grand Slam final 4/6 I
*2011 Dortmund 7/10 I
*2011 Hoogeveen 4½/6 I
*2011 London Chess Classic 6/8 I
*2013 Chess World Cup 2013
He has won three team gold medals and three individual medals at Chess Olympiads.

== World championship matches and qualifiers ==
* PCA Quarterfinals, June 1994, New York, Kramnik–Gata Kamsky (1½–4½).
* FIDE Semifinals, August 1994 Sanghi Nagar, Kramnik–Boris Gelfand (3½–4½).
* Classical WCC Candidates Match, 1998, Cazorla, Kramnik–Alexei Shirov (3½–5½).
* FIDE WCC Knockout Quarterfinals, July 1999, Las Vegas, Kramnik–Michael Adams (2–4, including rapid playoff).
* Classical World Chess Championship 2000, London, Kramnik–Garry Kasparov (8½–6½)
* Classical World Chess Championship 2004, Brissago, Kramnik–Péter Lékó (7–7), Kramnik retains.
* FIDE World Chess Championship 2006, Elista, Kramnik–Topalov (6–6, 2½–1½ rapid playoff), Kramnik unifies the title
* FIDE World Chess Championship 2007 Runner up, Mexico City (loses the title to Anand, joint second Gelfand).
* World Chess Championship 2008, Bonn, Kramnik–Anand (4½–6½), Anand retains
* World Chess Championship 2012 Candidates Match Quarterfinals, April 2011, Kazan, Kramnik–Radjabov (2–2, 2–2 rapid playoff, 2½–1½ blitz playoff), Kramnik advances
* World Chess Championship 2012 Candidates Match Semifinals, April 2011, Kazan, Kramnik–Grischuk (2–2, 2–2 rapid playoff, ½–1½ blitz playoff), Kramnik eliminated
* World Chess Championship 2013 Runner-up, Candidates Tournament, March–April 2013, London, +4−1=9.
* World Chess Championship 2014 Third place, Candidates Tournament, Khanty-Mansiysk, +3−3=8
* He failed to qualify for the Candidates Tournament 2016, after narrowly missing a qualifying place on rating, and being eliminated in the third round of the Chess World Cup 2015.
* He qualified for the Candidates Tournament 2018 as the organiser&#x27;s nominee, placing fifth with +3−4=7.

== Assessment and legacy ==

=== Playing style ===
Garry Kasparov described Kramnik&#x27;s style as pragmatic and tenacious, in the latter similar to Anatoly Karpov. He is one of the toughest opponents to defeat, losing only one game in over one hundred games leading up to his match with Kasparov, including eighty consecutive games without a loss. Kasparov did not defeat Kramnik during their 2000 World Championship match, partly due to Kramnik&#x27;s use of the Berlin Defence of the Ruy Lopez. Kramnik is renowned for his endgame skills.

=== Contributions to chess ===
Kramnik has significantly shaped opening theory in chess. Viswanathan Anand has said of him in 2012: &quot;I don&#x27;t know exactly how many lines he&#x27;s established, but you get the impression that for the last 10 years we&#x27;ve only been using his ideas. ... His stamp on opening theory is much more significant than mine.&quot; Kramnik&#x27;s results with the white pieces against the King&#x27;s Indian Defence made Kasparov drop the opening from his repertoire, and caused the opening to drop in popularity from top-level play for many years. Kramnik&#x27;s use of the Berlin Defence in his 2000 match against Kasparov led to a massive increase in the opening&#x27;s popularity. Kramnik was the world&#x27;s leading exponent of the Petrov&#x27;s Defence for much of his career and he also revived the Catalan Opening.

=== Makruk ===
Kramnik also plays makruk. On 1 May 2004, while visiting the Federal Exhibition Hall, he immediately learned the rules and beat Dr. René Gralla. In his opinion, Thai chess is more strategic than Indian (international); and they need to plan combinations with care, since Thai chess can be compared to endgame in international chess. As the reigning world chess champion, he expressed his wish to play a mixed match of makruk and chess with the reigning makruk champion Tor Pagnaam.

==Notable games==
*Levon Aronian vs Kramnik, Candidates Tournament 2018, Berlin, Round 3, Ruy Lopez, Berlin Defence (C65), .
Using an opening novelty discovered years prior, Kramnik overwhelms Aronian on the board, foregoing castling in favour of the attack, culminating in a rook sacrifice followed by imminent checkmate against the white king.

==Chess books==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==Videos by Kramnik==
* Kramnik, Vladimir. 2007. &quot;My Path to the Top&quot; DVD. Chessbase. 

== See also ==
* List of chess games between Anand and Kramnik
* List of chess games between Kasparov and Kramnik

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website: illustrated biography, classical game records (1987‒2013), and interviews (2011‒13). No content from after 2013.
* Frederic Friedel: &quot;Kramnik on health, plans – and computers.&quot; ChessBase, 13 March 2006.
* Pavel Matocha: &quot;Interview with Vladimir Kramnik.&quot; LatesChess, 25 July 2008.
* Marina Makarycheva: &quot;Indepth interview with Vladimir Kramnik.&quot; ChessBase, 4 November 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161092" start="0" end="27" title="Vladimir Kramnik" label="Vladimir Borisovich Kramnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="63" end="80" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="chess grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93" end="123" title="World Chess Champion#Split title (1993–2006)" label="Classical World Chess Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190042" start="167" end="187" title="World Chess Champion" label="World Chess Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="234" end="248" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345226" start="264" end="294" title="Classical World Chess Championship 2000" label="Classical World Chess Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q667625" start="299" end="317" title="Classical World Chess Championship 2004" label="defended his title"/>
<link wikidata="Q210922" start="334" end="344" title="Peter Leko" label="Peter Leko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="372" end="391" title="World Chess Champion#Split title (1993–2006)" label="FIDE World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172798" start="392" end="407" title="Veselin Topalov" label="Veselin Topalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q773632" start="413" end="430" title="World Chess Championship 2006" label="unification match"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="625" end="642" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q542213" start="656" end="685" title="World Chess Championship 2007" label="World Chess Championship 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q634297" start="742" end="771" title="World Chess Championship 2008" label="World Chess Championship 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723677" start="850" end="872" title="Candidates Tournament" label="Candidates tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058369" start="919" end="923" title="Candidates Tournament 2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q105955" start="1106" end="1112" title="Elo rating system" label="rating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1158" end="1203" title="Comparison of top chess players throughout history#Elo system" label="joint-eighth-highest-rated player of all time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1254" end="1268" title="Chess theory#Opening theory" label="opening theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q196702" start="1333" end="1339" title="Tuapse" label="Tuapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1362" end="1371" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1550" end="1559" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="1623" end="1630" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178865" start="1725" end="1742" title="Mikhail Botvinnik" label="Mikhail Botvinnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q287649" start="1859" end="1888" title="30th Chess Olympiad" label="1992 Chess Olympiad in Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="1981" end="1992" title="FIDE Master" label="FIDE Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="2034" end="2048" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137224" start="2076" end="2080" title="draw (chess)" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q266098" start="2241" end="2248" title="Linares chess tournament" label="Linares"/>
<link wikidata="Q208229" start="2306" end="2320" title="Vasyl Ivanchuk" label="Vasyl Ivanchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q694766" start="2498" end="2517" title="Dortmund Sparkassen Chess Meeting" label="Dortmund tournament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2572" end="2578" title="Glossary of chess#Second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000493" start="2599" end="2638" title="Classical World Chess Championship 1995" label="Classical World Chess Championship 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="2664" end="2681" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570561" start="2751" end="2767" title="List of FIDE chess world number ones" label="world number-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="3377" end="3391" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105955" start="3596" end="3602" title="Elo rating system" label="rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="3790" end="3807" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q315155" start="4378" end="4389" title="Gata Kamsky" label="Gata Kamsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q486778" start="4481" end="4494" title="Boris Gelfand" label="Boris Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214713" start="4540" end="4553" title="Alexei Shirov" label="Alexei Shirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723677" start="4559" end="4575" title="Candidates Tournament" label="Candidates match"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="4598" end="4612" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="4710" end="4714" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="4740" end="4749" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q299636" start="4784" end="4797" title="Michael Adams (chess player)" label="Michael Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="5604" end="5618" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5735" end="5749" title="Ruy Lopez#Berlin Defence" label="Berlin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="5769" end="5778" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q262740" start="6229" end="6243" title="World Chess Championship 1921" label="Lasker in 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q752000" start="6361" end="6372" title="Chess Oscar" label="Chess Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643576" start="6493" end="6510" title="Brains in Bahrain" label="Brains in Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q901348" start="6559" end="6569" title="Deep Fritz" label="Deep Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="6573" end="6580" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392263" start="6798" end="6806" title="resign (chess)" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q266098" start="7057" end="7078" title="Linares chess tournament" label="Tournament of Linares"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="7201" end="7215" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q210922" start="7422" end="7432" title="Péter Lékó" label="Péter Lékó"/>
<link wikidata="Q69706" start="7436" end="7444" title="Brissago" label="Brissago"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="7698" end="7709" title="Swiss franc" label="Swiss franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7728" end="7731" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q102178" start="7893" end="7897" title="FIDE" label="FIDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q313778" start="7985" end="7996" title="Nigel Short" label="Nigel Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="8081" end="8095" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q139438" start="8100" end="8110" title="Jan Timman" label="Jan Timman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102648" start="8300" end="8308" title="Wilhelm Steinitz" label="Steinitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082745" start="8452" end="8486" title="FIDE World Chess Championship 2005" label="FIDE World Chess Championship 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q172798" start="8733" end="8748" title="Veselin Topalov" label="Veselin Topalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8752" end="8760" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q773632" start="8847" end="8881" title="FIDE World Chess Championship 2006" label="FIDE World Chess Championship 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977" start="8907" end="8913" title="Elista" label="Elista"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953" start="8915" end="8923" title="Kalmykia" label="Kalmykia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="9867" end="9875" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q752000" start="10631" end="10642" title="Chess Oscar" label="Chess Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="11318" end="11335" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="11494" end="11498" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829673" start="12000" end="12012" title="Tal Memorial" label="Tal Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841451" start="12043" end="12061" title="Performance rating (chess)" label="rating performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208229" start="12093" end="12107" title="Vasyl Ivanchuk" label="Vasyl Ivanchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="12109" end="12123" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="12125" end="12138" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q486778" start="12140" end="12153" title="Boris Gelfand" label="Boris Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q207723" start="12182" end="12199" title="Ruslan Ponomariov" label="Ruslan Ponomariov"/>
<link wikidata="Q210922" start="12201" end="12211" title="Peter Leko" label="Peter Leko"/>
<link wikidata="Q278777" start="12213" end="12226" title="Peter Svidler" label="Peter Svidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q312918" start="12231" end="12251" title="Alexander Morozevich" label="Alexander Morozevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="12526" end="12540" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q110693" start="12603" end="12618" title="English Opening" label="English Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723677" start="12759" end="12780" title="Candidates Tournament" label="Candidates Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q909142" start="12817" end="12846" title="World Chess Championship 2012" label="World Chess Championship 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q161981" start="12889" end="12911" title="Corus chess tournament" label="Corus chess tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="13103" end="13120" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214713" start="13213" end="13226" title="Alexei Shirov" label="Alexei Shirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="13312" end="13329" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q733589" start="13353" end="13382" title="World Chess Championship 2010" label="World Chess Championship 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q172798" start="13402" end="13417" title="Veselin Topalov" label="Veselin Topalov"/>
<link wikidata="Q312267" start="13510" end="13531" title="Shakhriyar Mamedyarov" label="Shakhriyar Mamedyarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q315155" start="13536" end="13547" title="Gata Kamsky" label="Gata Kamsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q207723" start="13736" end="13753" title="Ruslan Ponomariov" label="Ruslan Ponomariov"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="13945" end="13958" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214713" start="13960" end="13973" title="Alexei Shirov" label="Alexei Shirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q964913" start="13979" end="13987" title="Wang Hao (chess player)" label="Wang Hao"/>
<link wikidata="Q256923" start="15210" end="15232" title="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave" label="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q314531" start="15277" end="15295" title="Alexander Grischuk" label="Alexander Grischuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q734168" start="15338" end="15351" title="Lê Quang Liêm" label="Lê Quang Liêm"/>
<link wikidata="Q278777" start="15393" end="15406" title="Peter Svidler" label="Peter Svidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q312918" start="15411" end="15431" title="Alexander Morozevich" label="Alexander Morozevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q337223" start="15573" end="15588" title="Hikaru Nakamura" label="Hikaru Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="15742" end="15756" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="15805" end="15818" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="15875" end="15888" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106807" start="16032" end="16046" title="Magnus Carlsen" label="Magnus Carlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q367277" start="16048" end="16063" title="Fabiano Caruana" label="Fabiano Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q211634" start="16068" end="16084" title="Teimour Radjabov" label="Teimour Radjabov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335047" start="16112" end="16132" title="London Chess Classic" label="London Chess Classic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16183" end="16209" title="World Chess Championship 2013#Candidates Tournament" label="2013 Candidates Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290127" start="16391" end="16408" title="Alekhine Memorial" label="Alekhine Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829673" start="16502" end="16514" title="Tal Memorial" label="Tal Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947282" start="16608" end="16628" title="Chess World Cup 2013" label="Chess World Cup 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232768" start="16719" end="16735" title="Dmitry Andreikin" label="Dmitry Andreikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947282" start="16811" end="16831" title="Chess World Cup 2013" label="Chess World Cup 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q15822583" start="16854" end="16880" title="Candidates Tournament 2014" label="Candidates Tournament 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666538" start="17145" end="17171" title="Candidates Tournament 2016" label="Candidates Tournament 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q909142" start="17269" end="17298" title="World Chess Championship 2012" label="2012 World Championship cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q314531" start="17681" end="17699" title="Alexander Grischuk" label="Alexander Grischuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q256923" start="17737" end="17759" title="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave" label="Maxime Vachier-Lagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q841144" start="17932" end="17954" title="round-robin tournament" label="round-robin tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q20921574" start="18315" end="18331" title="Grand Chess Tour" label="Grand Chess Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17665272" start="18354" end="18369" title="Sinquefield Cup" label="Sinquefield Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383467" start="18888" end="18905" title="Laurent Fressinet" label="Laurent Fressinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="18982" end="18988" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q312267" start="19398" end="19418" title="Shakriyar Mamedyarov" label="Shakriyar Mamedyarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q208229" start="19548" end="19562" title="Vasyl Ivanchuk" label="Vasyl Ivanchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="19683" end="19689" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q43388615" start="19869" end="19895" title="Candidates Tournament 2018" label="Candidates Tournament 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="19990" end="20003" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q161981" start="20127" end="20159" title="81st Tata Steel Chess Tournament" label="81st Tata Steel Chess Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q105123086" start="20693" end="20705" title="online chess" label="online chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829376" start="20715" end="20724" title="Chess.com" label="Chess.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q337223" start="21092" end="21107" title="Hikaru Nakamura" label="Hikaru Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="21190" end="21191" title="Twitter" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q521817" start="21346" end="21364" title="Ian Nepomniachtchi" label="Ian Nepomniachtchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q504960" start="21761" end="21779" title="Denis Khismatullin" label="Denis Khismatullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690563" start="21842" end="21844" title="FIDE titles" label="IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125263" start="21896" end="21904" title="YouTuber" label="YouTuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829376" start="21998" end="22012" title="Titled Tuesday" label="Titled Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q901348" start="22099" end="22109" title="Deep Fritz" label="Deep Fritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="22113" end="22117" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="22239" end="22243" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q216334" start="22372" end="22388" title="Intel Core 2" label="Intel Core 2 Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="22389" end="22392" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901352" start="22504" end="22516" title="opening book" label="opening book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340994" start="22644" end="22661" title="endgame tablebase" label="endgame tablebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q12823" start="22994" end="23006" title="Susan Polgar" label="Susan Polgar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23027" end="23049" title="Blunder (chess)#Deep Fritz vs. Vladimir Kramnik" label="blunder of the century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493222" start="23673" end="23708" title="Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Paris" label="Alexander Nevsky Cathedral in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="23794" end="23800" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q31919" start="23862" end="23878" title="Vitali Klitschko" label="Vitali Klitschko"/>
<link wikidata="Q52849" start="23929" end="23951" title="ankylosing spondylitis" label="ankylosing spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="23973" end="23982" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161981" start="24097" end="24119" title="Corus Chess Tournament" label="Corus Chess Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q913649" start="24123" end="24135" title="Wijk aan Zee" label="Wijk aan Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q402434" start="24233" end="24252" title="37th Chess Olympiad" label="37th Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q326354" start="24481" end="24491" title="Guarapuava" label="Guarapuava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454771" start="25480" end="25494" title="Advanced Chess" label="Advanced Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947282" start="26225" end="26245" title="Chess World Cup 2013" label="Chess World Cup 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q428303" start="26311" end="26325" title="Chess Olympiad" label="Chess Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q315155" start="26427" end="26438" title="Gata Kamsky" label="Gata Kamsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q486778" start="26501" end="26514" title="Boris Gelfand" label="Boris Gelfand"/>
<link wikidata="Q214713" start="26581" end="26594" title="Alexei Shirov" label="Alexei Shirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q299636" start="26669" end="26682" title="Michael Adams (chess player)" label="Michael Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345226" start="26717" end="26756" title="Classical World Chess Championship 2000" label="Classical World Chess Championship 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q28614" start="26774" end="26788" title="Garry Kasparov" label="Garry Kasparov"/>
<link wikidata="Q667625" start="26799" end="26838" title="Classical World Chess Championship 2004" label="Classical World Chess Championship 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q210922" start="26858" end="26868" title="Péter Lékó" label="Péter Lékó"/>
<link wikidata="Q773632" start="26895" end="26929" title="FIDE World Chess Championship 2006" label="FIDE World Chess Championship 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q542213" start="27011" end="27045" title="FIDE World Chess Championship 2007" label="FIDE World Chess Championship 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q634297" start="27121" end="27150" title="World Chess Championship 2008" label="World Chess Championship 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q909142" start="27197" end="27226" title="World Chess Championship 2012" label="World Chess Championship 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q211634" start="27286" end="27294" title="Teimour Radjabov" label="Radjabov"/>
<link wikidata="Q909142" start="27361" end="27390" title="World Chess Championship 2012" label="World Chess Championship 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q314531" start="27447" end="27455" title="Alexander Grischuk" label="Grischuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q917629" start="27523" end="27552" title="World Chess Championship 2013" label="World Chess Championship 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035503" start="27623" end="27652" title="World Chess Championship 2014" label="World Chess Championship 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666538" start="27744" end="27770" title="Candidates Tournament 2016" label="Candidates Tournament 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064594" start="27872" end="27892" title="Chess World Cup 2015" label="Chess World Cup 2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q43388615" start="27917" end="27943" title="Candidates Tournament 2018" label="Candidates Tournament 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="28155" end="28169" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28471" end="28485" title="Ruy Lopez#Berlin Defence" label="Berlin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="28493" end="28502" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="28532" end="28539" title="Chess endgame" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28613" end="28636" title="Chess theory#Opening theory" label="opening theory in chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q45747" start="28638" end="28655" title="Viswanathan Anand" label="Viswanathan Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q899932" start="28974" end="29000" title="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence" label="King&amp;#x27;s Indian Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q326928" start="29323" end="29344" title="Petrov&amp;#x27;s Defence" label="Petrov&amp;#x27;s Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138488" start="29392" end="29407" title="Catalan Opening" label="Catalan Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q631557" start="29444" end="29450" title="makruk" label="makruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q879960" start="29486" end="29509" title="Federal Exhibition Hall" label="Federal Exhibition Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="29605" end="29614" title="strategy" label="strategic"/>
<link wikidata="Q332225" start="29726" end="29733" title="endgame (chess)" label="endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q154586" start="29927" end="29940" title="Levon Aronian" label="Levon Aronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290671" start="29998" end="30007" title="Ruy Lopez" label="Ruy Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763283" start="30009" end="30023" title="Berlin Defence" label="Berlin Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q702446" start="30369" end="30378" title="Chessbase" label="Chessbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357638" start="30399" end="30444" title="List of chess games between Anand and Kramnik" label="List of chess games between Anand and Kramnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850939" start="30447" end="30495" title="List of chess games between Kasparov and Kramnik" label="List of chess games between Kasparov and Kramnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503577" start="30670" end="30686" title="Frederic Friedel" label="Frederic Friedel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99648" wikidata="Q1021350" url="?curid=99648" title="Woodbridge, Suffolk">
<text>Woodbridge is a port town and civil parish in the East Suffolk district of Suffolk, England. It is up the River Deben from the sea. It lies north-east of Ipswich and around north-east of London. In 2011 it had a population of 7,749.

The town is close to some major archaeological sites of the Anglo-Saxon period, including the Sutton Hoo burial ship. It is well known for its boating harbour and tide mill next to the River Deben, in the Suffolk &amp; Essex Coast &amp; Heaths National Landscape. Several festivals are held. As a &quot;gem in Suffolk&#x27;s crown&quot; (according to The Suffolk Coast tourist site) it has been named the best place to live in the East of England.

==Etymology==
Historians disagree over the etymology of Woodbridge. &quot;The Dictionary of British Placenames&quot; (2003) suggests that it is a combination of the Old English wudu (wood) and brycg (bridge). The Sutton Hoo Society&#x27;s 1988 magazine &quot;Saxon&quot; points out, however, that there is no suitable site for a bridge at Woodbridge, or any fordable sites until Wilford, the site of the current bridge, several miles upstream. It also raises that an Anglo-Saxon bridge being wooden would have been unlikely to be worthy of comment. It suggests that it might instead have been a combination of &quot;odde&quot; (a cognate of the Old Scandinavian &quot;oddi&quot; meaning &#x27;promontory or cape&#x27;) and &quot;breg&quot; (from the Anglo-Saxon &quot;brego&quot; meaning king – note the closeness of Sutton Hoo) or more likely &quot;bryg&quot; (a cognate of the Norwegian &quot;brygge&quot; or quay).

&quot;The Suffolk Traveller&quot; (1764) suggests a similar origin to &quot;The Dictionary&quot; but originating from a bridge over a hollow way that leads from Woodbridge Market Place to the Ipswich. But this is disputed by Rev. Thomas Carthew, then perpetual curate of Woodbridge who points out that the bridge had existed for less than a hundred years at that point and therefore was not old enough to be the source of the name. He instead suggests Oden or Woden (Odin) and Burgh, Bury, or Brigg (town). &quot;The Topographical Dictionary of England&quot; (1840) suggests a combination of Woden and Bryge.

==History and heritage== 
Archaeological finds point to habitation in the area from the Neolithic Age (2500–1700 BCE). A ritual site was found while excavations were made for the East Anglia Array, a wind farm at Seven Springs Field. The area was occupied by the Romans for 300 years after Queen Boudica&#x27;s failed rebellion in 59 CE, but there is little evidence of their presence.

After the Roman forces were recalled to Rome in 410 CE, substantial Anglo-Saxon (Germanic) settlement ensued. The Angles gave their name to East Anglia.

King Rædwald of East Anglia was Bretwalda, the most powerful king in England in the early 7th century. He died in about 624 CE and is often associated with the burial at Sutton Hoo, across the River Deben from Woodbridge. The burial ship is long. The treasures discovered there in 1939 were the richest finds ever on British soil. They are held now in the British Museum in London, but replicas of some items and the story of the finds can be seen in the Woodbridge Museum. The National Trust has built a visitor centre on the site.

The earliest record of Woodbridge as such dates from the mid-10th century, when it was acquired by St Aethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, as part of the endowment of a monastery he helped to refound at Ely, Cambridgeshire in 970. The Domesday Book of 1086 describes Woodbridge as part of Loes Hundred with 35 households, i.e. one of the largest 20 per cent of settlements recorded. Much of Woodbridge was granted to the powerful Bigod family, who built the castle at Framlingham.

The town has been a centre for boatbuilding, rope-making and sail-making since the Middle Ages. Edward III and Sir Francis Drake had fighting ships built in Woodbridge. The town suffered in the plague of 1349, but recovered enough, with encouragement from the Canons and growing general prosperity, to have a new church (St Mary&#x27;s, behind the buildings on the south side of Market Hill) built of limestone from the Wash and decorated with Thetford flint. By the mid-15th century the Brews family had added a tower and porch.

On 12 October 1534, Prior Henry Bassingbourne confirmed Henry VIII&#x27;s supremacy over the Church and rejected the incumbent &quot;Roman Bishop&quot;. Nonetheless, Woodbridge Priory was dissolved three years later.

As religious unrest continued under the Roman Catholic Queen Mary, Alexander Gooch, a weaver of Woodbridge, and Alice Driver of Grundisburgh were burnt for heresy on Rushmere Heath. Alice had previously had her ears cut off for likening Queen Mary to Jezebel. Subsequent religious settlement under Elizabeth I helped Woodbridge industries such as weaving, sail-cloth manufacture, rope-making and salt making to prosper, along with the wool trade. The port was enlarged, and shipbuilding and the timber trade became lucrative, so that a customs house was established in 1589.

The town has various buildings of the Tudor, Georgian, Regency and Victorian periods, and a tide mill in working order, one of only two in the UK and among the earliest. The mill first recorded on the site in 1170 was run by Augustinian canons. In 1536 it passed to King Henry VIII. In 1564, Queen Elizabeth I granted the mill and the priory to Thomas Seckford, who in 1577 founded Woodbridge School and the Seckford Almshouses for the poor of Woodbridge. Two windmills survive, Buttrum&#x27;s Mill, and Tricker&#x27;s Mill, of which Buttrum&#x27;s is open to the public.

In 1943, the Royal Air Force (RAF) built a military airfield east of Woodbridge. RAF Woodbridge was used during the Cold War by the United States Air Force as the base for two Tactical Fighter Squadrons until 1993.

==Governance== 

Woodbridge lies in the East Suffolk district of the shire county of Suffolk. It is a civil parish; the town council, which is based at Woodbridge Shire Hall has a mayor and 16 councillors elected for four wards. The town is currently represented by the Labour MP Jenny Riddell-Carpenter in the Suffolk Coastal parliamentary constituency. The county councillor is the Liberal Democrat Caroline Page.

In 1894 Woodbridge became an urban district which became part of the administrative county of East Suffolk in 1889, the district contained the parish of Woodbridge. On 1 April 1974 the district was abolished and became part of Suffolk Coastal in the non-metropolitan county of Suffolk. A successor parish was formed covering the same area as the former district and its parish. In 2019 Woodbridge became part of East Suffolk district.

==Education and the arts==
The town has state and grant-aided primary and secondary education at Farlingaye High School, Woodbridge Primary School, Kyson Primary School, and St Mary&#x27;s Church of England Voluntarily Aided Primary School. The co-educational independent Woodbridge School has junior and senior departments and facilities for boarding.

Woodbridge has a community brass band, the Excelsior, formed in 1846, which makes it the oldest in East Anglia. There is a local radio station. The town also has a two-hectare (5-acre) walled park. Also of interest ecologically are the Quaker Burial Ground and Fen Meadow, of traditionally managed grassland.

==Media==
Local news and television programmes are provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia. Television signals are received from the Sudbury TV transmitter and the local relay transmitter. 

Local radio stations are BBC Radio Suffolk, Heart East, Greatest Hits Radio Ipswich &amp; Suffolk, Nation Radio Suffolk and Ipswich Community Radio, a community based station which broadcast from nearby Ipswich. 

The town is served by the local newspaper, Ipswich Star.

==Sport and leisure== 

Woodbridge has a Non-League football club Woodbridge Town F.C., which plays at Notcutts Park.

The many clubs and groups cover association football, badminton, birdwatching, bowls, cricket, cruising, netball, road running, rowing, rugby football, swimming, tennis, golf (Woodbridge Golf Club, founded 1893 at Bromeswell listed in the top 100 in England and Ufford Park), yachting and archery. They include Deben Rowing Club and Deben Yacht Club.

The town&#x27;s Deben Leisure Centre and swimming pool were refurbished in 2017–2018 and now provide fuller services since reopening.

==Places of worship== 

The two Church of England churches are the medieval St Mary&#x27;s on Market Hill, and the Victorian St John&#x27;s on St John&#x27;s Hill.

&quot;Woodbridge Quay Church&quot; in Quay Street, once the Quay Meeting House, embodies a 2006 merger of the town&#x27;s Baptist and United Reformed congregations. It is affiliated to the Baptist Union of Great Britain and the Evangelical Alliance. There is a Methodist Church in St John&#x27;s Street, a Salvation Army hall in New Street, and the Roman Catholic Church of St Thomas of Canterbury in St John&#x27;s Street. The last forms a joint parish with Framlingham. Woodbridge Quaker Meeting meets weekly at Woodbridge Shire Hall. Avenue Evangelical Church, on the outskirts of Woodbridge, is affiliated to the Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches.

==Climate== 
Woodbridge has an unusually warm summer climate, according to the averages for 1991–2020, and is exceptionally dry by British standards.
==Notable residents== 
Writers Edward FitzGerald and Anne Knight were born in Woodbridge, and fellow writer Bernard Barton lived in the town in later life.

Other residents of note include musicians Nate James and Charlie Simpson; actors Brian Capron and Nicholas Pandolfi; painter Thomas Churchyard; Director-General of the BBC Ian Jacob; abolitionist John Clarkson; Roy Keane the football manager, and Thomas Seckford, official at the court of Queen Elizabeth I. The clockmaker John Calver lived in the town. Musicians Brian Eno and Brinsley Schwarz were born there. The world&#x27;s most tattooed man, Tom Leppard, was born in the town. So were the actor Gavin Lee and the footballer Vernon Lewis.

The composer Christopher Wright (1954–2024) and his wife, violinist Ruth Dickins (1958–2009), lived in Woodbridge.

==Twin towns== 
Woodbridge has been twinned since 1973 with Mussidan, a town in the Dordogne in south-west France.

==Freedom of the Town==
The following people and military units have received the Freedom of the Town of Woodbridge.

===Military units===
* 23 Parachute Engineer Regiment: 2006
* The Royal Air Force: 11 June 2016
* The Royal British Legion (Woodbridge Branch): 11 June 2016

==See also== 
*Deben Registration District

==References== 
==External links== 
*Woodbridge Town Council
*Choose Woodbridge</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1021350" start="0" end="10" title="Woodbridge, Suffolk" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554266" start="50" end="62" title="East Suffolk District" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="75" end="82" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q338299" start="106" end="117" title="River Deben" label="River Deben"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="154" end="161" title="Ipswich" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="294" end="305" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="328" end="338" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q493694" start="397" end="406" title="tide mill" label="tide mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634537" start="439" end="496" title="Suffolk &amp;amp; Essex Coast &amp;amp; Heaths National Landscape" label="Suffolk &amp;amp; Essex Coast &amp;amp; Heaths National Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q476352" start="1736" end="1746" title="Sunken lane" label="hollow way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169547" start="1853" end="1869" title="perpetual curate" label="perpetual curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="2069" end="2073" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364853" start="2391" end="2408" title="East Anglia Array" label="East Anglia Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q184634" start="2508" end="2515" title="Boudica" label="Boudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q468836" start="2753" end="2765" title="Rædwald of East Anglia" label="King Rædwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q837998" start="2769" end="2780" title="Kingdom of East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864816" start="2785" end="2794" title="Bretwalda" label="Bretwalda"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="2923" end="2933" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="3109" end="3123" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q543858" start="3389" end="3421" title="Aethelwold of Winchester" label="Aethelwold, Bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="3453" end="3462" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q209176" start="3487" end="3506" title="Ely, Cambridgeshire" label="Ely, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666573" start="3573" end="3585" title="Loes Hundred" label="Loes Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q859714" start="3714" end="3726" title="Bigod family" label="Bigod family"/>
<link wikidata="Q616587" start="3752" end="3763" title="Framlingham" label="Framlingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="3797" end="3809" title="boat building" label="boatbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="3811" end="3822" title="rope" label="rope-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999" start="3827" end="3838" title="sail" label="sail-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3849" end="3860" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="3862" end="3872" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="3881" end="3894" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463998" start="4182" end="4190" title="the Wash" label="the Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q237250" start="4210" end="4218" title="Thetford" label="Thetford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032421" start="4463" end="4480" title="Woodbridge Priory" label="Woodbridge Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="4570" end="4580" title="Queen Mary I of England" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027680" start="4643" end="4655" title="Grundisburgh" label="Grundisburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380838" start="4681" end="4695" title="Rushmere Heath" label="Rushmere Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q721295" start="4766" end="4773" title="Jezebel" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="5129" end="5134" title="Tudor architecture" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="5136" end="5144" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931689" start="5146" end="5153" title="Regency style" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="5158" end="5167" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5183" end="5209" title="Tide mill#Surviving tide mills in Britain" label="tide mill in working order"/>
<link wikidata="Q89566537" start="5316" end="5334" title="Augustinian canons" label="Augustinian canons"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="5362" end="5372" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5389" end="5400" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793855" start="5436" end="5451" title="Thomas Seckford" label="Thomas Seckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032423" start="5473" end="5490" title="Woodbridge School" label="Woodbridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442929" start="5499" end="5518" title="Seckford Trust" label="Seckford Almshouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="5551" end="5559" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003132" start="5570" end="5589" title="Buttrum&amp;#x27;s Mill, Woodbridge" label="Buttrum&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841176" start="5595" end="5614" title="Tricker&amp;#x27;s Mill, Woodbridge" label="Tricker&amp;#x27;s Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="5677" end="5692" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q695850" start="5707" end="5724" title="military airfield" label="military airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275687" start="5745" end="5759" title="RAF Woodbridge" label="RAF Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5780" end="5788" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="5796" end="5819" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554266" start="5920" end="5932" title="East Suffolk (district)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="5982" end="5994" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="6000" end="6012" title="town council" label="town council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17527203" start="6032" end="6053" title="Shire Hall, Woodbridge" label="Woodbridge Shire Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="6150" end="6156" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q126852565" start="6160" end="6183" title="Jenny Riddell-Carpenter" label="Jenny Riddell-Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q988194" start="6191" end="6233" title="Suffolk Coastal (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Suffolk Coastal parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="6264" end="6280" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="6326" end="6340" title="Urban district (England and Wales)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q374808" start="6391" end="6403" title="East Suffolk (county)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116371" start="6524" end="6539" title="Suffolk Coastal" label="Suffolk Coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="6547" end="6570" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632657" start="6585" end="6601" title="successor parish" label="successor parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435447" start="6830" end="6852" title="Farlingaye High School" label="Farlingaye High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032423" start="7005" end="7022" title="Woodbridge School" label="Woodbridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244156" start="7114" end="7124" title="brass band" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="7186" end="7197" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834810" start="7460" end="7468" title="BBC East" label="BBC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975048" start="7473" end="7483" title="ITV Anglia" label="ITV Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633558" start="7526" end="7533" title="Sudbury transmitting station" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834934" start="7609" end="7626" title="BBC Radio Suffolk" label="BBC Radio Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066880" start="7628" end="7638" title="Heart East" label="Heart East"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853203" start="7640" end="7681" title="Greatest Hits Radio East" label="Greatest Hits Radio Ipswich &amp;amp; Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277047" start="7683" end="7703" title="Nation Radio Suffolk" label="Nation Radio Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874569" start="7708" end="7731" title="Ipswich Community Radio" label="Ipswich Community Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q184775" start="7787" end="7794" title="Ipswich, Suffolk" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416632" start="7841" end="7853" title="Ipswich Star" label="Ipswich Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="7897" end="7916" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417725" start="7922" end="7942" title="Woodbridge Town F.C." label="Woodbridge Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8494" end="8511" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349760" start="8529" end="8537" title="Medieval architecture" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="8577" end="8586" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="8749" end="8756" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458238" start="8761" end="8776" title="United Reformed Church" label="United Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="8816" end="8846" title="Baptists Together" label="Baptist Union of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931133" start="8855" end="8875" title="Evangelical Alliance" label="Evangelical Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="8888" end="8897" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="8933" end="8947" title="Salvation Army" label="Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8976" end="8990" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258313" start="8991" end="9024" title="Church of St Thomas of Canterbury, Woodbridge" label="Church of St Thomas of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q616587" start="9086" end="9097" title="Framlingham" label="Framlingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="9110" end="9116" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442536" start="9244" end="9290" title="Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches" label="Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="9474" end="9491" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Edward FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768512" start="9496" end="9507" title="Anne Knight (children&amp;#x27;s writer)" label="Anne Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566669" start="9551" end="9565" title="Bernard Barton" label="Bernard Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870711" start="9642" end="9652" title="Nate James" label="Nate James"/>
<link wikidata="Q470996" start="9657" end="9672" title="Charlie Simpson" label="Charlie Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963279" start="9681" end="9693" title="Brian Capron" label="Brian Capron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026023" start="9698" end="9715" title="Nicholas Pandolfi" label="Nicholas Pandolfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788420" start="9725" end="9742" title="Thomas Churchyard (painter)" label="Thomas Churchyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147283" start="9772" end="9781" title="Ian Jacob" label="Ian Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226249" start="9796" end="9809" title="John Clarkson (abolitionist)" label="John Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188632" start="9811" end="9820" title="Roy Keane" label="Roy Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793855" start="9847" end="9862" title="Thomas Seckford" label="Thomas Seckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="9889" end="9906" title="Queen Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239231" start="9923" end="9934" title="John Calver" label="John Calver"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="9964" end="9973" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968469" start="9978" end="9994" title="Brinsley Schwarz (musician)" label="Brinsley Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530778" start="10048" end="10059" title="Tom Leppard" label="Tom Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528201" start="10101" end="10110" title="Gavin Lee" label="Gavin Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q65552883" start="10130" end="10142" title="Vernon Lewis (footballer)" label="Vernon Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131759327" start="10158" end="10176" title="Christopher Wright (composer)" label="Christopher Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="10297" end="10304" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q494972" start="10321" end="10329" title="Mussidan" label="Mussidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357" start="10345" end="10353" title="Dordogne" label="Dordogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="10459" end="10478" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631561" start="10518" end="10548" title="23 Parachute Engineer Regiment" label="23 Parachute Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="10561" end="10576" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="10597" end="10617" title="Royal British Legion" label="Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248052" start="10668" end="10695" title="Deben Registration District" label="Deben Registration District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="99653" wikidata="Q1024896" url="?curid=99653" title="Looe">
<text>Looe (; , ) is a coastal town and civil parish in south-east Cornwall, England, United Kingdom, with a population of 5,280 at the 2011 census.

Looe is west of Plymouth and south of Liskeard, divided in two by the River Looe, East Looe () and West Looe (, &quot;little cove&quot;) being connected by a bridge. Looe developed as two separate towns each with MPs and its own mayor.

The town centres around a small harbour and along the steep-sided valley of the River Looe which flows between East and West Looe to the sea beside a sandy beach. Offshore to the west, opposite the stonier Hannafore Beach, lies Looe Island.

==History==

===Prehistory and foundation===
Archaeological evidence indicates that the area around Looe has been inhabited since the Neolithic period (although a possible series of ancient field systems, south of nearby Penarthtown, could suggest earlier Palaeolithic activity). A Neolithic stone axe, made of greenstone, was found in 1978 on a tidal gravel bank in the bed of West Looe River. Further Neolithic finds, such as flint arrow heads, have also been found in the fields above Trenant Point. Furthermore, the site of a large perfect Bronze Age tumulus and most likely the site for a post medieval beacon was located in a field just north of Hillcrest Nursing home in East Looe. Unfortunately, some time after 1823 the site was levelled, thus leaving no trace of the large barrow to be seen today. Additional tumuli have also been noted in the area of Looe, such as at the locally known Wooldown field and at the base of Shutta hill, however neither of the tumuli are visible today. Throughout the Looe area, there are also numerous Iron Age and Romano-British forts. These include the nearby forts/settlements near Trelawne and Great Tree.

Additionally, there are some archaeological evidence to suggest there was some small scale Roman influence and possible occupation in Looe. For example, during the early 1800s, a very probable Roman urn was found whilst developing the road on St Martins hill. It is said that the urn was brown in colour, was about 10 inches high and contained several burnt human bone fragments. Close to the spot where the urn was found, a rock containing numerous specimens of bivalve shells, most likely Terebratula, was found. Unfortunately however, the exact location of the burial and the whereabouts of the urn has been lost to time. Subsequently, earthwork remains, of two rectilinear enclosures, can be seen using LiDar in fields near Trelawne just outside Looe. Morphology suggests that the southern enclosure could possibly be a Roman signal station however the site has never been formally excavated. Furthermore, pieces of a Roman amphorae, stone boat anchors, Roman coins and a number of late prehistoric or Romano-British finds have been made in the vicinity of nearby Looe Island. A large bronze ingot was found by divers to the south of the island. This has led to a number of historians to suggest that the island could possibly be Ictis, the tin trading island seen by Pytheas in the 4th century BC and recalled by Diodorus Siculus in the 1st century BC. Additionally, a small hoard of eight late Roman coins was recovered in 2008. These coins were recovered from one of the shallow ditches forming a &#x27;pear-shaped enclosure&#x27; which encompassed the top of Looe Island and the later Christian chapel site. All eight coins date to the late 3rd or early 4th century AD.

One of Looe&#x27;s greatest archaeological mysteries is the so called &#x27;Giant&#x27;s Hedge&#x27;, which is an ancient earthwork which runs over 9 miles between the Looe and Fowey Estuaries. In some places it is still twelve feet high, and where it is best preserved (for example, in Willake Wood) it is stone-faced and flanked by a ditch. Over the years, there have been many theories to what the ancient earthwork may have been or its intended purpose. While the name and early folklore suggests it was built by a giant, as the rhyme goes &quot;One day, the Devil having nothing to do, built a great hedge from Lerryn to Looe&quot;, the general consensus is that this linear earthwork marked the boundary of a post-Roman kingdom. During the mid-18th century, British antiquarian William Borlase believed the earthwork to be the remnants of a Roman road, that would connect Looe to the Fowey estuary. Whilst this theory is now disputed by some historians, there has been some archaeological finds, such as a hoard of Roman coins found at Lerryn and a possible Roman fort at Lanreath, that could back this theory. Other theories suggest that &#x27;Giant&#x27;s Hedge&#x27; is actually far more ancient and may even date back to the bronze age. For example, Dr Keith Ray, the County Archaeologist for Oxfordshire, who is making a special study of the Giant&#x27;s Hedge, is convinced that it originally continued on the west side of the River Fowey and was defended there by Castle Dore. Along the Hedge, there are numerous bronze age barrows, hillforts and ancient enclosures. Such as the Hall Rings, Kilminorth fort, the fort at Yearle&#x27;s Wood and many more. It is likely that the secrets behind &#x27;Giant&#x27;s Hedge&#x27; may never be known, perhaps the history of the Hedge could even be a combination of different time periods.

At the time of the Domesday Book in 1086 the manor of Pendrym, which included much of the site of modern-day East Looe, was still held by William the Conqueror, as part of his own demesne, which he later devolved to the Bodgrugan (Bodrigan) family. Land across the river belonged to the manors of Portalla (or Portallant) and Portbyhan (variously spelt Portbyan, Porthbyghan, Porthpyghan, among others).

Shutta, on the steep hillside over East Looe, is recorded as being inhabited by the 12th century. Between 1154 and 1189 Henry II granted a charter in favour of Sir Henry Bodrugan as Mayor of East Looe. West Looe was given free borough status sometime after this (the first known historical mention of the town dates from 1327) and in the 1230s East Looe secured the right to hold a weekly market and a Michaelmas fair. East Looe&#x27;s layout looks like a &quot;planted borough&quot;, a concept similar to modern new towns, since most of its streets form a grid-like pattern.

Low-lying parts of Looe continue to suffer frequent flooding when the tides are very high. For practical reasons, most fishermen&#x27;s houses in ancient Looe, like elsewhere along the south coast, were constructed with their living quarters upstairs and a storage area at ground level below: for boats, tools and fishing tackle, &quot;etc&quot;; these are termed &quot;fishermen&#x27;s cellars&quot;.

===Early churches===
Some time before 1144, the Order of Saint Benedict occupied Looe Island, building a chapel there, and the monks established a rudimentary lighthouse service using beacons. Another chapel was founded on an opposite hillside just outside West Looe; both are now marked only by ruins.

The parish church of East Looe was at St Martin by Looe but there was a chapel of ease in the town. St Mary&#x27;s Church, East Looe was dedicated in 1259 by Walter Bronscombe, Bishop of Exeter. Despite rebuilding commencing in 1805, it has since fallen into disrepair, although the original Tower still remains. On the centre of the bridge in medieval times stood the Chapel of St Anne (dedicated in 1436): this dedication was attributed to the town chapel by Dr George Oliver and has been adopted ever since, displacing that of St Mary.

West Looe comprised part of the parish of Talland since the early Middle Ages, but a chapel of ease, St Nicholas&#x27; Church, West Looe was extant before 1330 when it is recorded as being further endowed and enlarged. After spells as a common hall and a schoolhouse, this building has reverted to its original ecclesiastical use, having been substantially restored in 1852, 1862 and 1915.

===Medieval era===
The town was able to provide some 20 ships for the Siege of Calais in 1347.

An early wooden bridge over the Looe River was in place by 1411; but it burned down and was replaced by the first stone bridge, completed in 1436. This featured a chapel dedicated to St Anne in the middle. The current bridge, a seven-arched Victorian bridge, was opened in 1853. By that time Looe had become a major port, one of Cornwall&#x27;s largest, exporting local tin, arsenic and granite, as well as hosting thriving fishing and boatbuilding industries.

With effective civic leadership, Looe thrived in the Middle Ages and Tudor era, being both a busy port and situated with close access to the main road from London to Penzance. By then the textile industry was an important part of the town&#x27;s economy, in addition to the traditional boatbuilding and fishing (particularly pilchards and crabs). Trade and transport to and from thriving Newfoundland also contributed to the town&#x27;s success. The Old Guildhall in East Looe is believed to have dated from around 1450.

The constituencies of East Looe and West Looe were incorporated as parliamentary boroughs in 1571 and 1553 respectively. They both survived as rotten boroughs. and each returned two Members of Parliament (MPs) to the unreformed House of Commons until the Great Reform Act of 1832. For example, Admiral Sir Charles Wager, a son and grandson of Kentish mariners, was an MP for West Looe early in his political career (1713–1715) and at the end of it (1741–1743). The seal of East Looe was blazoned &quot;An antique one-mast vessel in it a man and boy against the side of the hulk three escutcheons each charges with three bends&quot;, with the legend &quot;Si, comunetatis de Loo&quot;. The seal of West Looe was &quot;An armed man holding a bow in his right hand and an arrow in his left&quot;, with the legend &quot;Por-tu-an &quot;vel&quot; Wys Westlo&quot;.

===17th century===
In June 1625, the fishing port of Looe was raided by Barbary pirates who streamed into the cobbled streets and forced their way into cottages and taverns. Much to their fury, they discovered that the villagers had been forewarned of their arrival and many had fled into the surrounding orchards and meadows to escape. The pirates still managed to seize eighty mariners and fishermen. Those unfortunate individuals were led away in chains to North Africa to be enslaved, and the town itself was torched. 
===19th century===

By the start of the 1800s, Looe&#x27;s fortunes were in decline. The Napoleonic Wars had taken their toll on the country; in 1803, the town formed a volunteer company to man guns in defence against attack from the French. The blockade of 1808, which prevented the Looe fleet from reaching their pilchard-fishing areas, also put considerable financial strain on the community. In 1805, the old St. Mary&#x27;s Chapel (apart from the tower) had to be demolished due to dilapidation, and in 1817, the town was badly damaged by heavy storms and flooding.

With the building of the Liskeard and Looe Union Canal linking Looe to Liskeard in 1828, and the development of booming copper mines in the Caradon area from 1837, Looe&#x27;s fortunes began to revive. The Herodsfoot mine produced 13,470 tons of lead between 1848 and 1884 and more than 17 tons of silver between 1853 and 1884. The canal was used first to transport lime from Wales for use in Cornish farming, and later to carry copper and granite between the railhead at Liskeard (from where rail links reached to the Cheesewring on Bodmin Moor) and the port of Looe. In 1856 the large quay of East Looe was built to handle the demands of the shipping trade, and in 1860, with the canal unable to keep up with demand, a railway was built linking Looe to Moorswater near Liskeard, along the towpath of the canal, which was used less and less until, by 1910, traffic ceased entirely. The railway was later linked to Liskeard proper, and as the mining boom came to an end, it adapted to carry passengers in 1879.

In 1866, a lifeboat station had been established on East Looe Beach, and in 1877 a new town hall was built: the new Looe Guildhall. Around this time recommendations were made that the two towns be merged under one governing body, and despite much protest Looe Urban District Council was formed in 1898 with jurisdiction over the communities on both sides of the River Looe.

===20th century and beyond===
With the Victorian fashion for seaside holidays, Looe evolved as a tourist town, with nearby Talland Bay being dubbed &quot;the playground of Plymouth&quot;. This trend continued throughout the 20th century; more and more hotels and tourist facilities were built in the town, and Looe grew and prospered, with peaks in fishing and boatbuilding following the First and Second World Wars.

New Zealand writer Katherine Mansfield stayed in Looe for spring and summer 1918, while recovering from tuberculosis. She joined there her long-time friend the American painter Anne Estelle Rice, who famously painted her in red. The &quot;Portrait of Katherine Mansfield&quot; made in Looe has been exhibited since 1946 in the Te Papa Tongarewa museum of New Zealand.

Looe and its surrounds are the filming location of BBC television crime drama &quot;Beyond Paradise&quot;, which first aired in 2023. It stands in for the fictional Devon town of Shipton Abbott.

==Cornish wrestling==
There have been Cornish wrestling tournaments, for prizes, held in Looe (both East Looe and West Looe) for centuries. Venues for tournaments have included: 
the field at Barbican Farm,
the field adjoining the Old Barbican,
Looe Beach and
West Looe Down.

==Looe today==

Looe remains a fishing town, and retained several fish dealers operating from the East Looe quayside until the advent of EU regulations. With its fleet of small fishing boats returning their catches to port daily, Looe has a reputation for procuring excellent fresh fish. The town is also a centre for shark fishing, and is home to the Shark Angling Club of Great Britain.
Nonetheless, Looe&#x27;s main business today is tourism, with much of the town given over to hotels, guest houses and holiday homes, along with a large number of pubs, restaurants and beach equipment, ice cream and Cornish pasty vendors. Inland from Looe lie many camping and caravan sites, as well as the famous Woolly Monkey Sanctuary. Other local attractions include the beaches, sailing, fishing and diving, and spectacular coastal walks (especially via Talland to Polperro). South East Cornwall boasts several stately homes, including Antony House, Cotehele, Mount Edgcumbe and Lanhydrock House, as well as the Eden Project near St Austell which tourists can access by road.

Outside the busy summer months, the town remains a centre for shopping and entertainment for local villagers. Annually in late September, the town is the destination of choice for thousands of music lovers and top name performers for the Looe Music Festival, which takes place in temporary venues around the town, harbour and on East Looe beach.

There is a tradition of the townsfolk wearing fancy dress on New Year&#x27;s Eve, when the streets are thronged with revellers in inventive outfits. Looe has been on the list of the top ten places in the UK to celebrate New Year, and ranked third on the list for 2007–08. Looe is regenerating itself, like many other ports, to serve as a small cargo port. On the high ground north of East and West Looe there are many modern houses and a recreational area called &#x27;the Downs&#x27;.

===East Looe===

East Looe centres on its broad sandy beach, with the distinctive Banjo Pier designed by Joseph Thomas, a new lifeboat station and St Mary&#x27;s Church. Stretching back from the church is a grid of narrow streets forming the main business area of the town, packed with many small shops, restaurants and pubs and the Old Guildhall, now a museum. Along the estuary lies the quay with its fish merchants. Towards Looe Bridge lies the Victorian Guildhall, and just north of the bridge the railway station. This is the terminus of the Looe Valley branch line to Liskeard, where it connects to the Great Western Main Line and services to London Paddington.

On the hilltop above East Looe lies Shutta, and beyond that the Sunrising housing estate and Looe Community Academy. Along the cliffs to the east is Plaidy Beach, and further on the bay and village of Millendreath.

It is covered by the Looe East division of Cornwall Council.

===West Looe===

West Looe spreads west from the bridge on the Polperro Road towards Sclerder, and along the river south of the bridge, with hotels, restaurants and boarding houses along the waterfront and houses climbing the perilous cliff above, towards a cluster of shops and businesses and the Church of St. Nicholas.

West Looe rises onto the Downs, a public recreation ground, well known for local dog walkers. Beyond this is West Looe cemetery, as well as Porthbythan Road, Goonwartha Road and Tregarrick.

Further south along the coast road is Hannafore Point, marking the edge of Looe Harbour, with to the west the wide, stony Hannafore Beach, facing across a narrow channel to Looe Island. Beyond lies the coastal path leading to Portnadler Bay, Talland and Porthallow, and then onward to Polperro. Two towers mark one end of a nautical measured mile, the other end is marked by two towers near Talland Bay.

It is part of the Looe West, Lansallos and Lanteglos division of Cornwall Council.

===New Year festivities===
On New Year&#x27;s Eve, Looe provides a surprisingly exciting and large celebration. The small fishing town, usually quiet in winter, due to the largely seasonal economy, is host to an influx of visitors. People flock to the streets in their hundreds, wearing fancy dress, a tradition upheld by all ages. The crowds begin the evening in the town and slowly move towards the seafront for a fireworks display to see in the New Year.

==Twinning==
Looe is twinned with Quiberon () in Brittany, France.

==See also==
* People from Looe

==References==
==External links==

* Looe Town Council
* Looe official website
* Looe Chamber of Commerce website
* Cornwall Record Office Online Catalogue for Looe
* Looe Sailing Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1024896" start="0" end="4" title="Looe" label="Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="34" end="46" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="61" end="69" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="160" end="168" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019908" start="182" end="190" title="Liskeard" label="Liskeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395654" start="214" end="224" title="River Looe" label="River Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q26496844" start="300" end="308" title="Looe Bridge" label="a bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618058" start="609" end="620" title="Looe Island" label="Looe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="757" end="766" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="879" end="891" title="Paleolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1167" end="1177" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="1178" end="1185" title="tumulus" label="tumulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="1231" end="1237" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="1442" end="1448" title="Tumulus" label="tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1666" end="1674" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="1679" end="1693" title="Romano-British culture" label="Romano-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716216" start="1749" end="1757" title="Trelawne" label="Trelawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1866" end="1871" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="1974" end="1977" title="urn" label="urn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511295" start="2238" end="2251" title="bivalve shell" label="bivalve shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079202" start="2266" end="2277" title="Terebratula" label="Terebratula"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="2482" end="2487" title="Lidar" label="LiDar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716216" start="2503" end="2511" title="Trelawne" label="Trelawne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346139" start="2531" end="2541" title="Morphology (archaeology)" label="Morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2697" end="2702" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="2703" end="2711" title="amphorae" label="amphorae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920521" start="3009" end="3014" title="Ictis" label="Ictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="3047" end="3054" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="3093" end="3109" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025790" start="3631" end="3636" title="Fowey" label="Fowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727346" start="4238" end="4253" title="William Copeland Borlase" label="William Borlase"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="4301" end="4311" title="Roman roads" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025790" start="4344" end="4349" title="Fowey" label="Fowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529082" start="4496" end="4502" title="Lerryn" label="Lerryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433872" start="4532" end="4540" title="Lanreath" label="Lanreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4689" end="4699" title="Bronze Age" label="bronze age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212567" start="4893" end="4904" title="River Fowey" label="River Fowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050057" start="4931" end="4942" title="Castle Dore" label="Castle Dore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4980" end="4990" title="Bronze Age" label="bronze age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="4991" end="4998" title="Tumulus" label="barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="5000" end="5008" title="hillfort" label="hillfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="5317" end="5330" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="5343" end="5348" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="5436" end="5457" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="5478" end="5485" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936741" start="5529" end="5537" title="Bodrigan" label="Bodrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="5823" end="5831" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="5842" end="5849" title="Royal charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239145" start="5863" end="5881" title="Henry Bodrugan" label="Sir Henry Bodrugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="5885" end="5890" title="Mayor" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="5930" end="5937" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="6105" end="6115" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="6116" end="6120" title="fair" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="6216" end="6224" title="new town" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="6332" end="6340" title="flooding" label="flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="6350" end="6354" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="6399" end="6408" title="fishermen" label="fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="6553" end="6565" title="Storey" label="ground level"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="6577" end="6581" title="boat" label="boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="6584" end="6588" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604618" start="6594" end="6608" title="fishing tackle" label="fishing tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="6667" end="6674" title="Basement" label="cellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="6727" end="6754" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="the Order of Saint Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618058" start="6764" end="6775" title="Looe Island" label="Looe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="6867" end="6873" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q302257" start="7025" end="7042" title="St Martin by Looe" label="St Martin by Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671684" start="7059" end="7073" title="chapel of ease" label="chapel of ease"/>
<link wikidata="Q26496858" start="7087" end="7119" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, East Looe" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, East Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964365" start="7145" end="7162" title="Walter Bronscombe" label="Walter Bronscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q465869" start="7164" end="7180" title="Bishop of Exeter" label="Bishop of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065786" start="7448" end="7464" title="George Oliver (freemason)" label="Dr George Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="7559" end="7565" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680062" start="7569" end="7576" title="Talland" label="Talland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7593" end="7604" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17532706" start="7628" end="7663" title="St Nicholas&amp;#x27; Church, West Looe" label="St Nicholas&amp;#x27; Church, West Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961493" start="7764" end="7775" title="Guildhall" label="common hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q676340" start="7988" end="8003" title="Siege of Calais (1346)" label="Siege of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q26496844" start="8118" end="8140" title="Looe Bridge" label="the first stone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q164294" start="8197" end="8204" title="Saint Anne" label="St Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="8255" end="8264" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="8384" end="8387" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="8389" end="8396" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="8401" end="8408" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="8438" end="8445" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q893164" start="8450" end="8462" title="Boat building" label="boatbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q208209" start="8642" end="8650" title="Penzance" label="Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="8664" end="8680" title="textile industry" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="8801" end="8809" title="pilchard" label="pilchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="8815" end="8819" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="8864" end="8876" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17642133" start="8926" end="8939" title="Old Guildhall, Looe" label="Old Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328877" start="9020" end="9029" title="East Looe (UK Parliament constituency)" label="East Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985803" start="9034" end="9043" title="West Looe (UK Parliament constituency)" label="West Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="9065" end="9086" title="parliamentary borough" label="parliamentary borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="9141" end="9155" title="rotten borough" label="rotten borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="9180" end="9201" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897356" start="9215" end="9242" title="unreformed House of Commons" label="unreformed House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="9253" end="9269" title="Great Reform Act" label="Great Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028893" start="9292" end="9317" title="Charles Wager" label="Admiral Sir Charles Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="9463" end="9467" title="coat of arms" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="9485" end="9491" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="9931" end="9946" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="10319" end="10331" title="Barbary Coast" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="10471" end="10486" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="10834" end="10839" title="Bell tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q769660" start="10979" end="11008" title="Liskeard and Looe Union Canal" label="Liskeard and Looe Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019908" start="11025" end="11033" title="Liskeard" label="Liskeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="11074" end="11080" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035347" start="11094" end="11101" title="Caradon" label="Caradon"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="11320" end="11324" title="Lime (mineral)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="11330" end="11335" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089438" start="11473" end="11484" title="Cheesewring" label="Cheesewring"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="11488" end="11499" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q847214" start="11673" end="11682" title="Looe Valley Line" label="a railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908495" start="11709" end="11719" title="Moorswater" label="Moorswater"/>
<link wikidata="Q650399" start="11745" end="11752" title="towpath" label="towpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361551" start="11977" end="11985" title="Lifeboat (rescue)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26569953" start="12082" end="12096" title="Looe Guildhall" label="Looe Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680063" start="12464" end="12475" title="Talland Bay" label="Talland Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q270632" start="12778" end="12797" title="Katherine Mansfield" label="Katherine Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="12863" end="12875" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768315" start="12936" end="12953" title="Anne Estelle Rice" label="Anne Estelle Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="13086" end="13125" title="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" label="Te Papa Tongarewa museum of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q116864342" start="13212" end="13227" title="Beyond Paradise (TV series)" label="Beyond Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354339" start="13362" end="13379" title="Cornish wrestling" label="Cornish wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512148" start="13925" end="13932" title="Big-game fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456218" start="13953" end="13988" title="Shark Angling Club of Great Britain" label="Shark Angling Club of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460422" start="14091" end="14103" title="guest house (lodging)" label="guest houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371789" start="14108" end="14120" title="holiday home" label="holiday home"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="14152" end="14156" title="public house" label="pubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="14158" end="14168" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q126777" start="14205" end="14218" title="Pasty" label="Cornish pasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q216040" start="14266" end="14273" title="Travel trailer" label="caravan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900809" start="14303" end="14326" title="Monkey Sanctuary" label="Woolly Monkey Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="14394" end="14400" title="Scuba diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025780" start="14459" end="14467" title="Polperro" label="Polperro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332758" start="14530" end="14542" title="Antony House" label="Antony House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568029" start="14544" end="14552" title="Cotehele" label="Cotehele"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920546" start="14554" end="14568" title="Mount Edgcumbe House" label="Mount Edgcumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805491" start="14573" end="14589" title="Lanhydrock House" label="Lanhydrock House"/>
<link wikidata="Q596642" start="14606" end="14618" title="Eden Project" label="Eden Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="14624" end="14634" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135006" start="14909" end="14928" title="Looe Music Festival" label="Looe Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759320" start="15064" end="15075" title="fancy dress" label="fancy dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="15079" end="15098" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855855" start="15587" end="15597" title="Banjo Pier" label="Banjo Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q27854131" start="15610" end="15623" title="Joseph Thomas (architect)" label="Joseph Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="15953" end="15962" title="Victorian Era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298791" start="16007" end="16022" title="Looe railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="16036" end="16044" title="Terminal station" label="terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q847214" start="16052" end="16075" title="Looe Valley Line" label="Looe Valley branch line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501606" start="16079" end="16087" title="Liskeard railway station" label="Liskeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415063" start="16114" end="16137" title="Great Western Main Line" label="Great Western Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="16154" end="16171" title="London Paddington station" label="London Paddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104567" start="16248" end="16262" title="housing estate" label="housing estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161212" start="16267" end="16289" title="Looe Community Academy" label="Looe Community Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058901" start="16375" end="16387" title="Millendreath" label="Millendreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q104867598" start="16411" end="16429" title="Looe East (electoral division)" label="Looe East division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="16433" end="16449" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072509" start="16537" end="16545" title="Sclerder" label="Sclerder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631281" start="17168" end="17180" title="South West Coast Path" label="coastal path"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404775" start="17192" end="17206" title="Portnadler Bay" label="Portnadler Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17220" end="17230" title="Porthallow (Talland)" label="Porthallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981493" start="17290" end="17312" title="nautical measured mile" label="nautical measured mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q105834337" start="17389" end="17432" title="Looe West, Lansallos and Lanteglos (electoral division)" label="Looe West, Lansallos and Lanteglos division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="17436" end="17452" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="17485" end="17504" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="17935" end="17942" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q128783" start="17948" end="17956" title="Quiberon" label="Quiberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="17963" end="17971" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17997" end="18013" title=":Category:People from Looe" label="People from Looe"/>
</links>
</doc>
