<doc id="1141484" wikidata="Q8048808" url="?curid=1141484" title="Yankees–Red Sox rivalry">
<text>The Yankees–Red Sox rivalry is a Major League Baseball (MLB) rivalry between the New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox. Both teams have competed in MLB&#x27;s American League (AL) for over 120 seasons and have since developed what is arguably the fiercest rivalry in all of American sports. In 1919, Red Sox owner Harry Frazee sold star player Babe Ruth to the Yankees, which was followed by an 86-year period in which the Red Sox did not win a World Series. This led to the popularization of a superstition known as the &quot;Curse of the Bambino,&quot; which was one of the most well-known aspects of the rivalry.

The rivalry is often a heated subject of conversation, especially in the home region of both teams, the Northeastern United States. 
Until the 2014 season, every season&#x27;s postseason had featured one or both of the AL East rivals since the inception of the wild card format and the resultant additional Division Series in 1995; they have faced each other in the AL Championship Series (ALCS) three times. The Yankees won twice, in and ; while the Red Sox won in . The two teams have also met once in the AL Division Series (ALDS), in , with Boston winning 3–1, a series which included a 16–1 Red Sox win in Game 3 at Yankee Stadium, the most lopsided postseason loss for the Yankees in their history. The Red Sox also beat the Yankees in the 2021 American League Wild Card Game.

In addition, the teams have twice met in the last regular-season series to decide the AL pennant, in (when the Red Sox, then known as the Americans, won) and (when the Yankees won). 

The Yankees and the Red Sox finished tied for first in ; subsequently, the Yankees won a high-profile tie-breaker game for the division title. The first-place tie came after the Red Sox had a 14-game lead over the Yankees more than halfway through the season. Similarly, in the 2004 ALCS, the Yankees ultimately lost a best-of-seven series after leading 3–0. The Red Sox comeback was the only time in American baseball history that a team has come back from a 3–0 deficit to win a series. The Red Sox went on to win the World Series, ending the 86-year-old curse.

This match-up is regarded by some sports journalists as the greatest rivalry in sports. Games between the two teams often generate considerable interest and receive extensive media coverage, including being broadcast on national television. National carriers of Major League Baseball coverage, including Fox/FS1, ESPN, and MLB Network carry most of the games in the rivalry across the nation, regardless of team standings or playoff implications. Yankees–Red Sox games are some of the most-watched MLB games each season. Outside of baseball, the rivalry has led to violence between fans, along with attention from politicians and other athletes.

==Background==
Boston and New York City have shared a rivalry as cities since before the American Revolution. For more than a century after its founding, Boston was arguably the educational, cultural, artistic, and economic power in the United States. Its location as a close American port to Europe and its concentration of elite schools and manufacturing hubs helped maintain this position for several decades. During this time period, New York was often looked down upon as the upstart, over-populated, dirty cousin to aristocratic and clean Boston.

In the 19th century, however, New York&#x27;s economic power outpaced Boston&#x27;s, fueled by possession of the terminus of the Erie Canal, which spurred massive growth in the manufacturing, shipping, insurance and financial services businesses. Another factor was its more rapid population expansion compared to that of Boston, driven by the growth of these industries, by New York&#x27;s popularity as an immigration port of entry, and enhanced by a larger population base, even prior to the construction of the Canal – on the eve of the Revolution, New York, with 30,000 people, had nearly twice the population of Boston, with about 16,000. By the start of the 20th century the original dynamic, centered on Boston, had completely shifted as New York, particularly Wall Street, became the financial center of both the United States and the world.

The cities even played two different versions of early baseball. The &quot;Massachusetts Game,&quot; as it was called, was played on a field with four bases and with home plate in the middle; whereas, the &quot;New York Game,&quot; popularized by the New York Knickerbocker Club, was played on a diamond with three bases. The &quot;New York Game&quot; spread throughout the nation after the American Civil War and became the foundation for the modern game of baseball.

==Red Sox&#x27; early success==

The Red Sox were one of the most successful teams in baseball from 1901 to 1918. They won the inaugural World Series in (as the Boston Americans; the team changed its name to Red Sox in 1908) and four more between and . The Yankees were founded in 1903 after franchise rights were purchased from the defunct Baltimore Orioles (as the New York Highlanders, in reference to playing games in the Washington Heights neighborhood of Manhattan.) The two teams had their first meeting in Boston on May 7, 1903. The game was marked by a fight when Boston pitcher George Winter was knocked down. Boston would eventually go on to win the pennant and the inaugural 1903 World Series. The 1904 season featured the teams facing each other on opening day. Later in the season, the Highlanders, led by pitcher Jack Chesbro in his record-setting 41 game-winning season, met the Boston Americans in the season&#x27;s final game to decide the American League pennant winner. Chesbro threw a wild pitch in the top of the ninth inning, allowing the winning run to score from third base, and Boston won the game, and the pennant. The New York Giants, who had already clinched the National League pennant, refused to play in the 1904 World Series because of a perception of the &quot;Junior Circuit&quot; as being inferior (and because of alleged animosity between American League founder and first president, Ban Johnson, and the hierarchy of the Giants, owner John T. Brush and his team&#x27;s Hall of Fame coach, player-manager John McGraw); thus, there was no World Series that year. Not until 2004 would the Red Sox again defeat the Yankees in a title-deciding game.

On April 11, 1912, the Highlanders debuted their pinstripes in a game against Boston, by then known as the Red Sox. Nine days later, Boston opened Fenway Park with a game against the Highlanders, who had left their home field of Hilltop Park to play in the newly rebuilt Polo Grounds; soon thereafter, in 1913, the team dropped the nickname Highlanders in favor of Yankees.

Six years later, the Chicago Cubs scored two runs off of Babe Ruth in game 4 of the Series, snapping his then record World Series scoreless inning streak at innings. The Red Sox won the game, 3–2, and went on to capture their fifth Series title, their third in four years, and fourth in seven years.

The Yankees would however receive one notable moment of glory against the Red Sox during this era. On April 24, 1917, Yankees pitcher George Mogridge threw a no-hitter at Fenway Park, the first in the ballpark&#x27;s history and first in Yankees history.

==&quot;The Curse of the Bambino&quot;==

In 1916, Broadway producer Harry Frazee purchased the Red Sox, on credit, for $500,000. Frazee lost his patience with Ruth despite the latter&#x27;s success with the Red Sox, as Ruth had threatened to hold out for a larger contract and become a distraction. After the Red Sox finished sixth in the American League in 1919, Frazee, needing money to finance a Broadway musical, often said to be &quot;No, No Nanette&quot; (the success of that 1925 play is actually what paid off the loan). However, Ruth was sold to the Yankees in 1919, and &quot;No, No Nanette&quot; was produced by Frazee in 1925. Frazee received $125,000 and a loan of $300,000 – secured on Fenway Park – for Ruth, despite Ruth having set the record for home runs with 29 in 1919. This began a series of deals with the Yankees that resulted in a long period of mediocrity for the Red Sox while the Yankees began their dynasty.

Ruth&#x27;s arrival in New York simultaneously launched the Yankees dynasty while ravaging the Red Sox. While the Red Sox&#x27; five World Series titles were a record at the time, 1918 would be the team&#x27;s last championship for 86 years. The Yankees then created the greatest dynasty and team in baseball history. Meanwhile, Ruth&#x27;s home run-hitting prowess anchored the Yankees line-up, which became known as &quot;Murderers&#x27; Row&quot; in the late 1920s. The Yankees reached the World Series seven times during Ruth&#x27;s New York years, winning four. This abrupt reversal of fortunes for the Red Sox marked the beginning of the supposed &quot;Curse of the Bambino.&quot; But it was not the Ruth deal alone that reversed the fortunes of both clubs. Frazee also sold many other players to the Yankees.

Robert W. Creamer reported that &quot;[the] loan was made and relations between the two clubs continued to be cordial, with Frazee sending player after player to the Yankees over the next few seasons for more and more cash. This was no accident. Frazee and Yankees owner Tillinghast L&#x27;Hommedieu Huston were friends, and American League president Ban Johnson&#x27;s attempts to drive Frazee out of the game had caused the five teams loyal to Johnson to make no deals with the Red Sox as long as Frazee owned the club, leaving only the Yankees and White Sox as trading partners. When the White Sox&#x27; reputation was destroyed in the Black Sox Scandal, Frazee&#x27;s only option for trades was to deal with the Yankees. The Red Sox soon became a baseball disaster area, finishing dead last nine times in eleven seasons.&quot;

Among others, Wally Schang, Everett Scott, Carl Mays, Waite Hoyt, Joe Bush and Sam Jones went from the Sox to the Yankees in the next one to three years, along with Ed Barrow, the former Red Sox manager who became the Yankees&#x27; general manager and empire-builder for the first quarter-century of the Yankees&#x27; dynasty. Scott, a former Red Sox team captain, actually took the reins as Yankees captain from Ruth when he arrived; in doing so, he became the only player in history to be named captain for both teams.

==Curse of the Bambino==
From 1920 through 2003, the Yankees won 26 World Series championships and 39 pennants, compared to only four pennants for the Red Sox. In every year that the Red Sox won the pennant1946, 1967, and they lost the World Series 4–3, leaving them with no World Series titles. During this time, the Red Sox finished second in the standings to the Yankees on twelve occasionsin , , , , , , , and every year from to . During the 84-year period, the Yankees finished with a better regular-season record than the Red Sox 66 times, leading one sportswriter to quip that the Yankees&#x27; rivalry with the Red Sox was much like the rivalry &quot;between a hammer and a nail.&quot; The Yankees finished second in the standings to the Red Sox twice, in and .

===1920s and 1930s: First Yankees dynasty===
Just two years after Ruth&#x27;s sale, he went on to have a record setting season, one of the greatest in major league history for a batter. This propelled the Yankees to win their first pennant and face their cross-town rival. Ruth got hurt during the Series, and the Yankees eventually dropped the last three games, losing the Series 5–3 to the Giants in the last ever best-of-nine Series. Both the Yankees and Giants would play in the 1922 World Series as well, a series that would be the Yankees&#x27; last in the two teams&#x27; shared stadium at the Polo Grounds, as the Giants served the Yankees an eviction notice after the 1921 season.

The Yankees moved across the Harlem River to the Bronx into Yankee Stadium. On April 18, 1923, the Yankees opened their new home against the Red Sox. Over 74,200 people watched the Yankees defeat the Red Sox, 4–1, in the first game played at the stadium. Babe Ruth hit the new stadium&#x27;s first home run, christening the stadium as &quot;The House that Ruth Built.&quot; Ruth would finish the year with a .393 batting average and the Yankees won their first World Series that year. Of the 24 players on the Yankees, 11 previously played for the Red Sox.

Several lesser known moments in the rivalry occurred during the 1930s. Pitcher Red Ruffing was traded in 1930 from the Red Sox to the Yankees. Ruffing, who had limited success with the Red Sox, would go on to a Hall of Fame career with the Yankees winning six World Series. On May 30, 1938, before 83,533 spectators at Yankee Stadium, Yankees outfielder Jake Powell and Red Sox player-manager Joe Cronin fought on the field and beneath the stands. Both players were fined and suspended for 10 games. The Yankees and Red Sox would finish first and second in the League respectively that year as well as the following. The Yankees went on to sweep the Chicago Cubs in the World Series and the Cincinnati Reds in the World Series a year later.

===1940s–1960s: Teddy Ballgame and Joltin&#x27; Joe===
The rivalry intensified in 1941 when Ted Williams of the Red Sox batted .406, becoming the last player to bat over .400 in a season. Despite his accomplishment, Williams lost the AL MVP race to the Yankees&#x27; Joe DiMaggio, who in the same season set the record for a hitting streak, with 56 straight games with a hit. Williams later reminisced about his rivalry with DiMaggio saying &quot;DiMaggio was the greatest all-around player I ever saw. His career cannot be summed up in numbers and awards. It might sound corny, but he had a profound and lasting impact on the country.&quot; Both teams almost swapped the two players. In 1947, Boston Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey and Yankees GM Larry MacPhail were rumored to have verbally agreed to trade DiMaggio for Williams, but MacPhail refused to include Yogi Berra and the deal fell through. Joe DiMaggio&#x27;s younger brother Dom would play for the Red Sox his entire career during the 1940s.

The Red Sox won 15 games in a row in 1946. They were unstoppable and were in first place all but two days in the season, and would play in their first World Series game since 1918, having finished ahead of the Yankees in the American League for the first time since selling Babe Ruth. Since the Red Sox last pennant in 1918, the Yankees had won 14 pennants and 10 World Series. Boston would eventually lose the Series 4–3 to the St. Louis Cardinals.

Former Yankees manager Joe McCarthy came out of retirement after a feud with Yankees ownership to sign with the Red Sox as their manager in 1948. Both the Yankees and the Red Sox were involved in a tight pennant race with the Cleveland Indians until the final weekend. The Red Sox eliminated the Yankees in the final series at Fenway Park, overcoming four DiMaggio hits in the final game to tie Cleveland for the pennant. The situation forced the first-ever one-game playoff in AL history, which the Indians won 8–3 at Fenway Park and preventing the first all-Boston World Series, as the Indians went on to defeat the Boston Braves in the Series.

A year later, the Red Sox entered the final series of the season at Yankee Stadium needing only one win over the Yankees to advance to the World Series. The Sox lost 5–3 on the last day of the season after falling 5–4 the previous day, resulting in the Yankees winning the AL pennant. The Yankees went on to defeat the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1949 World Series for their 12th championship.

The 1951 season opened up at Yankee Stadium. The Yankees defeated the Red Sox in public address (PA) announcer Bob Sheppard first game. Sheppard would go on to serve PA duties at Yankee Stadium for another 56 years. On September 28 of that year, Yankees pitcher Allie Reynolds pitched a no-hitter against the Red Sox. A year later, Red Sox outfielder Jimmy Piersall and Yankees second baseman Billy Martin exchanged insults before a game in Boston, and ended up fighting in the tunnel under the stands. The fight was eventually broken up by Yankees coaches Bill Dickey and Oscar Melillo, and Boston starting pitcher Ellis Kinder. Piersall changed out of his bloody shirt and promptly fought with teammate Maury McDermott. The Red Sox won 5–2 with Piersall sitting the game out.

The Yankees won five consecutive World Series titles from 1949 to 1953, breaking their previous streak of four straight titles from 1936 to 1939. They would also go on to win 14 AL pennants in 16 years from 1949 to 1964.

===1961–1980: Milestones, fights, close finishes, and the Bucky Dent game===
The 1961 season saw the chase of Babe Ruth&#x27;s 1927 single season home run record by Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle. Both Maris and Mantle would continue to reach the home run record until Mantle got injured late in the season, leaving Maris to reach the record. On the last day of the season, Maris broke the record with his 61st home run of the year off Red Sox pitcher Tracy Stallard at Yankee Stadium. Former Hall of Fame shortstop for the Yankees, Phil Rizzuto, called the shot in what was one of his first games as an announcer. The Yankees won the game 1–0 to win their 26th American League pennant and then to win their 19th World Series title.

The next year, the Red Sox had been in the middle of a streak of eight straight losing seasons. The team was so bad, that after a 13–3 loss to the Yankees on July 26, Red Sox ace Gene Conley got off the bus and attempted to leave the country and go to Israel. Conley was denied his request because he did not have a passport. Nonetheless, Conley stayed away from the team for three days.

In 1967, Red Sox pitcher Billy Rohr came within a single strike of a no-hitter at Yankee Stadium. Elston Howard hit a two-out, two-strike single in the ninth to break the no-hit bid. Rohr completed the one-hitter, but ultimately finished his career with only two wins, both coming against the Yankees. Later that year, Red Sox third baseman Joe Foy hit a grand slam during the first game of a two-game series. In the second game, Yankees pitcher Thad Tillotson threw two brushback pitches at Foy before beaning him in the batting helmet. In the next inning, Red Sox pitcher Jim Lonborg beaned Tillotson. Both pitchers yelled at each other, and then a brawl ensued. During the fight, Red Sox outfielder Reggie Smith picked up and body-slammed Tillotson to the ground. Two months later, both teams were involved in the longest game ever played (by innings) at Yankee Stadium. New York recorded a 20-inning 4–3 victory over Boston. Earlier that year on August 3, the Yankees traded Howard to the Red Sox to help bolster their team during the pennant race. When Howard returned to Yankee Stadium in a Red Sox uniform, the Yankees fans gave him a standing ovation. Boston would be led by Hall of Famer Carl Yastrzemski&#x27;s historic season winning the batting triple crown, leading the Red Sox to the pennant in what was a dream year for the Sox. Howard&#x27;s contribution would be instrumental in the 1967 World Series, but he and Yastrzemski would lose to Bob Gibson and the St. Louis Cardinals four games to three.

In 1973, the American League adopted the designated hitter rule. On April 6, opening the season at Fenway Park, Ron Blomberg of the Yankees became the first designated hitter in Major League history. Red Sox pitcher Luis Tiant walked Blomberg in his first plate appearance of the game. Later that year at Fenway Park, with the score tied 2–2 in the top of the ninth, Yankees catcher Thurman Munson attempted to score from third base on a missed bunt by Gene Michael. He crashed into Red Sox catcher Carlton Fisk resulting in a fight with Munson punching Fisk in the face. The rivalry intensified in the 1970s with the fans too, as just a year later in 1974 at Fenway Park, Yankees first baseman Chris Chambliss was struck in the right arm with a dart thrown from the stands after hitting an RBI ground-rule double. Two years later, Yankees outfielder Lou Piniella would crash into Fisk feet first in an attempt to score in the sixth inning of a game at Yankee Stadium. The two benches cleared while Piniella and Fisk brawled at home plate. After the fight apparently died down and order appeared to be restored, Sox pitcher Bill Lee and Yankees third baseman Graig Nettles and center fielder Mickey Rivers began to exchange words, resulting in another fight. Lee suffered a separated left shoulder from the tilt and missed the next 51 games of the 1976 season. He would continue to pitch until 1982. The 1976 season saw the Yankees win the pennant, but lose to the Big Red Machine in the 1976 World Series, just like the Red Sox had done a year prior in the 1975 World Series in which Carlton Fisk hit his famous home run off of the left field foul pole at Fenway Park.

After the Yankees&#x27; loss to the Reds, owner George Steinbrenner committed to sign marquee free agent Reggie Jackson to help win a championship. The Yankees, Red Sox, and Baltimore Orioles would battle each other the entire year in the division race. The Yankees would win the division for the second year in a row, while the Orioles and Red Sox finished tied for second, games behind the Yankees. Jackson&#x27;s entry onto the Yankees initially had caused a lot of friction on them. In the middle game of what would prove to be a three-game series sweep by the Red Sox at Fenway Park, Yankees manager Billy Martin pulled Reggie Jackson off the field in mid-inning for failing to hustle on a ball hit to the outfield. The extremely angry and highly animated Martin had to be restrained by coaches Yogi Berra and Elston Howard from getting into a fistfight with Jackson in the dugout during the nationally televised game. Eventually, emotions calmed down for the season and the Yankees came together to recapture the pennant and defeat the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 1977 World Series, their first since .
In 1978, the Red Sox, led by Jim Rice, Carl Yastrzemski, Fred Lynn and catcher Carlton Fisk, and managed by future Yankees coach Don Zimmer, were looking good for the World Series for the second time in the decade. They led the Yankees in the standings by 14 games in mid-July, with less than three months to go in the regular season. The Yankees turned their season around just as the Red Sox started to collapse. By September 7, the Yankees had whittled down the 14-game deficit to only four games, just in time for a four-game series at Fenway Park in Boston. The Yankees won all four games in the series by a combined score of 42–9. This series became known as the &quot;Boston Massacre&quot;. On September 16, the Yankees held a -game lead over the Red Sox, but the Sox won 12 of their next 14 games to overcome that deficit and finish in a first-place tie with the Yankees. A tie-breaker game was scheduled in Boston to determine who would win the AL East pennant for 1978.

Boston pitted former Yankees pitcher Mike Torrez against the Yankees&#x27; Cy Young Award winner, Ron Guidry, who took a 24–3 record into the game. The Sox were beating Guidry 2–0 in the top of the seventh inning when light-hitting Yankees shortstop Bucky Dent hit a two-out, three-run home run over Fenway Park&#x27;s Green Monster to take a 3–2 lead. It was only his fifth home run of the season. The Yankees later led 5–2 and held on to win 5–4 when Yastrzemski popped out with runners on first and third, ending the Red Sox&#x27; season. Yankees closer Goose Gossage notched his 27th save of the season. Gossage would later comment years later about how he was spat on at Fenway Park and had beer thrown in his face. &quot;There is no rivalry in sports that rivals the YankeesRed Sox...that playoff game in &#x27;78–it felt like the playoffs and World Series were exhibition games after that.&quot; The headline in &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; the next day summed it all up: &quot;Destiny 5, Red Sox 4.&quot; New York went on to defeat the Kansas City Royals in the ALCS and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series for their second straight championship.

==1980s and early 1990s==


===1980s: No championships===
The 1980s is the only decade in which neither the Yankees nor the Red Sox won a World Series. Although both teams went to a World Series during that decade, the Red Sox were not serious contenders in the Yankees&#x27; playoff years (1980 and ), but the Yankees seriously contended in the Red Sox&#x27; playoff years ( and 1988).

The Yankees lost the World Series in , while the Red Sox loss came in . Both times, the teams lost after being up 2–0 in their respective World Series. For the Yankees, the loss in 1981 marked the beginning of the team&#x27;s demise and downfall in the 1980s and early 1990s. Despite the lack of championships, the rivalry between the teams did have some memorable highlights. Yankees left-hander Dave Righetti threw a no-hitter against the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium. One of the game&#x27;s greatest hitters, Wade Boggs, struck out to end the game.

On October 4, 1986, Righetti once again made history against the Red Sox when he saved both games of a doubleheader against them, finishing the season with 46 saves, and breaking the major league record shared by Dan Quisenberry and Bruce Sutter. The record would stand until Bobby Thigpen saved 57 games for the Chicago White Sox in 1990, which would also be Righetti&#x27;s last season with the Yankees. Righetti retained the single-season record for left-handers until 1993, when Randy Myers saved 53 games for the Chicago Cubs; Righetti still owns the AL record for left-handers.

Righetti&#x27;s teammate, first baseman and defending American League MVP Don Mattingly, came into the last game batting .352, second in the league to Boston&#x27;s Wade Boggs. With Boggs sitting out the game, Mattingly needed to go 6 for 6 to win the batting title. Although Mattingly would hit a home run in his first at bat and a double later on, he fell short and Boggs won the batting title. Mattingly would be named most outstanding player that year by the press, but fell short to Boggs&#x27; teammate Roger Clemens in the AL MVP voting.

Despite Righetti&#x27;s pitching on the last day of the season, the Red Sox still won the division and marched on in the playoffs. The Red Sox faced the Yankees&#x27; cross-town rivals, the New York Mets, in the World Series. &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the series a &quot;painful series&quot;. &quot;Newsday&quot; called it &quot;woeful days for Yankee fans&quot;. Mike Lupica of the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; called the series &quot;the World Series that is the Yankee nightmare&quot;. Both &quot;Newsday&quot; and &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; said there were Mets T-shirts saying &quot;Steinbrenner&#x27;s nightmare,&quot; referring to Yankees owner George Steinbrenner. John Powers of the &quot;Globe&quot; quoted Claire Smith, who covered the Yankees for the &quot;Hartford Courant&quot;, as having said &quot;this really is the World Series of the nightmares&quot;.

In Game 6 of the World Series, Boston (leading the series 3–2) took a 5–3 lead in the top of the 10th inning. In the bottom half of the inning, Red Sox reliever Calvin Schiraldi retired the first two batters, putting the team within one out of winning the World Series. The Mets, however, scored three runs, tying the game on a wild pitch from Bob Stanley and winning it when Boston first baseman Bill Buckner allowed a ground ball hit by the Mets&#x27; Mookie Wilson to roll through his legs, scoring Ray Knight from second base. In Game 7, the Red Sox took an early 3–0 lead, only to lose 8–5. The collapses in the last two games prompted a series of articles by George Vecsey of &quot;The New York Times&quot; fueling speculation that the Red Sox were &quot;cursed&quot;.

The 1987 season saw rivalry at the end of the season, as on September 29, Yankees&#x27; first baseman Don Mattingly set an MLB record by hitting his sixth grand slam home-run of the season against the Red Sox. The competitiveness of the teams continued the following year. Co-captains Ron Guidry and Willie Randolph had led the Yankees to first place two weeks after the All-Star break. On July 28, the Yankees fell out of first place, and the Red Sox won their second division title in three years. Boston went on to face the Oakland Athletics in the 1988 American League Championship Series, but would end up getting swept.

===1990–1995===
In the early to mid-1990s, the two teams were seldom equally good. The Yankees had the worst record in the American League when the Red Sox won their division title in 1990. In 1992, both teams finished at or near the bottom of the AL East.

In 1990, &quot;Boston Globe&quot; columnist Dan Shaughnessy wrote a book titled &quot;The Curse of the Bambino&quot;, criticizing the Red Sox for the sale of Babe Ruth, and publicized the curse. When the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium during a weekend in September 1990, Yankees fans started to chant &quot;1918!&quot; to taunt the Red Sox, reminding them of the last time they won a World Series. Each time the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium afterward, demeaning chants of &quot;1918!&quot; echoed through the stadium. Yankees fans also taunted the Red Sox with signs saying &quot;1918!&quot;, &quot;CURSE OF THE BAMBINO&quot;, pictures of Babe Ruth, and wearing &quot;1918!&quot; T-shirts each time they were at the Stadium. Other teams would not pick up the &quot;1918!&quot; chant; it was only at Yankee Stadium where the chants of &quot;1918!&quot; were heard.

On June 6, 1990, before a Yankees–Red Sox game at Fenway Park, the Yankees fired Bucky Dent as their manager, making Fenway Park the scene of his worst moment as manager, although he had his greatest moment as a player there. Red Sox fans felt retribution as Dent was fired on their field, while players on the Yankees, including former Red Sox catcher Rick Cerone and Mattingly felt Dent was used as a scapegoat. Dan Shaughnessy criticized Steinbrenner for firing Dent in Boston and said he should &quot;have waited until the Yankees got to Baltimore&quot; to fire Dent. He said that &quot;if Dent had been fired in Seattle or Milwaukee, this would have been just another event in an endless line of George&#x27;s jettisons. But it happened in Boston and the nightly news had its hook.&quot; He also said that &quot;the firing was only special because...it&#x27;s the first time a Yankees manager...was purged on the ancient Indian burial grounds of the Back Bay.&quot; However, Yankees television analyst Tony Kubek blasted at Steinbrenner for the firing in a harsh, angry way. At the beginning of the broadcast of the game on MSG Network, he said to Yankees television play-by-play announcer Dewayne Staats, &quot;George Steinbrenner...mishandled this. You don&#x27;t take a Bucky Dent (at) the site of one of the greatest home runs in Yankee history and fire him and make it a media circus for the Boston Red Sox.&quot; He then stared defiantly on camera and said to Steinbrenner, &quot;You don&#x27;t do it by telephone, either, George. You do it face to face, eyeball to eyeball...If you really are a winner, you should not have handled this like a loser.&quot; He then said, angrily, &quot;George, you&#x27;re a bully and a coward.&quot; He then said that &quot;What all this does, it just wrecks George Steinbrenner&#x27;s credibility with his players, with the front office and in baseball more than it already is–if that&#x27;s possible. It was just mishandled.&quot; The firing of Dent shook New York to its core and the Yankees flagship radio station then, WABC, which also criticized the firing, ran editorials demanding that Steinbrenner sell the team.

The 1993 season saw long-time Red Sox fan favorite Wade Boggs defect to the Yankees after eleven seasons with Boston. Later in September 1993, the Yankees defeated Boston at Yankee Stadium via a last-moment reprieve. Trailing 3–1, Mike Stanley&#x27;s apparent fly out with two outs in the ninth was nullified by a fan running onto the field prior to the pitch being thrown. The umpire had called time and when play resumed, Stanley singled. The Yankees would rally to score three runs and win on a Mattingly single.

The Yankees&#x27; 1980s demise and downfall continued into the early 1990s and was at its frustrating peak in 1994, when they finished with the best record in the American League in a season that was prematurely halted by the 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike, which left New York sports fans disappointed that Mattingly had not played in a postseason despite being poised to do so that year. At that time, he led active players in both games played and at-bats without participating in a postseason game. Throughout October, the news media added to the embarrassment when they often made references to dates that games in the World Series would have been played. That year, the Yankees and Red Sox would have finished the season against each other at Fenway Park. Both managers, Buck Showalter of the Yankees and Butch Hobson of the Red Sox, who made their managerial debuts against each other, were fired as a result of or during the strike.

The strike was the harbinger of the 1995 season for the Yankees. Although the Red Sox jumped out to a fast start and finished the season in first place, the Yankees were not serious contenders for the division title. With the Yankees clinching the inaugural American League Wild Card on the last day of the season, the Yankees and Red Sox reached the post-season in the same season for the first time. Before the postseason began, Mattingly contemplated about the first-ever playoff series in the rivalry, saying, &quot;That would be pretty cool. It wouldn&#x27;t hurt the rivalry any. There&#x27;d be a few deaths...just kidding&quot;. Both teams lost in separate ALDS series, with the Red Sox being swept by the Cleveland Indians and the Yankees losing in five games to the Seattle Mariners. For the Yankees, the loss led to another post-strike fallout: both Showalter and general manager Gene Michael were fired as a result of the loss. Similarly, the firing of Michael as Yankees manager and the loss in the 1981 World Series were fallouts from the strike that year. In fact, the 1981 strike was antecedence to the Yankees&#x27; demise and downfall of the 1980s and 1990s and the strike in 1994 was part of that demise.

==1996–2003: Yankees dominance and first postseason meetings==
===Late 1990s: Yankees dynasty===
A year after captain Don Mattingly&#x27;s retirement in 1995, the Yankees won the 1996 World Series. It was their first in 18 years and the first of former Red Sox player Wade Boggs&#x27; career. Boggs celebrated the victory with a memorable moment of jumping on the horse of a NYPD officer during the celebration.

The Yankees had one of the greatest seasons in baseball history in 1998. The Yankees won a then-AL record 114 games and the season culminated in a win over the San Diego Padres in the 1998 World Series. The Red Sox, too, made the playoffs in 1998, but as a Wild Card, they did not seriously contend for the division title. They lost their ALDS.

About four months after victory, the Yankees traded fan favorite David Wells to the Toronto Blue Jays for Roger Clemens, a fan favorite with the Red Sox between 1984 and 1996. Clemens was coming off two consecutive season with the Blue Jays where he had won both the pitching triple crown and the Cy Young Award in both 1997 and 1998.

Once the 1999 season started, a moment of peace occurred between the fans. Yankees manager Joe Torre returned to Fenway Park for his first game following a battle with prostate cancer. While the managers were exchanging lineup cards, the Boston crowd gave Torre a long standing ovation, to which he tipped his cap. Good relations were seen during the All-Star Game at Fenway Park. Yankees manager Joe Torre, manager for the American League team, replaced starting shortstop Nomar Garciaparra of the Red Sox with Derek Jeter. Garciaparra received a standing ovation from the fans after Jeter came in to replace him (they also embraced each other at this time). Later in the game, when he came to bat, Jeter gave Garciaparra a tribute by mimicking his batting stance. Nine years later, in a similar fashion, Red Sox manager Terry Francona managed the American League team at the All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium, in the stadium&#x27;s final season.

On September 10, 1999, Chili Davis&#x27; second-inning home run was the only hit by the Yankees against Pedro Martínez, who struck out 17 Yankeesthe most strikeouts against a Yankees team ever in a nine inning game. Martínez retired the last 22 batters after giving up the home run, including striking out eight of the final nine batters. The teams finished first and second in their division and both made the playoffs in the same season. This led to the very first post-season meeting in the longtime rivalry.

====1999 ALCS: First postseason meeting====
In 1999, the Yankees and Red Sox faced each other for the first time in the ALCS. The Yankees were the defending World Series champions, while Boston had not appeared in the ALCS since . The Yankees won Game 1 on a 10th-inning walk-off home run by Bernie Williams off Boston reliever Rod Beck. Intensity built up due to this historic, first-ever postseason meeting between the two longtime rivals. The Yankees would win the first two games at home with 7th-inning comebacks.

The lone bright spot for the Red Sox came in Game 3 at Fenway Park, in what had been a much anticipated pitching match-up of former Red Sox star Roger Clemens, who was now with the Yankees, and Boston ace Pedro Martínez. Martínez struck out twelve and did not allow a run through seven innings of work; Clemens was hit hard, giving up five earned runs and only lasting two innings of a 13–1 Red Sox victory. The Yankees rebounded to win Games 4 and 5, clinching the American League pennant and advancing to the World Series, where they swept the Atlanta Braves. The loss to Pedro Martínez was the Yankees&#x27; only postseason loss, as the team went 11–1.

The following year at Fenway Park, the Yankees beat the Red Sox, 22–1, handing Boston its most lopsided home loss ever. The Yankees scored 16 total runs in the 8th and 9th innings. The Yankees lost 15 of their final 18 games that season and finished with a record of 87–74, but the Red Sox failed to catch up and finished 2.5 games out of first to lose another division title to the Yankees. Despite having the lowest winning percentage of any postseason qualifier in 2000, the Yankees won their third consecutive World Series and 26th overall, in the first Subway Series since 1956, over their cross-town rivals, the New York Mets, in 5 games.

A year later, David Cone, one of the key players in the then-most recent Yankees dynasty, started for the Red Sox against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium to the sound of a standing ovation despite playing for the arch-rivals. Cone would later take part in another notable game later that year when he went up against newly acquired Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina. Mussina had come within one strike of pitching a perfect game against the Red Sox at Fenway Park. Carl Everett&#x27;s 9th-inning single was the only baserunner allowed by Mussina in a 1–0 Yankees win. Coincidentally, David Cone was the last Yankees pitcher to throw a perfect game, in 1999.

On September 10, the two teams had a game against each other rained out. The next day, the country saw one of its biggest tragedies bring both sides together. Following the terrorist attacks on New York City&#x27;s Twin World Trade Center Towers (which ironically involved two passenger jets departing from Boston), Boston fans displayed signs saying &quot;Boston Loves New York&quot; in a rare moment of peace between the two sides of the rivalry. On September 23, the Yankees&#x27; home field hosted a memorial service titled, &quot;Prayer for America&quot;. The warm feeling of solidarity would once again be short-lived as just prior to the 2003 season, Red Sox President Larry Lucchino labeled New York Yankees the &quot;Evil Empire&quot; after Cuban free agent José Contreras opted to sign with the Yankees instead of the Red Sox. The new ownership group had made it their personal mission to win a championship.

===2001–2003: Unbalanced schedule===
Major League Baseball changed its scheduling format beginning in 2001, further intensifying division matchups throughout the league. The new &quot;unbalanced schedule&quot; allowed for additional games in each season between divisional rivals, replacing additional series with teams outside the division. Due to the change, the Red Sox and Yankees now played each other 18–19 times each season. The scheduling drew criticism both when it was enacted and after the fact, with some analysts even positing the unbalanced schedule &quot;hurt&quot; intra-divisional play.

In 2002, the Red Sox asked the Yankees for permission to interview one of George Steinbrenner&#x27;s assistants, former Yankees general manager Gene Michael, for their vacant general manager position, but Steinbrenner denied their request. Boston Red Sox then hired Theo Epstein, a protégé of Red Sox President and CEO Larry Lucchino, as general manager, and at 28 years old, he was the youngest general manager in baseball history.

====2003 ALCS====
Both teams would face off in the ALCS once again in 2003. Entering the series, the Red Sox were the favorites to reach the 2003 World Series and &quot;The New York Times&quot; had endorsed a showdown between the Red Sox and the Chicago Cubs, the latter of whom had not been to the World Series since and had not won a championship since .

Due to the unbalanced schedule, when Boston forced the ALCS to a full seven games, the seventh game set a major league record for the rivalry between the two teams: it marked the first time two major league teams have played more than 25 games against each other over the course of a single season.

In the top of the fourth inning of Game 3 of the ALCS at Fenway Park, Red Sox starting pitcher Pedro Martínez hit Yankees batter Karim García, prompting an argument between the two players, which ended with both teams clearing the benches but no punches being thrown. In the bottom half of the inning, a pitch from Roger Clemens to Manny Ramírez was high and inside, and a brawl ensued. Ramírez swore at Clemens for the pitch. Yankees bench coach Don Zimmer, then 72 years old, and who had been the manager of the &quot;doomed&quot; 1978 Boston Red Sox, charged at Martínez; the pitcher grabbed Zimmer by the head and swung him to the ground. Later, midway through the ninth inning, García and Yankees pitcher Jeff Nelson fought with a Fenway Park groundskeeper, Paul Williams, in the bullpen. Two Boston Police officers issued a report saying Nelson and García engaged in &quot;an unprovoked attack&quot; on Williams and summonses would be sought for the two New York Yankees for assault and battery. After reviewing the incident, MLB Commissioner Bud Selig said he was &quot;very disappointed&quot; by the behavior of the participants and fined Martínez $50,000, Ramírez $25,000, García $10,000, and Zimmer $5,000.

In Game 7 at Yankee Stadium, the Red Sox held a 5–2 lead through seven and a half innings due to an ineffective start by Roger Clemens, but the Yankees remained in the game because of three shutout innings of relief by Mike Mussina in his first career relief appearance. After Boston Red Sox starter Pedro Martínez gave up a run in the eighth, manager Grady Little visited the mound but elected to leave a tiring Martínez to complete the inning. Martínez then gave up a ground-rule double to Hideki Matsui, and Yankees catcher Jorge Posada blooped a double into center field that drove in two runners and tied the game. The game went into extra innings and in the bottom of the eleventh inning, leadoff hitter Aaron Boone, grandson of Ray Boone, a (retired) longtime scout with the Red Sox, hit a solo home run off of Tim Wakefield to left field, ending the game and the series, giving the Yankees their 39th American League pennant. The Long Island, New York, newspaper &quot;Newsday&quot; went to the press before the game was over, and thinking Boston would win the game, editorialized as to what was wrong with the Yankees, and why they had lost the ALCS to the Red Sox. In a postgame interview, Red Sox first baseman Kevin Millar described the emotions in the Red Sox locker room: &quot;It was like we were all back in high school, like we&#x27;d all just gotten beat in the state playoffs, and everyone was going to graduate... When you&#x27;re a teenager and you lose the big football game, that&#x27;s when you see guys cry uncontrollably. You don&#x27;t [usually] see that much at this level.&quot;

Two days later, the Red Sox fired Grady Little. People blamed him for the Game 7 loss, claiming he left Martínez in for too long.

==2004–16: The curse is broken==
===2004: Red Sox win World Series===
In an effort to build up their lineup, the Red Sox set up a potential deal that would send Texas Rangers SS and reigning AL MVP Alex Rodriguez to Boston and Manny Ramírez and other players to Texas. The deal eventually fell through after Rodriguez indicated he would not go against the MLBPA, which opposed a proposed renegotiation that would have potentially reduced Rodríguez&#x27;s earnings in the later years of his contract. A freak off-season basketball injury to Aaron Boone, just months removed from his historic home run, had Yankees management looking at possible options to replace him. Despite being courted by Boston for nearly three months, Rodriguez was traded to New York.

That year, the Red Sox won an eventful season series against the Yankees, 11–8. A 13-inning comeback win for the Yankees on July 1 was punctuated by a catch from Jeter, who ran and dove into the stands at full speed and came out with facial lacerations when Trot Nixon hit a pop up in an area deep behind third base. On July 24, Jason Varitek shoved his glove into the face of Rodriguez after Rodriguez was hit by a pitch from Bronson Arroyo, causing a bench-clearing brawl. Though he was ejected (along with Rodriguez) from the game following the incident, the moment sparked Boston to an 11–10 come-from-behind victory. After a 6–4 loss on September 24 in which he gave up 5 runs, Pedro Martínez told media &quot;I just tip my hat and call the Yankees my daddy&quot;. This would lead Yankees fans to taunt Pedro with &quot;who&#x27;s your Daddy&quot; chants for the remainder of his career. The Red Sox finished second to the Yankees in the AL East for the seventh straight season. Both teams would advance to the ALCS for the second straight year.

====2004 ALCS: The curse is broken====

After the melodrama of the 2003 ALCS, a rematch in 2004 was hotly anticipated. Yankees GM Brian Cashman said &quot;I think Boston...really are...a mirror image of us in terms of...aggressiveness and desire to win&quot;. Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina summarized the buildup: &quot;This is what everyone was hoping for...it&#x27;s a rematch of last year, with the best two teams in the American League&quot;.

The Yankees won the first three games of the series, including a 19–8 rout in Game 3. No team in the history of baseball had ever won a best-of-seven series after being down 3–0. But, momentum turned when a fight broke out between the Yankees hitter Alex Rodriguez and Red Sox Catcher Jason Varitek who got in Rodriguez&#x27; face during the fight to the excitement of the revived Boston fans. Entering the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 4 at Fenway Park, Yankees reliever Mariano Rivera was attempting to close out a 4–3 lead. But after a lead-off walk to Kevin Millar, pinch-runner Dave Roberts stole second and came around to score on an RBI single by Bill Mueller. Boston won the game in the bottom of the 12th inning on a home run by David Ortiz. Game 5 featured another extra-inning Boston comeback, as the Red Sox tied the game in the 8th inning and won it in the 14th on a single hit by Ortiz that drove in Damon from second. In Game 6, Curt Schilling, who tore a tendon sheath in his right ankle during the ALDS against Anaheim, pitched seven innings of one-run ball. Schilling&#x27;s tendon had been sutured to his ankle to relieve the discomfort and was given local anesthetic and painkillers for the game. During the game, his sock started to absorb the blood from his freshly sutured ankle, and &quot;the bloody sock&quot; instantly became an indelible image of the dramatic series. A controversial call was made when Alex Rodriguez was called out after he intentionally slapped the ball out of Arroyo&#x27;s hand while running to first base. Boston held on to win the contest, 4–2. They then completed their historic comeback with a blowout win in Game 7 by a score of 10–3. The New York Yankees blowing the 3–0 lead has been considered the biggest collapse in the history of baseball.

The Red Sox would go on to win their first World Series championship in 86 years, completing a four-game sweep of the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2004 World Series.

===2005–2009: Yankees, Red Sox win titles===
At Yankee Stadium on April 3, 2005, the teams&#x27; first meeting since the 2004 ALCS, Yankees fans started new taunts, saying &quot;The Curse of 1918 is finally over (86 years). Let the new curse 2090 begin.&quot; They also projected the next Red Sox championship with signs saying &quot;1918-2004-2090.&quot; A week later, the Red Sox received their World Series rings at Fenway Park before they played the Yankees. All of the Yankees went to the top step of the dugout to applaud their rivals&#x27; accomplishment. During the announcement of the lineups, Red Sox fans reciprocated by giving Yankees closer Mariano Rivera, who had struggled against the Red Sox in the previous year&#x27;s ALCS, a loud standing ovation, despite their booing of Alex Rodriguez. Rivera laughed and tipped his cap. In New York, the YES Network, the Yankees television network, declined to broadcast it. Instead, a fixed camera shot was focused tightly on correspondent Kimberly Jones as she described in general terms the events surrounding her; afterwards, YES was criticized for the move. The Red Sox won the game 8–1.
The Red Sox acquired starting pitcher Josh Beckett, who pitched a complete-game shutout for the Florida Marlins against the Yankees to end the 2003 World Series, in the 2005–2006 offseason. The Yankees would follow with their own off-season acquisition of former Red Sox outfielder Johnny Damon, a fan-favorite during his four years in Boston. Damon returned to Fenway Park the following May to a mix of cheers and boos as he tipped his helmet to the fans.

The Yankees completed a five-game sweep of the Red Sox at Fenway Park, evoking memories of 1978&#x27;s &quot;Boston Massacre&quot;. The Yankees pushed their division lead from games up to games over the second place Sox. &quot;Boston Globe&quot; columnist Dan Shaughnessy dubbed it the &quot;Son of Massacre.&quot; The second game of the series, which the Yankees won 14–11, took four hours and 45 minutes to complete, making it the longest nine-inning game in MLB history. Months after the Yankees loss in the 2006 ALDS and Torre&#x27;s decision to drop a struggling Alex Rodriguez to 8th in the lineup, Rodriguez in an interview with &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, claimed that he had preferred to go to the Red Sox before being traded to the Yankees. The incident would be one of contention between Torre and Rodriguez as noted in Torre&#x27;s book, &quot;The Yankee Years&quot;.
During the third inning of a 2007 game at Fenway Park, Ramírez, J. D. Drew, Mike Lowell, and Jason Varitek hit four consecutive home runs off Yankees pitcher Chase Wright, powering a comeback from a three-run deficit and completing a three-game sweep of the Yankees at Fenway Park for the first time since 1990. By May, after long speculation about what team he would play for after retirement, Roger Clemens chose to return to the Yankees as opposed to the Red Sox (where he started his career) or the Houston Astros (his hometown and last team he played for). Clemens helped the Yankees overcome a 14-game deficit in the standings to roar back to reach the playoffs again, however, this was not enough to win the division. On September 28, Boston won the AL East after a win against the Minnesota Twins and a loss by the Yankees against the Baltimore Orioles. This was the first AL East Championship for the Red Sox since 1995, ending the Yankees&#x27; nine-year reign in the division.

The Red Sox went on to sweep the Colorado Rockies in the World Series. Series MVP Mike Lowell remarks, upon receiving his trophy, that &quot;the Red Sox are expected to win.&quot; Controversy erupted during the eighth inning of the final game when Alex Rodriguez&#x27;s agent Scott Boras announced that Rodriguez had decided to opt out of his contract, in what was seen by many as an attempt by Boras to overshadow the series.

The 2007–08 off-season showed a war of words between management of both teams. Boston GM Theo Epstein called Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina a &quot;bad apple&quot; for complaining about the Yankees&#x27; 2004 trip to Japan as the Red Sox were gearing up for their own trip there. Epstein claimed that Mussina had used it as a crutch during the season. Mussina retorted back saying &quot;Yea, we used it as a crutch to win the division!&quot; Later that month, Hank Steinbrenner, who had taken a bigger role with the Yankees operation from his father George, responded in a feisty manner to the popularity of Red Sox Nation in &quot;The New York Times&quot; supplemental &quot;Play Magazine&quot;: Red Sox Nation?&#x27; What a bunch of (expletive) that is. That was a creation of the Red Sox and ESPN, which is filled with Red Sox fans. Go anywhere in America and you won&#x27;t see Red Sox hats and jackets, you&#x27;ll see Yankee hats and jackets. This is a Yankee country. We&#x27;re going to put the Yankees back on top and restore the universe to order.&quot; In response, Red Sox principal owner John W. Henry inducted Hank Steinbrenner into Red Sox Nation. Steinbrenner went on to praise Henry&#x27;s handling of the Red Sox and said they would always be competitive under him.

In the 2008–09 off-season, first baseman Mark Teixeira signed an eight year, $180 million contract with the Yankees. Tony Massarotti of &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; summed up his feelings by calling it a &quot;kick in the pants&quot;.

In August 2009, the Yankees defeated the Red Sox, 20–11, in which the total runs scored (31) was the most combined runs scored in a game in the history of the rivalry.

Both teams made the playoffs in 2009. During the ALDS, the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins to face the Los Angeles Angels who had knocked out the Red Sox. The Yankees beat the Angels and went on defeat the Philadelphia Phillies in the 2009 World Series, 4–2, to win their 27th World Series title in their first year in the new Yankee Stadium. Former Red Sox pitcher Pedro Martínez was the losing pitcher for the Phillies in the deciding Game 6.

===2010–2012: Yankees fall short, Red Sox collapse===
In the final series of the 2010 season at Fenway Park, the Red Sox, struggling to get out of third place for much of the season, played the role of spoiler, knocking the Yankees out of first place in the American League East, relegating them to the wild-card for 2010.

In 2011, the Red Sox went 12–6 against the Yankees, including beating Yankees ace CC Sabathia four times during the season and sweeping two three-game series at Yankee Stadium, the first two series of three games of more where the Yankees have been swept at home since it opened in 2009. Critics and writers forecasted overwhelmingly that the Red Sox would win the 2011 World Series. The Red Sox spent a great deal to build the team in the off-season, and were about to sell at least two Red Sox as Most Valuable Player candidates by mid season. Following a disastrous first month, the Red Sox climbed in the standings. The Yankees claimed the AL East crown after the Red Sox&#x27;s September struggles left them battling for the wild-card with the Rays, with whom they went into the season&#x27;s final game tied. On September 28, the Tampa Bay Rays staged a dramatic comeback from 7–0 to win 8–7 over the Yankees in the 12th inning. Only three minutes earlier, Red Sox closer Jonathan Papelbon blew a 3–2 lead over the Orioles in the bottom of the 9th inning, handing a 4–3 walk-off victory to the Orioles. The Rays claimed the AL Wild Card and eliminated the Red Sox from the postseason. It marked the first time in baseball history that a 9-game lead had been blown in September, becoming the worst collapse in baseball history. Dan Shaughnessy of &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; said that &quot;the greatest choke in baseball history...feels like revenge for and .&quot;

The Red Sox hired outspoken manager Bobby Valentine, who had previously lost to the Yankees in the 2000 World Series during his tenure with the New York Mets, to take Francona&#x27;s place. After his signing, Valentine immediately inserted himself into the rivalry when he said he hated the Yankees.

On the series of April 20–22, 2012, the Red Sox celebrated the 100th anniversary of Fenway Park against the Yankees, who they played to open up the park. Both teams wore their 1912 uniforms on April 20, which the Yankees won 6–2. The Yankees came back from down, 9–0, to win, 15–9, the next day, the largest deficit they have ever overcome. They won the season series 13–5, their best record against the Red Sox since 2001, when they also went 13–5 against them, and swept the final three-game series of the season at Yankee Stadium to clinch the AL East while the Red Sox finished last in the division for the first time since 1992 with their worst record since 1965. Valentine was fired soon after. Later in 2012, the Yankees acquired 2004 ALCS Game 7 winner Derek Lowe. He was the latest member of the 2004 team to later play for the Yankees. After the 2012 season, Kevin Youkilis, who the Red Sox traded to the Chicago White Sox earlier in the season, signed with the Yankees as a free agent. He had previously clashed with Joba Chamberlain when he was with Boston.

===2013–2016: Red Sox champions again===
On April 16, 2013, the Yankees showed support to the victims of the Boston Marathon bombing, which occurred the day before, by holding a moment of silence prior to their game against the Arizona Diamondbacks. Following the third inning, the team further paid tribute by playing &quot;Sweet Caroline&quot;, which is known as Fenway Park&#x27;s traditional song, over the Yankee Stadium&#x27;s loudspeakers. At the end of the year, the Red Sox took the regular season series over the Yankees 13–6. The Red Sox finished the season with the best record in the American League and went on to defeat the St. Louis Cardinals in the 2013 World Series to win their eighth World Series title, while the Yankees failed to make the playoffs. In 2014 the Yankees acquired Stephen Drew in exchange for Kelly Johnson in the first trade between the two teams since 1997. Both teams missed the playoffs in 2014, which was the first time in the wild card era.

To start the edition of the rivalry, the first game at Yankee Stadium on April 10 went into extra innings ended up being one of the longest games ever played – at 6 hours and 49 minutes – going 19 innings, with the Yankees tying the game three times in the bottom of the 9th, 14th, and 16th. The Red Sox won the game, 6–5. The Yankees won the 2015 season series 11–8, including going 7–2 at Fenway Park. Towards the end of the season in September, the Yankees headed to Fenway Park trailing the first place Red Sox by only four games. The Yankees ended up getting swept and blew late-inning leads in three of the four games, including giving up five runs in the ninth inning of the first game. The sweep has been dubbed &quot;Boston Massacre II&quot; in reference to the 1978 four-game sweep of the Red Sox by the Yankees at Fenway.

On September 28, Yankees first baseman and former Red Sox draft pick Mark Teixeira hit the final home run of his career, which was a walk-off grand slam off Boston Red Sox pitcher Joe Kelly. It was the first game-ending home run Teixeira had ever hit in a regular-season game. It was also the firstand as of 2018, the onlywalk-off grand slam hit by any player at the new Yankee Stadium.

==2017–present: Rebirth of the rivalry==
In 2017, the Red Sox won the division by two games, forcing the Yankees into the Wild Card Game. However, both teams lost in the postseason to the eventual World Series champion Houston Astros.
For the third time in the history of the rivalry (the previous two were 1930 and 1992), both teams had new managers to start the 2018 season. The Yankees hired Aaron Boone and the Red Sox hired Alex Cora, both former players of their respective teams. During an early-season game, a brawl erupted between both benches after Yankees first baseman Tyler Austin charged Red Sox pitcher Joe Kelly for throwing at him twice in response to Austin&#x27;s slide at second base earlier in the game. It became a trending topic on Twitter and the MLB&#x27;s YouTube channel video of the incident became one of the most viewed, and social media commentators saw the brawl as a spark of a reignited rivalry between the two teams. By the end of the 2018 regular season, both teams qualified for the postseason and both reached the 100-win mark. It was the first time that both teams won at least 100 games in the same season and, along with the Houston Astros, the first time the American League had three 100-game winners. Following the Yankees&#x27; victory in the AL Wild Card Game, the two faced each other in the 2018 ALDS. The Red Sox won the series 3–1, taking Games 3 and 4 in Yankee Stadium by a combined score of 20–4. Just like in the April brawl, this series became a Twitter trending topic.

In May 2018, MLB announced that the teams would play a two-game series during the 2019 season at London Stadium, in the first of a two-year deal to play regular-season games at the venue. The 2019 MLB London Series was the first time that the two sides have played each other in regular season play outside of either New York or Boston, and was also the first MLB regular-season games were played in Europe. The Yankees won both games in an offense heavy showing in which both teams combined for 50 runs scored in just 18 innings. The Yankees also won four of the five remaining series, pushing the Sox out of contention.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the 2020 season was shortened to 60 games and ten meetings between the rivals, with the Yankees winning nine out of the ten games. The Yankees would finish the season 33–27, good for second place in the AL East, qualifying for the postseason, where they would eventually lose to the Tampa Bay Rays in the American League Division Series.

On January 25, 2021, the Yankees sent relief pitcher and New York City native Adam Ottavino, prospect Frank German, and cash considerations to the Red Sox for a player to be named later and cash considerations. This was the first trade between the two teams since 2014 and third since 1997. In 2021, the Red Sox acquired reliever Garrett Whitlock from the Yankees after they failed to protect him in the Rule 5 Draft.

The 2021 season series saw the Red Sox win the first seven meetings as they and the Tampa Bay Rays battled for the AL East lead. The Yankees were in the mix for a Wild Card spot. However, New York won nine of the final twelve meetings as Boston fell several games behind Tampa Bay. This put the Yankees and Red Sox squarely in the Wild Card race. On the final day of the season, each team was 91–70 and could clinch a Wild Card spot with a win. New York defeated Tampa Bay, while Boston defeated the Washington Nationals, setting up a meeting in the Wild Card game at Fenway Park. On October 5, the Red Sox beat the Yankees in the 2021 American League Wild Card Game, 6–2.

==Season-by-season results==
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 137
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans, 73
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans&lt;br&gt;137
| First year of organized Major League Baseball&lt;br&gt;Americans win 1903 World Series 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 12102
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans, 64
| Tie, 662
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans&lt;br&gt;25172
| Americans win three of four over Highlanders to close out season&lt;br&gt;Americans win the AL Pennant by games over Highlanders&lt;br&gt;No World Series held as NL Champion New York Giants refuse to participate
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 138
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans&lt;br&gt;38252
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1751
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 921
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Americans&lt;br&gt;43423
| Highlanders win 11 straight meetings between May and September
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1281
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 631
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders&lt;br&gt;54514
| Americans change their name to &quot;Red Sox&quot;
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1210
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders&lt;br&gt;64634
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;76734

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1391
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 631
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders&lt;br&gt;86855
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1210
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Highlanders, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;97965
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 192
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 100
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;116985
| Red Sox open Fenway Park&lt;br&gt;Red Sox win 17 straight meetings from October 1911 to July 1912&lt;br&gt;Red Sox win 1912 World Series&lt;br&gt;Red Sox&#x27;s .905 win percentage makes 1912 the most one-sided season series in the history of the rivalry 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1461
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 721
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1301046
| Highlanders change their name to &quot;Yankees&quot;
| 
| Tie
| 1111
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1411156
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1210
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1511276
| Red Sox win 1915 World Series 
| 
| Tie 
| 1111
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1621386
| Red Sox win 1916 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1391
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 651
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1751477
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 116
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| Tie, 44
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1811587
| Red Sox win 1918 World Series, their last until 2004
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| Tie, 44
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;1911677

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;2001807
| Babe Ruth&#x27;s first season with the Yankees&lt;br&gt;Alleged start to the Curse of the Bambino
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 157
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 101
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;2071957
| Yankees win first AL pennant, lose 1921 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;2202047
| Yankees lose 1922 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox&lt;br&gt;2282187
| Yankees open the original Yankee Stadium&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1923 World Series for first title
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1751
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 921
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;2352338
| Yankees sweep a 4-game series in Boston on September 8–11 to take a 235–233–8 lead in the series, a lead the Yankees would never relinquish
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;2482428
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 175
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 93
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 82
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;2652478
| Yankees lose 1926 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 184
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 91
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 93
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;2832518
| Yankees win 11 straight meetings from May to August&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1927 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 166
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;2992578
| Yankees win 1928 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 175
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3162628

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 166
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3322688
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 166
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3482748
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 175
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 101
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3652798
| Yankees win 13 straight home meetings from July 1931 to June 1932&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1932 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3792878
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1210
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;3912978
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 129
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;4033068
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1571
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 651
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;4183139
| Yankees win 1936 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 157
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;4333209
| Yankees win 1937 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 11111
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 741
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;44433110
| Yankees win 1938 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1181
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 531
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;45234211
| Yankees win 1939 World Series
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;46535111
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1391
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 831
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;47836012
| Joe DiMaggio had 56-game hitting streak&lt;br&gt;Ted Williams batted .406&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1941 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1210
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;48837212
| Yankees lose 1942 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1751
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 831
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;50537713
| Yankees win 1943 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 1111
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;51638813
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 166 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;53239413
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;54040813
| Red Sox finish ahead of Yankees in the standings for first time since selling Babe Ruth&lt;br&gt;Red Sox lose 1946 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;55341713
| Yankees win 1947 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;56143113
| Both teams in hotly-contested pennant race with Cleveland Indians. Red Sox lose to Indians in AL tie-breaker game
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;57444013
| Yankees beat Red Sox in season&#x27;s final 2 games to win pennant&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1949 World Series
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;58744913
| Yankees win 1950 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 1111
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 92
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;59846013
| Yankees win 1951 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;61246813
| Yankees win 1952 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1110
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;62347813
| Yankees win 1953 World Series, their fifth straight title
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;63648713
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;65049513
| Yankees lose 1955 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;66450313
| Yankees win 1956 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 148
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;67851113
| Yankees lose 1957 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1391
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 741
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;69152014
| Yankees win 1958 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 139
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 65
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;70053314

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 157
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 83
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 74
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;71554014
| Yankees lose 1960 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 135
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 81
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;72854514
| Roger Maris breaks Babe Ruth&#x27;s single-season home run record vs. Red Sox on season&#x27;s last day&lt;br&gt;MLB expansion reduces schedule to 18 meetings per year&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1961 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 126
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;74055114
| Yankees win 1962 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 126
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;75255714
| Yankees lose 1963 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;76156614
| Yankees lose 1964 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;77057514
| Red Sox post winning road record vs. Yankees for first time since 1946
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 108 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;78058314
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 126
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;78659514
| Red Sox lose 1967 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 108
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;79460514
| Red Sox win consecutive season series for the first time since 191113
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 117
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;80161614

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 108
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;80962614
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 117
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;82063314
|-
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;82964214
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 144
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 81
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;83365614
| Munson, Fisk brawl
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 117
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;84066714
| Red Sox win 11 straight home meetings from August 1973 to July 1974
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 115
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 61
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;84567814
| Red Sox lose 1975 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 117
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;85668514
| Piniella, Fisk brawl&lt;br&gt;Yankees lose 1976 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 87
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 62
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 61
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;86369314
| MLB expansion reduces season series to 15 meetings per year&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1977 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 97
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;87270014
| Yankees overcome a 14-game deficit to Red Sox including a 4-game sweep in Fenway in September (&quot;Boston Massacre&quot;)&lt;br&gt;Teams tie for first in the AL East, Yankees defeat Red Sox in tiebreaker game&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1978 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 85
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;88070514
| Schedule reduced to 13 meetings per year as MLB implements &quot;balanced schedule.&quot;
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 103
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 70
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;89070814
| Yankees sweep all games in Boston for first time
| 
| Tie
| 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;89371114
| Strike-shortened season&lt;br&gt;Yankees lose 1981 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76 
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;89971814
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;90572514
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;91173214
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 85
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 52
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;91973714
| Red Sox win the first five meetings, Yankees win the next eight.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 85
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 61
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;92774214
| Red Sox lose 1986 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;93374914
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 94 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 52
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;93775814
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;94376514

| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 94
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 70
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;94777414
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;95478014
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 52
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;96078714
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;96779314
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 73
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 31
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;97479614
| Strike-shortened season. Strike cancels postseason.&lt;br&gt;Yankees had best regular season record in American League&lt;br&gt;MLB adds Wild Card, allowing for both teams to make the postseason in the same year.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 85
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 61
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;98280114
| Both teams qualify for postseason for the first time.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 52
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;98880814
| Yankees win 1996 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 84
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;99681214
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 75
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;100381714
| Yankees win 114 games to set AL record (later broken)&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 1998 World Series 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 84 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;100782514
| Yankees win 1999 World Series
|- style=&quot;background:#f2f2f2; font-weight:bold;&quot;
| 1999 ALCS
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 41
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 20
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;101182614
| First postseason meeting, the Red Sox hand the Yankees their only defeat in the 1999 postseason in Game 3.
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 42
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 52
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;101883214
| Yankees win 2000 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 135
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 81
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;103183714
| MLB changed to an unbalanced schedule in 2001, resulting in 1819 meetings per year&lt;br&gt;Yankees lose 2001 World Series
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;104184614
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;105185514
| Yankees lose 2003 World Series
|- style=&quot;background:#f2f2f2; font-weight:bold;&quot;
| 2003 ALCS
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 43
| Tie, 22
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;105585814
| Game 7 ends on Aaron Boone&#x27;s 11th inning home run. Rally from a 52 deficit in Game 7 while down to their last five outs.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 118
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 73
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;106386914
| Red Sox win 2004 World Series, their first since 1918
|- style=&quot;background:#f2f2f2; font-weight:bold;&quot;
| 2004 ALCS
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 43
| Tie, 22
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;106687314
| Red Sox overcome 30 series deficit. Overcome ninth inning deficit in Game 4, and a two-run deficit in the eighth inning of Game 5 to start the comeback.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| Tie, 55
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;107688214
| Over the final two days of the regular season, the Yankees clinch the AL East, while the Red Sox clinch the AL Wild Card in consecutive head-to-head games.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 118 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;108789014
| Yankees sweep a 5-game series at Fenway (&quot;Son of Massacre&quot;)
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 108
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;109789814
| Red Sox win 2007 World Series
| 
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;110690714
|-
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;111591614
| Yankees open the new Yankee Stadium&lt;br&gt;Red Sox win first eight meetings, Yankees win nine of next ten&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 2009 World Series
|-
| Tie
| 99
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;112492514
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 126
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;113093714
| Red Sox miss playoffs despite having 9-game lead in September
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 135
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;114394214
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 136 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 73
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;114995514
| Red Sox win 2013 World Series&lt;br&gt;Both AL and NL having balanced teams leads to a balanced schedule of 19 games per season.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 127
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;116196214
| Both teams miss postseason for first time since 1993
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 118
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 72
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;117297014
| Red Sox win 19-inning game over Yankees on April 10
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 118 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 82
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;118098114
| Red Sox sweep 4-game series in September (&quot;Boston Massacre II&quot;) 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 118
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;119198914
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 63
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 73
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;120099914
| Red Sox sweep four-game series in August to extend AL East lead from to , effectively taking control of the division.&lt;br&gt;Both teams win 100 games (Red Sox 108, Yankees 100) for first time ever&lt;br&gt;Red Sox win 2018 World Series
|- style=&quot;background:#f2f2f2; font-weight:bold;&quot;
| 2018 ALDS
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 31
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 20
| Tie, 11
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1201100214
| Red Sox win Game 3, 16–1, the largest postseason loss in Yankees history. Red Sox 2B Brock Holt hits for the cycle in this game, the first by any player in a postseason game.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 145
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 81
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1215100714
| The teams played two games in London (these were officially Red Sox home games and listed in the &quot;at Boston Red Sox&quot; column). The Yankees won both of these games. Most wins for Yankees in season series since 1960.
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 91
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 70
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 21
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1224100814
| Season shortened to 60 games (with 10 meetings) due to COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br&gt;Yankees win 12 straight meetings (September 2019 to September 2020).&lt;br&gt;With a .900 win percentage, this was the most one-sided season series for the Yankees in the history of the rivalry and the most one-sided season series for either team since . 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 109
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 64
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1233101814
| Red Sox win 8 straight meetings (September 2020 to July 2021) immediately following Yankees&#x27; 12-game winning streak in the series. 
|- style=&quot;background:#f2f2f2; font-weight:bold;&quot;
| 2021 ALWC
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 10
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 10
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1233101914
| First meeting in the Wild Card Game since the round was added in 2012. 
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 136
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 82
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 54
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1246102514
|-
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 94
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 51
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox, 43
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1250103414
| Schedule structure modified this season to allow every team to play one series against every interleague team. This reduced the number of meetings from 19 to 13 per season.
| 
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 76
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 43
| Tie, 33
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees&lt;br&gt;1257104014
| Yankees lose 2024 World Series
| 
| 
| &quot;Upcoming, June 68, August 2124&quot;
| &quot;Upcoming, June 1315, September 1214&quot;
|
|-
| Regular season games
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1245102814
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 6734627
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 5725667
|-
| Postseason games 
| Tie 
| 1212 
| Tie, 66
| Tie, 66
|-
| Postseason series
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Red Sox
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 32
| N/A
| N/A
| ALWC: 2021&lt;br&gt;ALDS: &lt;br&gt;ALCS: , , 
| Regular and postseason
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees
| style=&quot;;&quot; | 1257104014
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 6794687
| style=&quot;;&quot; | Yankees, 5785727

==Geography==
Using Facebook Like button data, Ben Blatt of the Harvard College Sports Analysis Collective found in 2012 that Red Sox fans are east of the New York State–Vermont/Massachusetts border, and Yankees fans are west. Blatt wrote, &quot;I had thought that it was possible that Red Sox Nation might extend into northern New York or Yankees territory might extend into Vermont. This turned out not to be the case.&quot; Connecticut divides support between the two teams; he found that 56.6% of Facebook users in Hartford, often cited as being on the border between the two teams&#x27; fans, supported the Yankees. While Blatt found that identifying an exact border within the state was impossible, Guilford and Middletown are almost exactly divided, with 50.7% in each city supporting the Yankees.

==Violence over rivalry==
There have been occasions of arrests due to violence over the rivalry. In May 2008, a Yankees fan in Nashua, New Hampshire, was arrested and charged with reckless second-degree murder outside a bar, which resulted from an argument over the rivalry. Later in 2008, a man driving a car with New York license plates in Massachusetts was pulled from his car and savagely beaten because locals suspected the man of being a Yankees fan. During the final series of the 2010 season, Boston Police arrested a Yankees fan for stabbing a Red Sox fan over an argument about the rivalry.

==Rivalry outside baseball==
Don Mattingly had appeared in public service announcements airing on the Spike TV network advocating fathers to spend time with their children as part of the &quot;True Dads&quot; campaign to encourage men to take an active role in their children&#x27;s lives. Mattingly jokes at the end of the commercial about the impatience of one of the characters in the commercial by calling him a Red Sox fan.

On April 13, 2008, rumors of a construction worker burying a Red Sox jersey in the concrete of the new Yankee Stadium were verified. The worker, identified as Gino Castignoli, buried a David Ortiz jersey in what would become a service corridor in the hopes of cursing the new stadium. After extracting the jersey from underneath two feet of concrete, Yankees&#x27; President Randy Levine indicated that the shirt would be donated to the Jimmy Fund to be auctioned for the charity long associated with the Red Sox. Whatever curse was intended failed to bear fruit with the Yankees winning the World Series in their first year at the new stadium.

===Politics===
On October 23, 2007, former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who is a Yankees fan, said at a New Hampshire event for his presidential campaign that he would support the Red Sox over the Colorado Rockies in the 2007 World Series, which started the following day; the Red Sox went on to sweep the Rockies in four games. Giuliani justified his support of the Red Sox by proclaiming he was a fan of American League baseball. The following day, the &quot;New York Post&quot; and &quot;New York Daily News&quot; printed doctored photos of Giuliani as a Red Sox fan on their covers with the headlines &quot;RED COAT&quot; and &quot;TRAITOR!&quot; respectively. Topps parodied this in a 2008 baseball card altered to depict Giuliani on the field with the Red Sox as the team celebrated their 2007 World Series championship.

A month later, he was asked about his support for the Red Sox by one of the questioners in a Republican Presidential Debate. In response to the mayor&#x27;s answer, former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney, who was in office during the Red Sox 2004 win, claimed that all Americans are united in hatred of the Yankees.

Giuliani&#x27;s successor, Michael Bloomberg, was born and raised in Massachusetts and grew up a Red Sox fan, but later switched his allegiance to the Yankees after assuming office. Bloomberg&#x27;s successor, Bill de Blasio, who was born in New York City but primarily grew up in Cambridge, Massachusetts, openly supported the Red Sox World Series run during his 2013 campaign, winning the general election by a huge margin.

During the 2010 special Senate election in Massachusetts, Martha Coakley, the Democratic candidate and state Attorney General, faced a mild backlash for deriding Curt Schilling as &quot;another Yankee fan&quot; on a local radio show, after Schilling endorsed Coakley&#x27;s Republican opponent, state senator Scott Brown. Many critics alleged that Coakley&#x27;s apparent unfamiliarity with Schilling demonstrated a lack of awareness toward her Massachusetts constituents. Schilling responded, &quot;I&#x27;ve been called a lot of things...but never, I mean never, could anyone make the mistake of calling me a Yankee fan. Well, check that; if you didn&#x27;t know what the hell is going on in your own state maybe you could.&quot; Brown, who had polled as much as 30 points behind Coakley a month before the election, had seen a late surge in support prior to Coakley&#x27;s comments and would eventually win a come from behind victory against her in the election.

===Other sports===
In 2002, when the NFL&#x27;s New England Patriots held their victory celebration after winning their first Super Bowl; linebacker Larry Izzo fired up the crowd, chanting &quot;Yankees suck!&quot; The chant would become a fixture of Patriots Super Bowl victory rallies following their victories in Super Bowls XXXVIII in 2004 and XXXIX in 2005, which were sandwiched around the Red Sox 2004 World Series win. Dan Shaughnessy wrote about the chant: &quot;Can you imagine a Giants or a Jets celebration in New York City in which a New York player would take the time to chant, &#x27;Red Sox suck? Shaughnessy opined that should such a thing occur, it would be more likely at a Jets celebration, as a Giants celebration, like those of the Mets and the Rangers, would be more likely to feature such chants made in reference to the Philadelphia teams, as one of the Giants&#x27; primary rivalries is with the Philadelphia Eagles.

The rivalry was played out during Super Bowl XLII in February 2008, as it was a showdown between football teams from each metropolitan area, the New York Giants and the New England Patriots. The Giants defeated the Patriots in what was considered one of the greatest upsets in Super Bowl history. After the game Giants fans chanted &quot;18 and 1! 18 and 1!&quot;, reminiscent of the infamous &quot;1918&quot; chant, towards Patriots fans as they left the stadium. (Had they won the game, the Patriots would have become the first NFL team to ever finish with a 19–0 record, and only the second NFL team since the 1972 Miami Dolphins to have a perfect season.) Giants fans called this revenge for the Red Sox comeback in 2004. The Giants and Patriots faced off again in Super Bowl XLVI; with the Giants once again defeating the Patriots. Dan Shaughnessy&#x27;s piece in &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; on the Giants victory over the Patriots was headlined, &quot;History Repeats.&quot;

During the 2008 NBA Finals between the Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers, movie director Spike Lee, a season ticket holder of the New York Knicks, wore a Yankees jersey and cap at Game 3 of the Finals in Los Angeles. Lee sat behind the Boston bench while loudly cheering for the Lakers, though he has a friendship with Ray Allen of the Celtics.

For the 2010 NHL Winter Classic outdoor ice hockey game held at Fenway Park, Boston Bruins then-backup goaltender Tuukka Rask had artwork on his &quot;special event&quot; goalie mask&#x27;s upper front area depicting a roaring bear with a ripped New York Yankees home &quot;pinstripe&quot; jersey falling from its lower jaw.

In 2011, NBA star LeBron James worked a deal with Red Sox owner John Henry to take partial ownership of Henry&#x27;s soccer subsidiary Liverpool Football Club of the Premier League. James was criticized in the New York media for spurning New York due to his being a purported Yankees fan.

On June 27, 2011, the Yankees/Red Sox feud spilled into the world of professional wrestling when CM Punk was cutting a promo against Boston native John Cena. CM Punk went on to call John Cena a hypocrite for reasons that were unfolding in their respective storyline and said that John Cena had become the very thing he had despised in the wrestling business. He concluded this promo by calling Cena the &quot;New York Yankees&quot;. Cena then punched Punk for comparing him to his home team&#x27;s famed rivals. [Punk:] &quot;What you&#x27;ve lost sight of is what you are, and what you are is what you hate. You&#x27;re the 10-time WWE Champion! You&#x27;re the man! You, like the Red Sox, like Boston, are no longer the underdog! You&#x27;re a dynasty. You are what you hate. You have become the New York Yankees!&quot; [John Cena immediately punches Punk, who scoots out of the ring, grabs the contract, and goes up the ramp. Points respectively to Vince McMahon and John Cena] &quot;You&#x27;re Steinbrenner, and you might as well be Jeter! Mr. 3000, I&#x27;m the underdog!&quot;

As the owners of the Yankees are involved with Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan, owner of Manchester City F.C. through City Football Group, as being joint owners of Major League Soccer franchise New York City FC, and the Red Sox being sisters of Liverpool F.C. through their Fenway Sports Group ownership, the 2014 International Champions Cup soccer game between English clubs Manchester City and Liverpool at Yankee Stadium carried a new angle of the Yankees and Red Sox rivalry. Liverpool defeated Manchester City on the day in a penalty shoot-out, after tying 0–0. Both teams have since developed their own rivalry in their home country, which also stems from the inter-city rivalry between Manchester and Liverpool that originated in the 19th century through the Industrial Revolution.

Rivalries between other New York sports teams and other Boston sports teams have been attributed to the Yankees–Red Sox rivalry. For example, some have pointed out the connections between this rivalry and those of the New York Jets and the New England Patriots in the NFL and the New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics in the NBA.

==Broadcasts on television==

The nature of the rivalry has led to games between the two teams being broadcast on national television. Whenever the two teams play a weekend series, the Friday game is sometimes broadcast on MLB Network (often as part of MLB Network Showcase) or livestreamed on Apple TV+ (Friday Night Baseball), the Saturday game is broadcast on either Fox or Fox Sports 1 (Fox Saturday Baseball in the afternoon, Baseball Night in America in the evening), and the Sunday game is broadcast on MLB Network in the afternoon or ESPN as part of &quot;Sunday Night Baseball&quot;; NESN in the Boston market and the YES Network (or Amazon Prime Video in case of conflicts with the Brooklyn Nets and the New York Liberty) in the New York City market always carry games not assigned on either Fox, FS1 (unless specified), or on ESPN&#x27;s Sunday Night Baseball. Weekday games are generally broadcast on MLB Network, FS1 (occasional Monday or Thursday nights), Fox (Thursday nights during September), ESPN (mainly special weekday broadcasts), or TBS (Tuesday Night Baseball as of 2022). On September 22, 2022, a Yankees–Red Sox game was shown exclusively on a livestreaming platform for the first time, with Apple TV+ handling the online-exclusive broadcast as part of Friday Night Baseball. In the past, NBC, ABC and CBS also carried nationally televised games involving the Yankees and the Red Sox regardless of how each team performed in a given season.

When the games are broadcast on Fox, Fox&#x27;s former lead broadcast team of Joe Buck and Tim McCarver have called most of the games. Thus, the duo has called many significant moments in the rivalry. In 2004, the first game of the season between the two teams, on Friday, April 16, was nationally broadcast on Fox, because it marked the first time the two teams were facing each other since the memorable 2003 American League Championship Series. Fox Sports President Ed Goren said of decision to have the game broadcast on Fox: &quot;If were up to me, we&#x27;d take the whole series and come back a week later and carry all their games at Yankee Stadium...We started thinking about this at some point after the Yankees closed the deal with A-Rod...This is sort of a relaunch of the season in the middle of April. This is going to be an event.&quot; MLB Commissioner Bud Selig called the broadcast &quot;an extension of the postseason brought into April.&quot; This was the first over-the-air broadcast of a regular-season game in prime-time since Mark McGwire hit his 62nd home run to break Roger Maris&#x27; record in 1998. In October, when the two teams met in the ALCS, Selig moved Game 5 of the series to primetime due to the rematch.

===Ratings===
The broadcasts of the games between the rivals have led to an increase in television ratings. These games have had at least 50% higher ratings than all of the other games broadcast, sometimes almost twice as high than locally broadcast games. In most cases, the most-watched MLB game on any network during a season is a game between the Yankees and the Red Sox.

Since 2003, ratings for Yankees–Red Sox games on Fox have averaged 2.6 percent of homes–44 percent better than other weeks, while ESPN has averaged 3.96 million viewers for Yankees–Red Sox games on Sunday nights, compared to the average of 2.18 million for all other games. Game 7 of the 2003 ALCS drew a 17.1 rating, the highest for a League Championship Series game since Game 6 of the 1993 National League Championship Series.

In 2004, the first game between the two teams drew a 3.6 national rating, and with an average audience of 5.3 million, it was the most-watched regular-season telecast since Mark McGwire&#x27;s record-breaking home run game. In 2003, Saturday games on Fox averaged a 2.5 rating; prime-time entertainment got a 3.3, but Goren said that he expected the game &quot;will perform much higher than those (prime-time) figures&quot; as a reason to have the game broadcast nationally.

In 2011, the three-game series between the two teams on the weekend of August 5–7 drew large television viewers. The August 5 game on MLB Network drew 563,000 viewers, making it the second-most watched game on the network, behind Stephen Strasburg&#x27;s debut. In New York and Boston, it was blacked out because the YES Network had local rights in New York City and NESN in Boston. The August 6 game on Fox was most-watched non-primetime regular season MLB telecast on the network in more than three years with 4.10 million viewers. The last Fox non-primetime telecast to record higher numbers also was Boston vs. New York on July 5, 2008. The Sunday game on ESPN drew 4.72 million viewers, making it the most-watched baseball game on ESPN since June 3, 2007, when both teams faced each other, and the most-watched MLB broadcast of the 2011 regular season on any network.

The 2021 American League Wild Card Game between the Yankees and Red Sox averaged 7.7 million viewers and was the most watched MLB game on ESPN since 1998.

==See also==

* Major League Baseball rivalries
* Dodgers–Giants rivalry
* Jets–Patriots rivalry
* Giants–Patriots rivalry
* Celtics–Knicks rivalry
* Bruins–Rangers rivalry

==References==
===Notes===
===Inline citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8048808" start="4" end="27" title="Yankees–Red Sox rivalry" label="Yankees–Red Sox rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="33" end="54" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738187" start="61" end="68" title="Major League Baseball rivalries" label="rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="81" end="97" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="106" end="120" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="161" end="176" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q27020041" start="195" end="201" title="season (sports)" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q286988" start="316" end="328" title="Harry Frazee" label="Harry Frazee"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="346" end="355" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="447" end="459" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358166" start="529" end="549" title="Curse of the Bambino" label="Curse of the Bambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="723" end="749" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738184" start="795" end="805" title="Major League Baseball postseason" label="postseason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="838" end="845" title="American League East" label="AL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738152" start="880" end="896" title="Major League Baseball wild card" label="wild card format"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049755" start="926" end="941" title="Division Series" label="Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465473" start="985" end="1007" title="American League Championship Series" label="AL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q465503" start="1127" end="1145" title="American League Division Series" label="AL Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="1240" end="1254" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739461" start="1365" end="1400" title="2021 American League Wild Card Game" label="2021 American League Wild Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578052" start="1689" end="1705" title="1978 American League East tie-breaker game" label="tie-breaker game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="2107" end="2119" title="2004 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301896" start="2456" end="2459" title="MLB on Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955519" start="2460" end="2463" title="MLB on FS1" label="FS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324256" start="2465" end="2469" title="ESPN Major League Baseball" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="2475" end="2486" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2814" end="2820" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2825" end="2838" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2888" end="2907" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="3482" end="3492" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="3761" end="3772" title="Immigration to the United States" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075664" start="3773" end="3786" title="port of entry" label="port of entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="4122" end="4133" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750559" start="4280" end="4298" title="Massachusetts Game" label="Massachusetts Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="4456" end="4478" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="New York Knickerbocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4596" end="4614" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904989" start="5016" end="5033" title="Baltimore Orioles (1901–1902)" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="5101" end="5119" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="5136" end="5145" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546453" start="5263" end="5276" title="George Winter (baseball)" label="George Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561396" start="5336" end="5343" title="List of American League pennant winners" label="pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568891" start="5362" end="5379" title="1903 World Series" label="1903 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q254553" start="5503" end="5515" title="Jack Chesbro" label="Jack Chesbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185489" start="5681" end="5691" title="wild pitch" label="wild pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="5821" end="5836" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="5867" end="5882" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q846644" start="5915" end="5932" title="1904 World Series" label="1904 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q766590" start="6096" end="6107" title="Ban Johnson" label="Ban Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894175" start="6148" end="6161" title="John T. Brush" label="John T. Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="6182" end="6194" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="6195" end="6200" title="Manager (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q379533" start="6202" end="6216" title="player-manager (baseball)" label="player-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="6217" end="6228" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131038" start="6284" end="6288" title="2004 American League Championship Series" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247883" start="6408" end="6418" title="pin stripes" label="pinstripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="6506" end="6517" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764114" start="6588" end="6600" title="Hilltop Park" label="Hilltop Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="6630" end="6642" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="6755" end="6767" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560543" start="6818" end="6824" title="1918 World Series" label="Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542541" start="7169" end="7184" title="George Mogridge" label="George Mogridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="7193" end="7202" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592052" start="7273" end="7288" title="List of New York Yankees no-hitters" label="Yankees history"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7342" end="7350" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q286988" start="7360" end="7372" title="Harry Frazee" label="Harry Frazee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994415" start="7732" end="7746" title="No, No Nanette" label="No, No Nanette"/>
<link wikidata="Q16279853" start="8653" end="8672" title="Murderers&amp;#x27; Row" label="Murderers&amp;#x27; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434866" start="9046" end="9063" title="Robert W. Creamer" label="Robert W. Creamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802858" start="9317" end="9352" title="Tillinghast L&amp;#x27;Hommedieu Huston" label="Tillinghast L&amp;#x27;Hommedieu Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="9685" end="9702" title="Black Sox Scandal" label="Black Sox Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963483" start="9892" end="9904" title="Wally Schang" label="Wally Schang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417061" start="9906" end="9919" title="Everett Scott" label="Everett Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040536" start="9921" end="9930" title="Carl Mays" label="Carl Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410004" start="9932" end="9942" title="Waite Hoyt" label="Waite Hoyt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996800" start="9944" end="9952" title="Bullet Joe Bush" label="Joe Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397441" start="9957" end="9966" title="Sad Sam Jones" label="Sam Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282274" start="10043" end="10052" title="Ed Barrow" label="Ed Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592045" start="10270" end="10285" title="List of New York Yankees team captains" label="Yankees captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565713" start="10606" end="10610" title="1946 Boston Red Sox season" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572657" start="10612" end="10616" title="1967 Boston Red Sox season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558553" start="11426" end="11442" title="Giants–Yankees rivalry" label="cross-town rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561243" start="11654" end="11671" title="1922 World Series" label="1922 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="11891" end="11903" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="11922" end="11936" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="12275" end="12290" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561415" start="12323" end="12335" title="1923 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136063" start="12499" end="12510" title="Red Ruffing" label="Red Ruffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124916" start="12774" end="12785" title="Jake Powell" label="Jake Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q713081" start="12813" end="12823" title="Joe Cronin" label="Joe Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564356" start="13090" end="13102" title="1938 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="13111" end="13126" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564598" start="13134" end="13146" title="1939 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="13254" end="13266" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="13396" end="13402" title="AL MVP" label="AL MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="13429" end="13441" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356229" start="13508" end="13525" title="Joe DiMaggio&amp;#x27;s 56-game hitting streak" label="56 straight games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818123" start="13877" end="13887" title="Tom Yawkey" label="Tom Yawkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q383433" start="13903" end="13917" title="Larry MacPhail" label="Larry MacPhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q367566" start="14019" end="14029" title="Yogi Berra" label="Yogi Berra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288297" start="14093" end="14096" title="Dom DiMaggio" label="Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565836" start="14572" end="14578" title="1946 World Series" label="Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="14590" end="14609" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q332899" start="14635" end="14647" title="Joe McCarthy (manager)" label="Joe McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="14838" end="14855" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566204" start="15070" end="15086" title="1948 American League tie-breaker game" label="one-game playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="15230" end="15243" title="Boston Braves (baseball)" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511285" start="15251" end="15257" title="1948 World Series" label="Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="15579" end="15595" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130846" start="15603" end="15620" title="1949 World Series" label="1949 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q220168" start="15762" end="15774" title="Bob Sheppard" label="Bob Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732530" start="15913" end="15927" title="Allie Reynolds" label="Allie Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179112" start="16002" end="16016" title="Jimmy Piersall" label="Jimmy Piersall"/>
<link wikidata="Q863184" start="16044" end="16056" title="Billy Martin" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862064" start="16208" end="16219" title="Bill Dickey" label="Bill Dickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365929" start="16267" end="16279" title="Ellis Kinder" label="Ellis Kinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="16817" end="16828" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q345004" start="16833" end="16846" title="Mickey Mantle" label="Mickey Mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831851" start="17103" end="17117" title="Tracy Stallard" label="Tracy Stallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030203" start="17184" end="17196" title="Phil Rizzuto" label="Phil Rizzuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736194" start="17564" end="17575" title="Gene Conley" label="Gene Conley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913256" start="17799" end="17809" title="Billy Rohr" label="Billy Rohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q332991" start="17872" end="17885" title="Elston Howard" label="Elston Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209894" start="18115" end="18122" title="Joe Foy" label="Joe Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708950" start="18220" end="18234" title="Thad Tillotson" label="Thad Tillotson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105989" start="18348" end="18359" title="Jim Lonborg" label="Jim Lonborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308312" start="18476" end="18488" title="Reggie Smith" label="Reggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="18971" end="18987" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202041" start="19031" end="19043" title="triple crown (baseball)" label="triple crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295892" start="19174" end="19191" title="1967 World Series" label="1967 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="19230" end="19240" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="19249" end="19268" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="19332" end="19354" title="designated hitter rule" label="designated hitter rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363538" start="19403" end="19415" title="Ron Blomberg" label="Ron Blomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="19448" end="19465" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266840" start="19507" end="19517" title="Luis Tiant" label="Luis Tiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q921807" start="19674" end="19688" title="Thurman Munson" label="Thurman Munson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531353" start="19744" end="19756" title="Gene Michael" label="Gene Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043433" start="19790" end="19802" title="Carlton Fisk" label="Carlton Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q421496" start="19986" end="20001" title="Chris Chambliss" label="Chris Chambliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q676861" start="20142" end="20154" title="Lou Piniella" label="Lou Piniella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903272" start="20415" end="20423" title="Bill Lee (left-handed pitcher)" label="Bill Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113290" start="20450" end="20463" title="Graig Nettles" label="Graig Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838772" start="20483" end="20496" title="Mickey Rivers" label="Mickey Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717762" start="20756" end="20771" title="Big Red Machine" label="Big Red Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295898" start="20779" end="20796" title="1976 World Series" label="1976 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295899" start="20849" end="20866" title="1975 World Series" label="1975 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q220210" start="21010" end="21029" title="George Steinbrenner" label="George Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="21067" end="21081" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q845650" start="22031" end="22048" title="1977 World Series" label="1977 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056244" start="22099" end="22107" title="Jim Rice" label="Jim Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="22109" end="22125" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q26036" start="22127" end="22136" title="Fred Lynn" label="Fred Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043433" start="22149" end="22161" title="Carlton Fisk" label="Carlton Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293769" start="22199" end="22209" title="Don Zimmer" label="Don Zimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578052" start="22952" end="22968" title="1978 American League East tie-breaker game" label="tie-breaker game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849067" start="23088" end="23099" title="Mike Torrez" label="Mike Torrez"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="23126" end="23140" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q711832" start="23149" end="23159" title="Ron Guidry" label="Ron Guidry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983591" start="23301" end="23311" title="Bucky Dent" label="Bucky Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="23370" end="23383" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q869147" start="23608" end="23621" title="Goose Gossage" label="Goose Gossage"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="23976" end="23992" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="24095" end="24113" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002825" start="24121" end="24125" title="1978 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="24134" end="24153" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q845655" start="24161" end="24173" title="1978 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579337" start="24506" end="24510" title="1980 New York Yankees season" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584346" start="24595" end="24599" title="1988 Boston Red Sox season" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017229" start="25000" end="25013" title="Dave Righetti" label="Dave Righetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q246539" start="25112" end="25122" title="Wade Boggs" label="Wade Boggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214238" start="25366" end="25381" title="Dan Quisenberry" label="Dan Quisenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926482" start="25386" end="25398" title="Bruce Sutter" label="Bruce Sutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908017" start="25429" end="25442" title="Bobby Thigpen" label="Bobby Thigpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="25466" end="25483" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026404" start="25636" end="25647" title="Randy Myers" label="Randy Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q679120" start="25812" end="25825" title="Don Mattingly" label="Don Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="26247" end="26260" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018812" start="26451" end="26467" title="Mets–Yankees rivalry" label="cross-town rival"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="26474" end="26487" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="26516" end="26534" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140593" start="26595" end="26602" title="Newsday" label="Newsday"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847725" start="26660" end="26671" title="Mike Lupica" label="Mike Lupica"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="26685" end="26704" title="Daily News (New York)" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q220210" start="26953" end="26972" title="George Steinbrenner" label="George Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587159" start="27070" end="27086" title="Hartford Courant" label="Hartford Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024497" start="27334" end="27350" title="Calvin Schiraldi" label="Calvin Schiraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934066" start="27517" end="27528" title="Bob Stanley (baseball)" label="Bob Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903144" start="27570" end="27582" title="Bill Buckner" label="Bill Buckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323539" start="27627" end="27640" title="Mookie Wilson" label="Mookie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420530" start="27675" end="27685" title="Ray Knight" label="Ray Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545478" start="27838" end="27851" title="George Vecsey" label="George Vecsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q679120" start="28051" end="28064" title="Don Mattingly" label="Don Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q711832" start="28234" end="28244" title="Ron Guidry" label="Ron Guidry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569102" start="28249" end="28264" title="Willie Randolph" label="Willie Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="28476" end="28493" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511190" start="28501" end="28541" title="1988 American League Championship Series" label="1988 American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214372" start="28878" end="28893" title="Dan Shaughnessy" label="Dan Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422779" start="29927" end="29938" title="Red Sox Nation" label="Red Sox fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331288" start="30054" end="30065" title="Rick Cerone" label="Rick Cerone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822737" start="30708" end="30718" title="Tony Kubek" label="Tony Kubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717767" start="30830" end="30841" title="MSG Network" label="MSG Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268115" start="30896" end="30910" title="Dewayne Staats" label="Dewayne Staats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322074" start="31770" end="31774" title="WABC (AM)" label="WABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848912" start="32100" end="32112" title="Mike Stanley" label="Mike Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="32612" end="32648" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134635" start="33016" end="33028" title="1994 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q921030" start="33169" end="33183" title="Buck Showalter" label="Buck Showalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002393" start="33203" end="33215" title="Butch Hobson" label="Butch Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002723" start="33999" end="34003" title="1995 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="34048" end="34065" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="34110" end="34126" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531353" start="34225" end="34237" title="Gene Michael" label="Gene Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="34387" end="34403" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="strike that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316802" start="34738" end="34755" title="1996 World Series" label="1996 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="34934" end="34938" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="35132" end="35148" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316734" start="35156" end="35173" title="1998 World Series" label="1998 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593348" start="35311" end="35315" title="1998 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741630" start="35383" end="35394" title="David Wells" label="David Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="35402" end="35419" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202041" start="35594" end="35606" title="triple crown (baseball)" label="triple crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="35615" end="35629" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q707804" start="35745" end="35754" title="Joe Torre" label="Joe Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="35822" end="35837" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298335" start="36005" end="36018" title="1999 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187214" start="36128" end="36145" title="Nomar Garciaparra" label="Nomar Garciaparra"/>
<link wikidata="Q353511" start="36166" end="36177" title="Derek Jeter" label="Derek Jeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162250" start="36420" end="36436" title="2008 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="Nine years later"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779055" start="36476" end="36490" title="Terry Francona" label="Terry Francona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963613" start="36624" end="36635" title="Chili Davis" label="Chili Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q726918" start="36705" end="36719" title="Pedro Martínez" label="Pedro Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002736" start="37234" end="37238" title="1999 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q711840" start="37406" end="37421" title="Bernie Williams" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438072" start="37442" end="37450" title="Rod Beck" label="Rod Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316770" start="38145" end="38157" title="1999 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="38180" end="38194" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181448" start="38849" end="38862" title="Subway Series" label="Subway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018812" start="38886" end="38903" title="Mets–Yankees rivalry" label="cross-town rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136890" start="38951" end="38961" title="David Cone" label="David Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="39283" end="39295" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="39346" end="39358" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040118" start="39395" end="39407" title="Carl Everett" label="Carl Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="39758" end="39779" title="September 11 attacks" label="the terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490715" start="40265" end="40279" title="Larry Lucchino" label="Larry Lucchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185584" start="40356" end="40370" title="José Contreras" label="José Contreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738194" start="40580" end="40597" title="Major League Baseball schedule" label="scheduling format"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531353" start="41258" end="41270" title="Gene Michael" label="Gene Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057736" start="41380" end="41392" title="Theo Epstein" label="Theo Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490715" start="41433" end="41447" title="Larry Lucchino" label="Larry Lucchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="41689" end="41706" title="2003 World Series" label="2003 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511210" start="42255" end="42259" title="2003 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q626089" start="42335" end="42347" title="Karim García" label="Karim García"/>
<link wikidata="Q375648" start="42538" end="42551" title="Manny Ramírez" label="Manny Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955348" start="42916" end="42927" title="Jeff Nelson (pitcher)" label="Jeff Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066929" start="43004" end="43017" title="Boston Police" label="Boston Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="43238" end="43254" title="Commissioner of Baseball (MLB)" label="MLB Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927496" start="43255" end="43264" title="Bud Selig" label="Bud Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="43643" end="43655" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113177" start="43776" end="43788" title="Grady Little" label="Grady Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q954080" start="43916" end="43929" title="Hideki Matsui" label="Hideki Matsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q952368" start="43951" end="43963" title="Jorge Posada" label="Jorge Posada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661865" start="44134" end="44145" title="Aaron Boone" label="Aaron Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297213" start="44159" end="44168" title="Ray Boone" label="Ray Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108240" start="44242" end="44255" title="Tim Wakefield" label="Tim Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="45325" end="45338" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="45362" end="45376" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q375648" start="45391" end="45404" title="Manny Ramírez" label="Manny Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="45520" end="45525" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="MLBPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739785" start="46182" end="46192" title="Trot Nixon" label="Trot Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377658" start="46253" end="46266" title="Jason Varitek" label="Jason Varitek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926099" start="46351" end="46365" title="Bronson Arroyo" label="Bronson Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q726918" start="46607" end="46621" title="Pedro Martínez" label="Pedro Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131038" start="46940" end="46944" title="2004 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924879" start="47106" end="47119" title="Brian Cashman" label="Brian Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="47252" end="47264" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="47900" end="47914" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747070" start="47984" end="47996" title="Kevin Millar" label="Kevin Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229701" start="48011" end="48023" title="Dave Roberts (outfielder)" label="Dave Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910284" start="48082" end="48094" title="Bill Mueller" label="Bill Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q448005" start="48166" end="48177" title="David Ortiz" label="David Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602482" start="48443" end="48447" title="2004 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="48456" end="48463" title="Anaheim Angels" label="Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="49346" end="49365" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="49373" end="49390" title="2004 World Series" label="2004 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073174" start="49790" end="49807" title="World Series ring" label="World Series ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610932" start="50142" end="50158" title="standing ovation" label="standing ovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="50184" end="50198" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="50252" end="50263" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408931" start="50389" end="50403" title="Kim Jones (reporter)" label="Kimberly Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365880" start="50579" end="50591" title="Josh Beckett" label="Josh Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q652879" start="50637" end="50652" title="Miami Marlins" label="Florida Marlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q25720" start="50823" end="50835" title="Johnny Damon" label="Johnny Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605757" start="51510" end="51519" title="2006 American League Division Series" label="2006 ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="51641" end="51659" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776500" start="51859" end="51875" title="The Yankee Years" label="The Yankee Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q945442" start="51947" end="51957" title="J. D. Drew" label="J. D. Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388356" start="51959" end="51970" title="Mike Lowell" label="Mike Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377658" start="51976" end="51989" title="Jason Varitek" label="Jason Varitek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087218" start="52041" end="52053" title="Chase Wright (baseball)" label="Chase Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="52386" end="52400" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="52672" end="52687" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="52726" end="52743" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="52905" end="52921" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="52929" end="52941" title="2007 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064440" start="53148" end="53159" title="Scott Boras" label="Scott Boras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057736" start="53389" end="53401" title="Theo Epstein" label="Theo Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069430" start="53425" end="53437" title="Mike Mussina" label="Mike Mussina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648473" start="53758" end="53775" title="Hank Steinbrenner" label="Hank Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422779" start="53906" end="53920" title="Red Sox Nation" label="Red Sox Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="53974" end="53987" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="Play Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="54093" end="54097" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186372" start="54399" end="54412" title="John W. Henry" label="John W. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q928196" start="54624" end="54637" title="Mark Teixeira" label="Mark Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058194" start="55037" end="55041" title="2009 American League Division Series" label="ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="55199" end="55220" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q155391" start="55228" end="55245" title="2009 World Series" label="2009 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q926404" start="55845" end="55856" title="CC Sabathia" label="CC Sabathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="55924" end="55938" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188429" start="56128" end="56145" title="2011 World Series" label="2011 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="56262" end="56282" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133717" start="56741" end="56758" title="Jonathan Papelbon" label="Jonathan Papelbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101104" start="57273" end="57288" title="Bobby Valentine" label="Bobby Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="57336" end="57353" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="57381" end="57394" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146798" start="58299" end="58309" title="Derek Lowe" label="Derek Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208322" start="58407" end="58421" title="Kevin Youkilis" label="Kevin Youkilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="58453" end="58470" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189644" start="58566" end="58582" title="Joba Chamberlain" label="Joba Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086137" start="58718" end="58741" title="Boston Marathon bombing" label="Boston Marathon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q670376" start="58837" end="58857" title="Arizona Diamondbacks" label="Arizona Diamondbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115187" start="58934" end="58948" title="Sweet Caroline" label="Sweet Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630084" start="59275" end="59292" title="2013 World Series" label="2013 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063924" start="59409" end="59421" title="Stephen Drew" label="Stephen Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194896" start="59438" end="59451" title="Kelly Johnson (baseball)" label="Kelly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q928196" start="60496" end="60509" title="Mark Teixeira" label="Mark Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351168" start="60607" end="60616" title="Joe Kelly (pitcher)" label="Joe Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="60798" end="60812" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="61034" end="61048" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661865" start="61210" end="61221" title="Aaron Boone" label="Aaron Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q595978" start="61244" end="61253" title="Alex Cora" label="Alex Cora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859942" start="61396" end="61408" title="Tyler Austin" label="Tyler Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351168" start="61433" end="61442" title="Joe Kelly (pitcher)" label="Joe Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010507" start="61981" end="61995" title="2018 Houston Astros season" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063431" start="62103" end="62120" title="2018 American League Wild Card Game" label="AL Wild Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063432" start="62154" end="62163" title="2018 American League Division Series" label="2018 ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q56042772" start="62423" end="62434" title="2019 Major League Baseball season" label="2019 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q172190" start="62438" end="62452" title="London Stadium" label="London Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60749959" start="62533" end="62555" title="2019 MLB London Series" label="2019 MLB London Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="62975" end="62992" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q67515766" start="62998" end="63009" title="2020 Major League Baseball season" label="2020 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="63277" end="63291" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823986" start="63411" end="63424" title="Adam Ottavino" label="Adam Ottavino"/>
<link wikidata="Q106328328" start="63663" end="63679" title="Garrett Whitlock" label="Garrett Whitlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="63836" end="63850" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="64252" end="64272" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739461" start="64383" end="64418" title="2021 American League Wild Card Game" label="2021 American League Wild Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568891" start="64714" end="64731" title="1903 World Series" label="1903 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q846644" start="65038" end="65053" title="1904 World Series" label="No World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558236" start="65074" end="65089" title="1904 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="66750" end="66761" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559547" start="66856" end="66873" title="1912 World Series" label="1912 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560101" start="67570" end="67587" title="1915 World Series" label="1915 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560258" start="67741" end="67758" title="1916 World Series" label="1916 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560543" start="68117" end="68134" title="1918 World Series" label="1918 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="68153" end="68157" title="2004 World Series" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="68503" end="68512" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358166" start="68580" end="68600" title="Curse of the Bambino" label="Curse of the Bambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561067" start="68823" end="68840" title="1921 World Series" label="1921 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561243" start="69040" end="69057" title="1922 World Series" label="1922 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="69270" end="69284" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561415" start="69306" end="69323" title="1923 World Series" label="1923 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132683" start="70051" end="70068" title="1926 World Series" label="1926 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562126" start="70328" end="70345" title="1927 World Series" label="1927 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562311" start="70544" end="70561" title="1928 World Series" label="1928 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147072" start="71389" end="71406" title="1932 World Series" label="1932 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563898" start="72134" end="72151" title="1936 World Series" label="1936 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564126" start="72350" end="72367" title="1937 World Series" label="1937 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564356" start="72522" end="72539" title="1938 World Series" label="1938 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564598" start="72741" end="72758" title="1939 World Series" label="1939 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q297142" start="73133" end="73145" title="Joe DiMaggio" label="Joe DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="73182" end="73194" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564977" start="73228" end="73245" title="1941 World Series" label="1941 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565127" start="73447" end="73464" title="1942 World Series" label="1942 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565294" start="73666" end="73683" title="1943 World Series" label="1943 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="74273" end="74282" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565836" start="74305" end="74322" title="1946 World Series" label="1946 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845627" start="74522" end="74539" title="1947 World Series" label="1947 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="74775" end="74792" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130846" start="75116" end="75133" title="1949 World Series" label="1949 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845534" start="75333" end="75350" title="1950 World Series" label="1950 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145292" start="75503" end="75520" title="1951 World Series" label="1951 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845603" start="75720" end="75737" title="1952 World Series" label="1952 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845607" start="75912" end="75929" title="1953 World Series" label="1953 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364101" start="76344" end="76361" title="1955 World Series" label="1955 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845599" start="76562" end="76579" title="1956 World Series" label="1956 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q987878" start="76780" end="76797" title="1957 World Series" label="1957 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845665" start="76999" end="77016" title="1958 World Series" label="1958 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q869082" start="77403" end="77420" title="1960 World Series" label="1960 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="77608" end="77619" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051846" start="77797" end="77814" title="1961 World Series" label="1961 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="78014" end="78031" title="1962 World Series" label="1962 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295885" start="78232" end="78249" title="1963 World Series" label="1963 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295887" start="78401" end="78418" title="1964 World Series" label="1964 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295892" start="79014" end="79031" title="1967 World Series" label="1967 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q921807" start="80168" end="80174" title="Thurman Munson" label="Munson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043433" start="80176" end="80180" title="Carlton Fisk" label="Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295899" start="80642" end="80659" title="1975 World Series" label="1975 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q676861" start="80847" end="80855" title="Lou Piniella" label="Piniella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295898" start="80890" end="80907" title="1976 World Series" label="1976 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845650" start="81175" end="81192" title="1977 World Series" label="1977 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q845655" start="81611" end="81628" title="1978 World Series" label="1978 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="82253" end="82259" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983763" start="82299" end="82316" title="1981 World Series" label="1981 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568875" start="83270" end="83287" title="1986 World Series" label="1986 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="84739" end="84745" title="1994 Major League Baseball strike" label="Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316802" start="85390" end="85407" title="1996 World Series" label="1996 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316734" start="85828" end="85845" title="1998 World Series" label="1998 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316770" start="86047" end="86064" title="1999 World Series" label="1999 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002736" start="86126" end="86135" title="1999 American League Championship Series" label="1999 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="86626" end="86643" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207242" start="86937" end="86954" title="2001 World Series" label="2001 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187392" start="87290" end="87307" title="2003 World Series" label="2003 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511210" start="87369" end="87378" title="2003 American League Championship Series" label="2003 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661865" start="87552" end="87563" title="Aaron Boone" label="Aaron Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="87863" end="87880" title="2004 World Series" label="2004 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131038" start="87966" end="87975" title="2004 American League Championship Series" label="2004 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="88519" end="88526" title="American League East" label="AL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="89064" end="89081" title="2007 World Series" label="2007 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q753529" start="89379" end="89393" title="Yankee Stadium" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q155391" start="89487" end="89504" title="2009 World Series" label="2009 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630084" start="90279" end="90296" title="2013 World Series" label="2013 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q56692089" start="91735" end="91752" title="2018 World Series" label="2018 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063432" start="91814" end="91823" title="2018 American League Division Series" label="2018 ALDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q660679" start="92068" end="92078" title="Brock Holt" label="Brock Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326086" start="92079" end="92097" title="hitting for the cycle" label="hits for the cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="92377" end="92383" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92814" end="92831" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on sports#Baseball" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739461" start="93485" end="93494" title="2021 American League Wild Card Game" label="2021 ALWC"/>
<link wikidata="Q124543265" start="94439" end="94456" title="2024 World Series" label="2024 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739461" start="94895" end="94899" title="2021 American League Wild Card Game" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="95131" end="95139" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892536" start="95140" end="95151" title="Like button" label="Like button"/>
<link wikidata="Q49123" start="95175" end="95190" title="Harvard College" label="Harvard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="95266" end="95280" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="95281" end="95288" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="95289" end="95302" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="95538" end="95549" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="95630" end="95638" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q753857" start="95816" end="95824" title="Guilford, Connecticut" label="Guilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="95829" end="95839" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q48274" start="96044" end="96065" title="Nashua, New Hampshire" label="Nashua, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066929" start="96418" end="96431" title="Boston Police Department" label="Boston Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="96578" end="96605" title="public service announcement" label="public service announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="96621" end="96629" title="Spike TV" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743282" start="97386" end="97396" title="Jimmy Fund" label="Jimmy Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="97658" end="97674" title="Rudolph Giuliani" label="Rudolph Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377612" start="97736" end="97757" title="Rudy Giuliani presidential campaign, 2008" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q388858" start="97801" end="97817" title="Colorado Rockies" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071224" start="97825" end="97842" title="2007 World Series" label="2007 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q910541" start="98269" end="98274" title="Topps" label="Topps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314671" start="98525" end="98555" title="Republican presidential debates, 2008" label="Republican Presidential Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="98627" end="98638" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="98779" end="98796" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911497" start="98962" end="98976" title="Bill de Blasio" label="Bill de Blasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="99033" end="99057" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q536957" start="99190" end="99235" title="United States Senate special election in Massachusetts, 2010" label="2010 special Senate election in Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q457021" start="99237" end="99251" title="Martha Coakley" label="Martha Coakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="99257" end="99267" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406492" start="99282" end="99304" title="Attorney General of Massachusetts" label="state Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="99474" end="99487" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="state senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q155125" start="99488" end="99499" title="Scott Brown (politician)" label="Scott Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="100183" end="100186" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="100194" end="100214" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570527" start="100295" end="100305" title="Larry Izzo" label="Larry Izzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="100474" end="100481" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="100494" end="100499" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="100636" end="100642" title="New York Giants" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="100648" end="100652" title="New York Jets" label="Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q188984" start="100913" end="100920" title="New York Rangers" label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152477" start="100991" end="101003" title="Sports in Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325392" start="101046" end="101055" title="Eagles–Giants rivalry" label="rivalries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="101068" end="101087" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="101124" end="101139" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592724" start="101703" end="101722" title="1972 Miami Dolphins season" label="1972 Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="101859" end="101874" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036161" start="102084" end="102099" title="2008 NBA Finals" label="2008 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342499" start="102112" end="102153" title="Celtics–Lakers rivalry" label="Boston Celtics and the Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="102170" end="102179" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q131364" start="102211" end="102226" title="New York Knicks" label="New York Knicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="102360" end="102366" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q208623" start="102400" end="102409" title="Ray Allen" label="Ray Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="102417" end="102424" title="Boston Celtics" label="Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q923177" start="102435" end="102458" title="2010 NHL Winter Classic" label="2010 NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="102504" end="102517" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q960553" start="102541" end="102552" title="Tuukka Rask" label="Tuukka Rask"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="102762" end="102765" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="102771" end="102783" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186372" start="102817" end="102827" title="John W. Henry" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="102888" end="102911" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="102919" end="102933" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q556607" start="104175" end="104202" title="Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan" label="Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="104213" end="104233" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2405171" start="104242" end="104261" title="City Football Group" label="City Football Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="104288" end="104307" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361030" start="104318" end="104334" title="New York City FC" label="New York City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="104369" end="104383" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1324524" start="104398" end="104417" title="Fenway Sports Group" label="Fenway Sports Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242071" start="104433" end="104465" title="2014 International Champions Cup" label="2014 International Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="104466" end="104472" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="104486" end="104493" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781773" start="104713" end="104740" title="Liverpool F.C.–Manchester City F.C. rivalry" label="developed their own rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658671" start="104790" end="104808" title="Liverpool–Manchester rivalry" label="inter-city rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="104817" end="104827" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="104832" end="104841" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="104890" end="104911" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189194" start="105132" end="105174" title="Jets–Patriots rivalry" label="New York Jets and the New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058573" start="105194" end="105232" title="Celtics–Knicks rivalry" label="New York Knicks and the Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="105469" end="105480" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968779" start="105499" end="105519" title="MLB Network Showcase" label="MLB Network Showcase"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="105540" end="105549" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q111535911" start="105551" end="105572" title="Friday Night Baseball" label="Friday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955519" start="105623" end="105635" title="MLB on FS1" label="Fox Sports 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q118830786" start="105637" end="105658" title="Fox Saturday Baseball" label="Fox Saturday Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q98568095" start="105677" end="105702" title="Baseball Night in America" label="Baseball Night in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324256" start="105788" end="105792" title="ESPN Major League Baseball" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839707" start="105810" end="105831" title="Sunday Night Baseball" label="Sunday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338942" start="105839" end="105843" title="NESN" label="NESN"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="105873" end="105884" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="105889" end="105907" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q572134" start="105938" end="105951" title="Brooklyn Nets" label="Brooklyn Nets"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="105960" end="105976" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898640" start="106188" end="106194" title="Monday Night Baseball" label="Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809465" start="106198" end="106213" title="Thursday Night Baseball" label="Thursday nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="106301" end="106304" title="MLB on TBS" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q107144234" start="106306" end="106328" title="Tuesday Night Baseball" label="Tuesday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="106415" end="106428" title="livestreaming" label="livestreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="106463" end="106472" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q111535911" start="106524" end="106545" title="Friday Night Baseball" label="Friday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738172" start="106560" end="106563" title="Major League Baseball on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738160" start="106565" end="106568" title="ESPN Major League Baseball on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738164" start="106573" end="106576" title="Major League Baseball on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247194" start="106791" end="106799" title="Joe Buck" label="Joe Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803927" start="106804" end="106816" title="Tim McCarver" label="Tim McCarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511210" start="107119" end="107159" title="2003 American League Championship Series" label="2003 American League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q75776" start="107161" end="107171" title="Fox Sports (United States)" label="Fox Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="107456" end="107461" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="A-Rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="107565" end="107581" title="Commissioner of Baseball (MLB)" label="MLB Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927496" start="107582" end="107591" title="Bud Selig" label="Bud Selig"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="107763" end="107775" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131038" start="107883" end="107887" title="2004 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511247" start="108721" end="108761" title="1993 National League Championship Series" label="1993 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661550" start="109374" end="109385" title="MLB Network" label="MLB Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192310" start="109470" end="109487" title="Stephen Strasburg" label="Stephen Strasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q903249" start="109557" end="109568" title="YES Network" label="YES Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338942" start="109607" end="109611" title="NESN" label="NESN"/>
<link wikidata="Q108739461" start="110118" end="110153" title="2021 American League Wild Card Game" label="2021 American League Wild Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="110252" end="110256" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738187" start="110286" end="110317" title="Major League Baseball rivalries" label="Major League Baseball rivalries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287915" start="110320" end="110342" title="Dodgers–Giants rivalry" label="Dodgers–Giants rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189194" start="110345" end="110366" title="Jets–Patriots rivalry" label="Jets–Patriots rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109974416" start="110369" end="110392" title="Giants–Patriots rivalry" label="Giants–Patriots rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058573" start="110395" end="110417" title="Celtics–Knicks rivalry" label="Celtics–Knicks rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="110420" end="110442" title="National Hockey League rivalries#Boston Bruins vs. New York Rangers" label="Bruins–Rangers rivalry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141486" wikidata="Q572077" url="?curid=1141486" title="La Bouche">
<text>La Bouche (French for &quot;The Mouth&quot;, ) is a German-American Eurodance duo best known for the hits &quot;Be My Lover&quot;, &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot;, &quot;You Won&#x27;t Forget Me&quot; and &quot;S.O.S.&quot; La Bouche was founded in 1994 by record producer Frank Farian in Frankfurt am Main. He worked together with techno DJ Ulli Brenner and producer Amir Saraf to produce the music, while American singer Melanie Thornton and American rapper and backup singer Lane McCray fronted the act.

Thornton and McCray had already worked together in music, prior to La Bouche&#x27;s creation. Thornton departed La Bouche in 2000, continuing her career as a solo artist.

In 2001, Thornton was killed in the Crossair Flight 3597 crash in Bassersdorf near Zurich, Switzerland. As a tribute to the singer, Farian released &quot;In Your Life&quot;, a previously unreleased song featuring vocals recorded earlier with Thornton and McCray. Farian released &quot;The Best of La Bouche featuring Melanie Thornton&quot;, a compilation album featuring Thornton&#x27;s solo tracks alongside La Bouche hits in 2002.

McCray continues to tour the world as La Bouche. In 2015, McCray pulled Hungarian-born singer Sophie Cairo out of obscurity to be the new official singer of the act. A new official remix titled &quot;Sweet Dreams 2017&quot; was released featuring vocals from McCray and Cairo.

== History ==
=== Beginnings with Groovin&#x27; Affairs ===
Prior to forming La Bouche in 1994, Melanie Thornton and Lane McCray were lead vocalists in a German cover band called Groovin&#x27; Affairs. While touring with the band in various parts of Germany, Thornton also did regular studio session work with producers Amir Saraf and Ulli Brenner. Eventually, Thornton asked her bandmate McCray to join her in the recording project.

=== Mainstream success with &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; and &quot;Be My Lover&quot; ===
The song &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; had quickly caught the attention of Farian and he later secured the track through his MCI label. &quot;Tonight Is the Night&quot; went to Logic Records in Germany under the band name Le Click. The single was released in 1994 and was a pan-European and Australian hit. It was later revealed that the rap performance was not done by Lane McCray, but by Robert Haynes, a former member of Le Click.

It was followed by &quot;Be My Lover&quot; in March 1995, which peaked at number one in Germany and Sweden, while also reaching the Top 10 in fourteen European countries. It also peaked at number 27 in 1995 and number 25 in 1996 in the UK Singles Chart when re-issued in that year. &quot;Be My Lover&quot; went to number 1 on the US Hot Dance Club Play chart in 1995 and climbed to number 6 on the Hot 100 in early 1996. It was then re-released in the UK and reached a new peak of number 25. 1996 It went on to win the ASCAP award for the &quot;Most Played Song in America&quot; and sold 6 million copies worldwide. In Australia it was the debut single (before Sweet Dreams) and reached a peak of #2. 
La Bouche went on to become one of the biggest Eurodance groups of the &#x27;90s, with a string of hits worldwide. The debut album &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; was released on 12 June 1995 and went to number 13 in the US, featured two more hit single releases, &quot;Fallin&#x27; in Love&quot; (a cover of the 1975 Hamilton, Joe Frank &amp; Reynolds song) and &quot;I Love to Love&quot;.

While still with the group, Thornton had some American chart success as featured vocalist on the Le Click hit &quot;Tonight Is the Night&quot;, which reached number 68 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. The song was included on the US version of La Bouche&#x27;s debut album, peaking at number 28 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. It was certified platinum by the RIAA and sold over 8 million copies worldwide. Thornton provided guest vocals on a lot of dance projects on single releases such as on Orange Blue&#x27;s &quot;If You Wanna Be (My Only)&quot;, Comic&#x27;s &quot;I Surrender to Your Love&quot;, 100%&#x27;s &quot;Power of the Light&quot;, Trance-Vision&#x27;s &quot;Take Me 2 Heaven 2 Nite&quot; and Men Behind&#x27;s &quot;How Can I&quot;.

=== &quot;All Mixed Up&quot; and &quot;A Moment of Love&quot; ===
A remix album called &quot;All Mixed Up&quot; was released on 16 December 1996. Their second studio album, &quot;A Moment of Love&quot;, was released on 17 November 1997, preceded by the singles &quot;Forget Me Nots&quot;, a cover of the Patrice Rushen song that was originally on their debut album, &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; internationally, &quot;Bolingo (Love Is in the Air)&quot;, which only appears on the US album version &quot;S.O.S&quot;, released on 16 June 1998, and followed by the singles &quot;You Won&#x27;t Forget Me&quot;, &quot;A Moment of Love&quot; and &quot;S.O.S.&quot;, being minor to moderate hits in Europe. &quot;You Won&#x27;t Forget Me&quot; was released in autumn of 1997 and reached number 48 on the Hot 100. One highlight on &quot;A Moment of Love&quot; was a bonus track, a cover version of the Elton John song &quot;Candle in the Wind&quot; in a gospel version which features guest vocalists Joan Faulkner, Christin Sargent, Freda Goodlett, Rejime, The Jackson Singers, Ma Belle and label mates No Mercy, which only appears on the European album version.

=== Melanie Thornton&#x27;s departure and death ===
In addition to her work with La Bouche, Thornton still provided guest vocals on singles such as Orange Blue&#x27;s &quot;Sunshine of my Life&quot; and &quot;Runaway&quot; and 100%&#x27;s &quot;The Way It Is&quot;, which led Thornton in February 2000 to leave La Bouche to pursue a full solo career. Thornton as a solo singer was climbing the German charts with her hit &quot;Love How You Love Me&quot;. Towards the end of 2001, Thornton was asked to record &quot;Wonderful Dream (Holidays are Coming)&quot; for a Coca-Cola Christmas TV commercial to be shown on German television. While promoting it, and a re-release of her solo album &quot;Ready to Fly&quot;, she was a passenger of Crossair Flight 3597, along with Nathaly van het Ende and Maria Serrano Serrano of Passion Fruit when the plane crashed in Bassersdorf near Zurich on 24 November 2001 and they were three of the 24 people killed. Following Thornton&#x27;s death, the single went on to become her biggest solo hit, reaching number 3 on the German singles chart.

=== Posthumous compilations and remixes ===
In April 2002, Frank Farian compiled songs from Thornton&#x27;s solo album along with selections from the first and second La Bouche albums into a best of collection entitled &quot;Best Of&quot; billed as &#x27;La Bouche feat. Melanie Thornton&#x27;. In November 2002, one year following Thornton&#x27;s death, Farian prepared a tribute single entitled &quot;In Your Life&quot;, a song which was previously unreleased. Farian combined her vocals with Kayo Shekoni&#x27;s vocals from Le Click, a band which Thornton also provided guest vocals for, who completed the song with additional vocals. The single was released worldwide in 2002 and in the U.S. in 2003. It peaked at number 9 on the Hot Dance Club Play chart.

On 1 December 2003, Thornton&#x27;s first remix compilation album, &quot;Memories – Her Most Beautiful Ballads&quot; was released, which also includes new ballad versions of La Bouche songs such as &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; and &quot;Fallin&#x27; in Love&quot;. In 2007, the second La Bouche compilation called &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; was released along with a 3-track EP, released on iTunes under the brand &#x27;Le Click&#x27; titled &quot;Let&#x27;s Click: 90&#x27;s Dance Classics&quot;. These are 3 tracks from the &quot;S.O.S.&quot; and &quot;A Moment of Love&quot; album recording sessions that did not make the final cut.

As of 2018, &quot;Be My Lover&quot; remains a prominent media component in the events all over the world, serving as the official theme song at many of Los Angeles&#x27; highest-profile ACC events.

==Members==
Current members:
*Lane McCray 
*Kayo Shekoni 
*Dana Rayne 
*Sophie Cairo 
*Belle Johnson 

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Remix albums===
* &quot;All Mixed Up&quot; (1996)

===Compilation albums===
* &quot;Best Of&quot; as &quot;La Bouche feat. Melanie Thornton&quot; (21 May 2002)
* &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; (2 April 2007)

===Singles===
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;La Bouche&quot; Booking Agent
* La Bouche – Biography, discography, singles
* La Bouche – Discography
* Melanie Thornton &amp; La Bouche Forum 
* La Bouche Chart History at Billboard.com
* La Bouche </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="0" end="9" title="La Bouche" label="La Bouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="68" end="77" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750724" start="112" end="123" title="Be My Lover (La Bouche song)" label="Be My Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978775" start="137" end="149" title="Sweet Dreams (La Bouche song)" label="Sweet Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057638" start="163" end="187" title="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me (song)" label="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q62437" start="266" end="278" title="Frank Farian" label="Frank Farian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="282" end="299" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="325" end="331" title="techno music" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="335" end="347" title="La Bouche" label="Ulli Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="361" end="371" title="La Bouche" label="Amir Saraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q235243" start="416" end="432" title="Melanie Thornton" label="Melanie Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485423" start="471" end="482" title="Lane McCray" label="Lane McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q569392" start="709" end="729" title="Crossair Flight 3597" label="Crossair Flight 3597"/>
<link wikidata="Q69734" start="739" end="750" title="Bassersdorf" label="Bassersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="756" end="762" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q235243" start="1481" end="1497" title="Melanie Thornton" label="Melanie Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485423" start="1502" end="1513" title="Lane McCray" label="Lane McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978775" start="1920" end="1932" title="Sweet Dreams (La Bouche song)" label="Sweet Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416419" start="2122" end="2130" title="Le Click" label="Le Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750724" start="2360" end="2371" title="Be My Lover (La Bouche song)" label="Be My Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="2571" end="2587" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="2668" end="2687" title="Hot Dance Club Play" label="Hot Dance Club Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="2854" end="2859" title="American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="3084" end="3093" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3300" end="3320" title="Fallin&amp;#x27; in Love (Hamilton, Joe Frank &amp;amp; Reynolds song)#La Bouche version" label="Fallin&amp;#x27; in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="3330" end="3335" title="cover version" label="cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644760" start="3348" end="3382" title="Hamilton, Joe Frank &amp;amp; Reynolds" label="Hamilton, Joe Frank &amp;amp; Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790323" start="3399" end="3413" title="I Love to Love" label="I Love to Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416419" start="3519" end="3527" title="Le Click" label="Le Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="3597" end="3626" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="3729" end="3754" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="3789" end="3793" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469659" start="4447" end="4461" title="Forget Me Nots" label="Forget Me Nots"/>
<link wikidata="Q454419" start="4484" end="4498" title="Patrice Rushen" label="Patrice Rushen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581264" start="4594" end="4622" title="Bolingo (Love Is in the Air)" label="Bolingo (Love Is in the Air)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057638" start="4752" end="4776" title="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me (song)" label="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057638" start="4883" end="4907" title="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me (song)" label="You Won&amp;#x27;t Forget Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="5071" end="5081" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449307" start="5093" end="5111" title="Candle in the Wind 1997" label="Candle in the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q836613" start="5272" end="5280" title="No Mercy (pop band)" label="No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="5898" end="5907" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q569392" start="6070" end="6090" title="Crossair Flight 3597" label="Crossair Flight 3597"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968481" start="6153" end="6166" title="Passion Fruit (group)" label="Passion Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q69734" start="6193" end="6204" title="Bassersdorf" label="Bassersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="6210" end="6216" title="Zurich" label="Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q62437" start="6473" end="6485" title="Frank Farian" label="Frank Farian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958419" start="6909" end="6921" title="Kayo Shekoni" label="Kayo Shekoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416419" start="6941" end="6949" title="Le Click" label="Le Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="7546" end="7548" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485423" start="8037" end="8048" title="Lane McCray" label="Lane McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958419" start="8051" end="8063" title="Kayo Shekoni" label="Kayo Shekoni"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141488" wikidata="Q213680" url="?curid=1141488" title="Egon Wellesz">
<text>Egon Joseph Wellesz, CBE, FBA (21 October 1885 – 9 November 1974) was an Austrian, later British composer, teacher and musicologist, notable particularly in the field of Byzantine music.

== Early life and education in Vienna ==
Egon Joseph Wellesz was born on 21 October 1885 in the Schottengasse district of Vienna to Samú Wellesz and Ilona Wellesz (née Lovenyi). Although his parents met and married in Vienna, they both originated from Hungary and came from Jewish families in that nation. His parents, while ethnically Hungarian Jews, were both practicing Christians in Vienna and Wellesz received a Protestant upbringing. He later converted to Catholicism. As a boy he attended the on where he received a classical education in Greek and Latin.

Wellesz&#x27;s father worked in the textile business and his parents initially intended Wellesz to join him in his work, or pursue a career as a civil servant. In order to achieve that aim, his parents were intent upon Wellesz pursuing an education in law. Accordingly, Wellesz entered the University of Vienna as a law student following the completion of his studies at the Franz-Joseph-Gymnasium. However, Wellesz&#x27;s own career ambitions had been bent towards music for several years prior to his entrance to the University of Vienna. This desire to pursue a music career had been formed after attending a performance of Carl Maria von Webers &quot;Der Freischütz&quot; under the baton of Gustav Mahler at the Vienna State Opera on October 21, 1898; a present from his parents on his 13th birthday. This opera so moved Wellesz that he decided he wanted to become a composer. Prior to this experience, Wellesz had already had some excellent music education as a boy, as his mother was a music enthusiast and amateur pianist who encouraged music studies as a hobby. He began his initial music training at a young age studying the piano with his mother&#x27;s teacher, Carl Frühling.

In 1905, at the age of 19, Wellesz began studying harmony and counterpoint at Eugenie Schwarzwald&#x27;s school with Arnold Schoenberg while simultaneously attending law classes at the university. Schwarzwald&#x27;s school became an important part of not only his musical development but also his social life. There he became the conductor of a school choir and he met and befriended the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, the architect Adolf Loos, and the painter Oskar Kokoschka; the latter of whom painted his portrait in 1911. He also met his future wife, , who was a student at that school. Wellesz&#x27;s lessons with Schoenberg took place at Schoenberg&#x27;s apartment where he received a thorough and rigorous training in the fundamentals of music. These lessons, however, lasted only a matter of months, and ended when he began studies in musicology with Guido Adler at the University of Vienna later in 1905. Adler had founded the Musicological Institute at the University of Vienna and was a leading editor of the Austrian &quot;Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich&quot;. He and Schoenberg&#x27;s dual influences shaped much of Wellesz&#x27;s musical and scholarly thought. His 1921 book on Schoenberg is still a standard source on Schoenberg&#x27;s early period.

==Work as a scholar, lecturer, and composer in Vienna==
The main focus of Wellesz&#x27;s early musicological research was Baroque opera; particularly those by composer Giuseppe Bonno who was the subject of his dissertation at the University of Vienna. He also edited Johann Joseph Fux&#x27;s 1723 opera &quot;&quot; for publication in Adler&#x27;s &quot;Denkmäler&quot;. Many years later Wellesz published a monograph on Fux in 1965. He graduated from the University of Vienna with a degree in musicology in 1908, and his dissertation on Bonno was published the following year. He married Emmy Stross in 1908, and had a very long and happy marriage.

In 1913 Wellesz joined the faculty of the University of Vienna as a lecturer in music history. That same year he embarked upon what would become a lifelong interest in the musical achievements of Byzantium. This interest initially arose from dialogues and debates with the Austrian art historian Josef Strzygowski who at this time was putting forward a new theory that many of the elements of Early Christian architecture, such as the rounded dome, originated not in the West but in the East; ideas published in his &quot;Orient oder Rom&quot;. Wellesz had plenty of opportunity to discuss these theories directly with Strzygowski as his wife Emmy was an art historian who specialized in the art of India and was a disciple and close friend of Strzygowski. These discussions awoke an interest in him to study the early roots of Christianity and compare the development of chant in the East and the West.

1913 was also the first year one of Wellesz&#x27;s compositions was publicly performed. The five movement String Quartet No 1, op 14 received its premiere on 31 October, showing the clear influence of Mahler and Schoenberg. Wellesz was the first pupil of Schoenberg to gain independent success as a composer, receiving a contract from Universal Edition before Berg or Webern. Three further string quartets followed during the war years, establishing his preference for linear chromaticism, and some of them explicitly categorised as atonal. However, it was with dramatic music that Wellesz really made his mark, starting with the ballet &quot;Das Wunder der Diana&quot; in 1914. In the following 12 years he completed five operas and three ballets, many of the libretti and ballet scenarios written by the important literary figures Hugo von Hofmannsthal and Jakob Wassermann. Operas such as &quot;Alkestis&quot; (1924) and &quot;Die Bakchantinnen&quot; (1931) take their subject matter from ancient mythology and, in contrast to the Wagnerian tradition, use techniques such as dance pantomime and coloratura singing derived from Claudio Monteverdi and Christoph Willibald Gluck.

In 1922 Wellesz, along with Rudolph Reti and others, founded the Internationale Gesellschaft für Neue Musik (IGNM) following the
Internationale Kammermusikaufführungen Salzburg, a festival of modern chamber music held as part of the Salzburg Festival. 
This soon evolved into the International Society for Contemporary Music, founded in 1923 with its headquarters in London. The Cambridge academic Edward J. Dent, whom Wellesz had met on his first trip to London in 1906, was elected as its president.

In 1929 Wellesz was promoted from lecturer to professor at the University of Vienna; succeeding Adler in his position at the university. He remained in that post until the events of the Anschluss on 13 March 1938 made it no longer safe for him to reside in Austria.

== Life in England ==
His links to England turned out to be fortunate in 1938 when Wellesz was forced to leave Austria in the wake of the Anschluss. By good fortune he was in Amsterdam on 12 March 1938 to hear his orchestral suite &quot;Prosperos Beschwörungen&quot; (&quot;Prospero&#x27;s Invocation&quot;, after &quot;The Tempest&quot;) conducted by Bruno Walter. Once in England he worked for a time on Grove&#x27;s Dictionary of Music, but in July 1940 he was interned as an enemy alien, ultimately in Hutchinson Camp in the Isle of Man. He gained his release later that year, on 13 October, thanks to intercessions by Ralph Vaughan Williams and H. C. Colles, the long-standing chief music critic of &quot;The Times&quot;. Following his internment in 1940 Wellesz found himself unable to compose, a creative block eventually broken by the composition of the String Quartet No. 5 (1943–44), the first important work of his English period. His response to the great English poet Gerard Manley Hopkins also helped re-kindle his urge to compose, resulting in his setting of &quot;The Leaden and the Golden Echo&quot; in 1944.

Despite his composing, Wellesz remains best known as an academic and teacher, and for his extensive scholarly contributions to the study of Byzantine music and opera in the 17th century. These contributions brought for him an honorary doctorate from Oxford University in 1932 and later a fellowship at Lincoln College, Oxford, where he remained until his death. His pupils there included Herbert Chappell, Martin Cooper, Kunihiko Hashimoto, Spike Hughes, Frederick May, Wilfrid Mellers, Nigel Osborne and Peter Sculthorpe. He was elected a Fellow of the British Academy in 1953.

A portrait was made of Wellesz by Jean Cooke, who had been commissioned for the work by Lincoln College. (There is also an early portrait, painted in 1911 by Oskar Kokoschka). Wellesz continued composing until he suffered a stroke in 1972. He died two years later and was buried in the Zentralfriedhof in Vienna. His widow Emmy Stross, whom he married in 1908, returned to live in Vienna until her own death in 1987.

== Music ==
Wellesz composed at least 112 works with opus numbers as well as some 20 without numbers. His large scale dramatic works (including six operas) were mostly completed during his Vienna period (the main exception being the comic opera &quot;Incognita&quot;, written with the Oxford poet Elizabeth Mackenzie and first staged there in 1952). Robert Layton regarded &quot;Alkestis&quot; as &quot;probably his most remarkable achievement for the stage. Its invention is marvellously sustained and organically conceived&quot;. It was successfully revived in the 1950s and 1960s.

Altogether he wrote nine symphonies and an equal number of string quartets, the former starting in 1945 and the latter series of works spread throughout his life. Several of his symphonies have titles, including the second (the &quot;English&quot;), fourth (the &quot;Austriaca&quot;) and seventh (&quot;Contra torrentem&quot;). They were generally well received in Austria, Germany and England, but even so the Third Symphony (1950–1) was only published posthumously and only received its world premiere in Vienna in 2000. Other compositions included the Octet (using Schubert&#x27;s combination); piano and violin concertos (one of each); choral works such as the Mass in F minor; and a number of vocal works with orchestral or chamber accompaniment.

Stylistically his earliest music, somewhat like that of Ernst Krenek, is in a dissonant but recognisably tonal style; there is a definite second period of sorts around the time of the first two symphonies (1940s) in which his music has a somewhat Brucknerian sound – in the symphonies sometimes an equal breadth, though still with something of a 20th-century feel and harmonies – but after the Fourth Symphony his music became more tonally vague in character, with serial techniques used, though still with hints of tonality, as in the Eighth Quartet.

Rather than follow his teacher Schoenberg&#x27;s Expressionist style, Wellesz found inspiration in music from the pre-modern era (with the exception of Mahler), becoming a forerunner to the anti-Romantic currents of the twenties. As well as the dramatic works, the chamber and orchestral pieces with voice often use these &quot;baroque&quot; elements. An example is the cantata &quot;Amor Timido&quot; (1933), a favourite of Wilfrid Mellers. Elsewhere, the neo-classical spirit of Hindemith is evident, as in the Piano Concerto (1931) and (still there much later) in the Divertimento (1969).

He wrote:In place of the infinite melody, the finite must return, in the place of dissolved, amorphous structures, clear, clearly outlined forms. The opera of the future must tie in with the traditions of Baroque opera. This is the natural form, the innermost essence of opera.

===Recordings===
A complete recording set of his nine symphonies by the Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra conducted by Gottfried Rabl is available, and there are recordings of three of the quartets, choral works including the Mass, the violin and piano concertos, and other orchestral works including &quot;Prosperos Beschwörungen&quot;, &quot;Vorfrühling&quot; and the &quot;Symphonic Epilogue&quot;.
* Chamber Music: Clarinet Quintet, Op. 81, String Trio, Op. 86, Four Pieces for String Quartet, Op. 103, and Four Pieces for String Trio, Op. 105. Veles Ensemble, Toccata TOCC0617 (2023)
* Choral Music and Song: Mass in F, Op 61; Missa Brevis, Op 89, &quot;To Sleep&quot; Op 94. Choir of Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. Nimbus NI5852 (2011)
* Piano Concerto: with &quot;Triptychon&quot;, Op 98; &quot;Divertimento&quot;, Op. 107; &quot;Drei Skizzen&quot;, Op. 6; &quot;Eklogen&quot;, Op. 11. Karl-Andreas Kolly (piano), Luzerner Sinfonieorchester/Howard Griffiths, Pan Classics 510104 (1999)
* Sonata for solo violin, Op. 72. Siân Philipps. Claudio CC6035-2 (2024)
* String Quartets: No. 3, 4 and 6. Artis Quartett Wien. NIMBUS NI 5821 (2008)
* Symphonies No. 1 – 9 (4-CD Set). Radio Symphonieorchester Wien/Gottfried Rabl, CPO 777183-2 (2009)
* &#x27;20th Century Portraits&#x27;: &quot;The Dawn of Spring&quot;; &quot;Sonnets from the Portuguese&quot; Op. 52; &quot;Song of the World, Op. 54&quot;; &quot;Life, dream and death&quot; Op. 55; &quot;Ode to Music&quot;, Op. 92; &quot;Vision&quot;, Op. 99; &quot;Symphonic Epilogue&quot;, Op. 108. Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin/Roger Epple, Capriccio 67 077 (2004)
* Violin Concerto: with &quot;Prosperos Beschwörungen&quot;, Op. 53. Andrea Duka Lowenstein (violin), Radio Symphonie Orchester Wien/Gerd Albrecht, ORFEO C 478 981 (1999)

==Works==
Stage
* &quot;Das Wunder der Diana&quot;, op. 18 (1914–1917), ballet after Béla Balázs
* &quot;Die Prinzessin Girnara&quot;, op. 27 (1919–1920), libretto by Jakob Wassermann
* &quot;Persisches Ballett&quot;, op. 30 (1920), ballet after Ellen Tels
* &quot;Achilles auf Skyros&quot;, op. 33 (1921), ballet after Hugo von Hofmannsthal
* &quot;Alkestis&quot;, op. 35 (1924), libretto by Hugo von Hofmannsthal after Euripides
* &quot;Die Nächtlichen: Tanzsinfonien&quot;, op. 37 (1924), Ballet scene after Max Terpis
* &quot;Die Opferung des Gefangenen&quot;, op. 40 (1924–1925), Stage drama after Eduard Stucken
* &quot;Scherz, List und Rache&quot;, op. 41 (1927), libretto after Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
* &quot;Die Bakchantinnen&quot;, op. 44 (1931), libretto by the composer after Euripides, opera in 2 Acts
** Hymne der Agave aus &quot;Die Bakchantinnen&quot;, op. 44, concert edition by Wellesz
* &quot;Incognita&quot;, op. 69 (1950), libretto Elizabeth MacKenzie, based on the novel by William Congreve

Choral
* &quot;Drei gemischte Chöre&quot;, op. 43 (1930), text: Angelus Silesius
* &quot;Fünf kleine Männerchöre&quot;, op. 46 (1932) from &quot;Der fränkische Koran&quot; by Ludwig Derleth
* &quot;Drei geistliche Chöre&quot;, op. 47 (1932) for men&#x27;s chorus based on poems from &quot;Mitte des Lebens&quot; by Rudolf Alexander Schröder
* &quot;Zwei Gesänge&quot;, op. 48 (1932) based on poems from &quot;Mitte des Lebens&quot; by Rudolf Alexander Schröder
* Mass in F minor, op. 51 (1934). Recorded by the choir of Christ Church, Oxford, 2010
* &quot;Quant&#x27;è bella Giovinezza&quot;, op. 59 (1937), for women&#x27;s choir
* &quot;Carol&quot;, op. 62a (1944) for women&#x27;s choir
* &quot;Proprium Missae&quot;, &quot;Laetare&quot;, op. 71 (1953) for choir and organ
* &quot;Kleine Messe&quot; in G major, op. 80a (1958) for three similar voices a capella
* &quot;Alleluia&quot;, op. 80b (1958) for soprano or tenor solo
* &quot;Laus Nocturna&quot;, op. 88 (1962)
* Missa brevis, op. 89 (1963). Recorded by the choir of Christ Church, Oxford, 2010
* &quot;To Sleep&quot;, op. 94 (1965). Recorded by the choir of Christ Church, Oxford, 2010
* &quot;Offertorium in Ascensione Domini&quot; (1965). Recorded by the choir of Christ Church, Oxford, 2010
* &quot;Festliches Präludium&quot;, op. 100 (1966) on a Byzantinium Magnificat for choir and organ

Orchestral
* &quot;Heldensang&quot;, op. 2 (1905), symphonic prologue for large orchestra
* &quot;Vorfrühling&quot; (&#x27;The Dawn of Spring&#x27;), op. 12 (1912), symphonic poem. Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* Suite, op. 16 (1913), for orchestra
* &quot;Mitte des Lebens&quot;, op. 45 (1931–32), cantata for soprano, choir, and orchestra
* Piano Concerto, op. 49 (1933). Recorded by Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra, soloist Margarete Babinsky, 2010
* &quot;Amor Timido&quot;, op. 50 (1933), aria for soprano and small orchestra, text: Pietro Metastasio
* &quot;Prosperos Beschwörungen&quot;, op. 53 (1934–36), five symphonic movements for orchestra after &quot;The Tempest&quot;. Recorded by Radio Symphonie Orchester Wien/Gerd Albrecht.
* &quot;Lied der Welt&quot;, op. 54 (1936–38), for soprano and orchestra. Text: Hugo von Hofmannsthal. Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* &quot;Leben, Traum und Tod&quot;, op. 55 (1936–37), for alto and orchestra. Text: Hugo von Hofmannsthal. Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* &quot;Schönbüheler Messe&quot; in C major, op. 58 (1937), for choir, orchestra, and organ
* Symphony No. 1, op. 62 (1945)
* Symphony No. 2, op. 65 (1947–48), &quot;The English&quot;
* Symphony No. 3, op. 68 (1949–51)
* Symphony No. 4, op. 70 (1951–53), &quot;Austriaca&quot;
* Symphony No. 5, op. 75 (1955–56)
* Violin concerto, op. 84 (1961), dedicated to the violinist Eduard Melkus. Recorded by Andrea Duka Lowenstein in 1999 and David Frühwirth in 2010.
* &quot;Four Songs of Return&quot;, op. 85 (1961), for soprano and chamber orchestra, after texts by Elizabeth Mackenzie
* &quot;Duineser Elegie&quot;, op. 90 (1963) for soprano, choir, and orchestra after Rainer Maria Rilke
* &quot;Ode an die Musik&quot;, op. 92 (1965) for baritone or alto and chamber orchestra, text: Pindar, adapted from Friedrich Hölderlin. Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* Symphony No. 6, op. 95 (1965)
* &quot;Vision&quot; for soprano and orchester, op. 99 (1966), text: Georg Trakl. Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* Mirabile Mysterium, op. 101 (1967) for soloist, choir, and Orchester
* Symphony No. 7, op. 102 (1967–68), &quot;Contra torrentem&quot;
* &quot;Canticum Sapientiae&quot;, op. 104 (1968) for baritone, choir, and orchestra after texts from the Old Testament
* Divertimento, op. 107 (1969), for small orchestra. Recorded by Luzerner Sinfonieorchester/Howard Griffiths, 1999
* Symphonic Epilogue, op. 108 (1969). Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* Symphony No. 8, op. 110 (1970)
* Symphony No. 9, op. 111 (1970–71)

Chamber and instrumental
* &quot;Der Abend&quot;, op. 4 (1909–10), four pieces for piano
* &quot;Drei Skizzen&quot;, op. 6 (1911), for piano. Recorded by Karl-Andreas Kolly, 1999
* &quot;Eklogen&quot;, op. 11, four pieces for piano. Recorded by Karl-Andreas Kolly, 1999
* String Quartet No. 1, op. 14 (1912)
* String Quartet No. 2, op. 20 (1915–16)
* &quot;Idyllen&quot;, op. 21 (1917), five pieces for piano after poems by Stefan George
* &quot;Geistliches Lied&quot;, op. 23 (1918–19) for singing voice, violin, viola, and piano
* String Quartet No. 3, op. 25 (1918). Recorded by Artis Quartett Wien, 2008
* String Quartet No. 4, op. 28 (1920). Recorded by Artis Quartett Wien, 2008
* Sonata for violoncello solo, op. 31 (1920)
* &quot;Zwei Stücke&quot; for clarinet and piano, op. 34 (1922)
* Sonata for violin solo, op. 36 (1923)
* Suite for violin and chamber orchestra, op. 38 (1924)
* &quot;Sonnets from the Portuguese&quot; for soprano and string quartet or string ensemble, op. 52 (1934). Recorded by Deutsches Symphonie-Orchester Berlin, 2004
* Suite for violoncello solo, op. 39 (1924)
* Suite for violin and piano, op. 56 (1937/1957)
* Suite for flute solo, op. 57 (1937)
* String quartet No. 5, op. 60 (1943)
* &quot;The Leaden Echo and the Golden Echo&quot;, cantata for soprano, clarinet, violoncello, piano, op. 61 (1944), text: Gerard Manley Hopkins
* String Quartet No. 6, op. 64 (1946). Recorded by Artis Quartett Wien, 2008
* String Quartet No. 7, op. 66 (1948)
* Octet, op. 67 (1948–49) for clarinet, bassoon, horn, two violins, viola, violoncello, and contrabass
* Sonata for violin solo, op. 72 (1953/59)
* Suite, op. 73 (1954) for flute, oboe, clarinet, horn, and bassoon
* Suite for solo clarinet, op. 74 (1956)
* Suite for solo oboe, op. 76 (1956)
* Suite for solo bassoon, op. 77 (1957)
* &quot;Fanfare&quot; for solo horn, op. 78 (1957)
* String Quartet No. 8, op. 79 (1957). Recorded by Artis Quartett Wien, 2008
* Quintet, op. 81 (1959) for clarinet, 2 violins, viola, and violoncello
* String trio, op. 86 (1962)
* Rhapsody for viola solo, op. 87 (1962)
* &quot;Musik&quot; for string orchestra in one movement, op. 91 (1964)
* &quot;Fünf Miniaturen&quot; for violins and piano, op. 93 (1965)
* &quot;Partita in Honor of Johann Sebastian Bach&quot;, op. 96 (1965) for organ
* String Quartet No. 9, op. 97 (1966)
* &quot;Triptychon&quot;, op. 98, three pieces for piano (1966). Recorded by Karl-Andreas Kolly, 1999
* &quot;Four Pieces&quot; for string quartet, op. 103 (1968)
* &quot;Four Pieces&quot; for string trio, op. 105 (1969, second version 1971)
* &quot;Five Studies in Grey&quot;, op. 106, for piano (1969)
* &quot;Four Pieces&quot; for string quintet, op. 109 (1970)
* Prelude for viola solo, op. 112 (1971)

==Decorations and awards==
* 1953: City of Vienna Prize for Music
* 1957: Commander of the Order of the British Empire
* 1957: Great Silver Medal of the City of Paris
* 1959: Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold for Services to the Republic of Austria
* 1961: Grand Austrian State Prize for Music
* 1961: Order of St. Gregory the Great (Vatican)
* 1971: Foreign Member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts
* 1971: Austrian Decoration for Science and Art
* 1973: Honorary Member of the Society of Friends of Music in Vienna

==Bibliography==
* 
* 

== See also ==
* List of émigré composers in Britain

==References==
==Further reading==
* Hans F. Redlich, &quot;Egon Wellesz&quot;, in: &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot;, XXVI (1940), 65–75.
* Rudolph Reti, &quot;Egon Wellesz, Musician and scholar&quot;, in: &quot;The Musical Quarterly&quot;, XLII (1956), 1–13.
* Robert Scholium, &quot;Egon Wellesz,&quot; in: &quot;Österreichische Komponisten des XX. Jahrhunderts&quot;, vol. 2, Vienna: Elisabeth Lafite 1964.
* Caroline Cepin Benser, &quot;Egon Wellesz (1885–1974): Chronicle of a Twentieth-Century Musician&quot;, New York: P. Lang, 1985 .
* Otto Kolleritsch (ed.), &quot;Egon Wellesz&quot;, Studien zur Wertungsforschung, vol. 17, Graz and Vienna: Universal Edition 1986.
* Lorenz Wedl, &quot;&quot;Die Bacchantinnen&quot; von Egon Wellesz oder das göttliche Wunder&quot;, Wien/Köln/Weimar, Böhlau 1992.
* Harald Kaufmann, &quot;Gespräch mit Egon Wellesz&quot;, in: Harald Kaufmann, &quot;Von innen und außen. Schriften über Musik, Musikleben und Ästhetik&quot;, ed. by Werner Grünzweig and Gottfried Krieger. Wolke: Hofheim, 1993, .
* Knut Eckhardt, &quot;Das Verhältnis von Klangfarbe und Form bei Egon Wellesz&quot;, Göttingen: Edition Re, 1994.
* David Symons, &quot;Egon Wellesz. Composer&quot;, Wilhelmshaven, Florian Noetzel 1996.
* Snowman, Daniel, &quot;The Hitler Emigrés&quot; , Penguin, 2002
* Marcus G. Patka/Michael Haas (eds.): &quot;Hans Gál und Egon Wellesz: Continental Britons. Ausstellung &quot;Continental Britons – Hans Gál und Egon Wellesz des Jüdischen Museums der Stadt Wien vom 25. Februar – 2. Mai 2004&quot; (= &quot;Musik des Aufbruchs&quot;). Im Auftrag des Jüdischen Museums Wien. Vienna: Mandelbaum-Verlag, 2004, .
* Jürgen Maehder, &quot;Das Quiché-Drama »Rabinal Achí«, Brasseur de Bourbourg und das Tanzdrama »Die Opferung des Gefangenen« von Egon Wellesz&quot;, in: Peter Csobádi, Ulrich Müller, et al. (eds.), &quot;Das (Musik)-Theater in Exil und Diktatur und seine Rezeption. Vorträge und Gespräche des Salzburger Symposiums 2003&quot;, Anif/Salzburg: Müller-Speiser 2005, .
* Pietro Massa, &quot;Antikerezeption und musikalische Dramaturgie in »Die Bakchantinnen« von Egon Wellesz&quot;, in: Peter Csobádi, Ulrich Müller et al. (eds.), &quot;Das (Musik)-Theater in Exil und Diktatur und seine Rezeption. Vorträge und Gespräche des Salzburger Symposiums 2003&quot;, Anif/Salzburg: Müller-Speiser 2005, .
* Michael Hass, &quot;Forbidden Music: The Jewish Composers Banned by the Nazis&quot;, Yale University Press, 2013
* Jörg Bierhance, &quot;The Observation of Form: The form analysis method of Constantin Bugeanu in reference to the 1st and 5th Symphonies of Egon Wellesz&quot;, Academia, 2018
* Bojan Bujić: &quot;Arnold Schoenberg and Egon Wellesz: A Fraught Relationship&quot;, Boydell and Brewer, 2020

==External links==
* Klavierkonzert/Violinkonzert, Babinsky (piano), David Frühwirth (violin), Epple (conductor), Egon Wellesz (composer)
* Egon-Wellesz-Fonds at the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, Vienna (also includes a News section with recent performances of Wellesz&#x27; compositions)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213680" start="0" end="19" title="Egon Wellesz" label="Egon Joseph Wellesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="21" end="24" title="CBE" label="CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988727" start="26" end="29" title="Fellow of the British Academy" label="FBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="119" end="131" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090950" start="170" end="185" title="Byzantine music" label="Byzantine music"/>
<link wikidata="" start="284" end="297" title=":de:Schottengasse" label="Schottengasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="440" end="447" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q469544" start="524" end="538" title="History of the Jews in Hungary" label="Hungarian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="561" end="571" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="605" end="615" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="650" end="661" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="1042" end="1062" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154812" start="1379" end="1399" title="Carl Maria von Weber" label="Carl Maria von Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q156435" start="1407" end="1421" title="Der Freischütz" label="Der Freischütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="1447" end="1460" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q209937" start="1468" end="1486" title="Vienna State Opera" label="Vienna State Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="1562" end="1567" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896837" start="1924" end="1937" title="Carl Frühling" label="Carl Frühling"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="1990" end="1997" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="2002" end="2014" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q79173" start="2018" end="2037" title="Eugenie Schwarzwald" label="Eugenie Schwarzwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="2057" end="2074" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Arnold Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="2333" end="2351" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q44323" start="2367" end="2377" title="Adolf Loos" label="Adolf Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q154260" start="2395" end="2410" title="Oskar Kokoschka" label="Oskar Kokoschka"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="2779" end="2789" title="musicology" label="musicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q78716" start="2795" end="2806" title="Guido Adler" label="Guido Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257900" start="2971" end="3007" title="Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich" label="Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="3330" end="3343" title="Baroque opera" label="Baroque opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q700798" start="3376" end="3390" title="Giuseppe Bonno" label="Giuseppe Bonno"/>
<link wikidata="Q311378" start="3475" end="3492" title="Johann Joseph Fux" label="Johann Joseph Fux"/>
<link wikidata="Q113809" start="4155" end="4172" title="Josef Strzygowski" label="Josef Strzygowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553339" start="4731" end="4736" title="chant" label="chant"/>
<link wikidata="Q569779" start="5099" end="5116" title="Universal Edition" label="Universal Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q78475" start="5124" end="5128" title="Alban Berg" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q190933" start="5132" end="5138" title="Anton Webern" label="Webern"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="5597" end="5618" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60369" start="5623" end="5639" title="Jakob Wassermann" label="Jakob Wassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q28152231" start="5694" end="5711" title="Die Bakchantinnen" label="Die Bakchantinnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="5894" end="5912" title="Claudio Monteverdi" label="Claudio Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130759" start="5917" end="5942" title="Christoph Willibald Gluck" label="Christoph Willibald Gluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q214322" start="5973" end="5985" title="Rudolph Reti" label="Rudolph Reti"/>
<link wikidata="Q695546" start="6225" end="6269" title="International Society for Contemporary Music" label="International Society for Contemporary Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292053" start="6343" end="6357" title="Edward Joseph Dent" label="Edward J. Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="6634" end="6643" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="6853" end="6862" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="6890" end="6899" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="7035" end="7046" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q156910" start="7067" end="7079" title="Bruno Walter" label="Bruno Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="7121" end="7153" title="Grove&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of Music" label="Grove&amp;#x27;s Dictionary of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="7179" end="7187" title="internment" label="interned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341127" start="7194" end="7205" title="enemy alien" label="enemy alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201125" start="7221" end="7236" title="Hutchinson Internment Camp" label="Hutchinson Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="7244" end="7255" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="7338" end="7360" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228008" start="7365" end="7377" title="H. C. Colles" label="H. C. Colles"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="7425" end="7434" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="7696" end="7717" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8092" end="8109" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q81153" start="8144" end="8167" title="Lincoln College, Oxford" label="Lincoln College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q30143625" start="8230" end="8246" title="Herbert Chappell" label="Herbert Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q52822964" start="8248" end="8261" title="Martin Cooper (musicologist)" label="Martin Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444653" start="8263" end="8281" title="Kunihiko Hashimoto" label="Kunihiko Hashimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632204" start="8283" end="8295" title="Spike Hughes" label="Spike Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498371" start="8297" end="8310" title="Frederick May (composer)" label="Frederick May"/>
<link wikidata="Q378785" start="8312" end="8327" title="Wilfrid Mellers" label="Wilfrid Mellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989587" start="8329" end="8342" title="Nigel Osborne" label="Nigel Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q924162" start="8347" end="8363" title="Peter Sculthorpe" label="Peter Sculthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27988727" start="8382" end="8411" title="Fellow of the British Academy" label="Fellow of the British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15619222" start="8456" end="8466" title="Jean Cooke" label="Jean Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q154260" start="8580" end="8595" title="Oskar Kokoschka" label="Oskar Kokoschka"/>
<link wikidata="Q240744" start="8708" end="8723" title="Zentralfriedhof" label="Zentralfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q385271" start="8893" end="8904" title="opus number" label="opus number"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402205" start="9190" end="9203" title="Robert Layton (musicologist)" label="Robert Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="9450" end="9460" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="9484" end="9498" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="9933" end="9939" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q158436" start="10235" end="10247" title="Ernst Krenek" label="Ernst Krenek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="10284" end="10289" title="tonality" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="10426" end="10437" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Brucknerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q507246" start="10644" end="10650" title="serialism" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q192822" start="10695" end="10703" title="tonality" label="tonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q154770" start="10763" end="10773" title="Arnold Schoenberg" label="Schoenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q613707" start="10781" end="10794" title="Expressionist music" label="Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426218" start="10850" end="10856" title="Modernism (music)" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="10884" end="10890" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="11213" end="11222" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942368" start="11350" end="11365" title="Music of the Future" label="infinite melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="11407" end="11438" title="Symphonic poem" label="dissolved, amorphous structures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11530" end="11543" title="Opera#Baroque era" label="Baroque opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q695491" start="11676" end="11707" title="Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Vienna Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q469963" start="13482" end="13493" title="Béla Balázs" label="Béla Balázs"/>
<link wikidata="Q104864051" start="13502" end="13524" title="Die Prinzessin Girnara" label="Die Prinzessin Girnara"/>
<link wikidata="Q60369" start="13564" end="13580" title="Jakob Wassermann" label="Jakob Wassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="13717" end="13738" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="13818" end="13827" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q21040197" start="13908" end="13918" title="Max Terpis" label="Max Terpis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862034" start="13927" end="13954" title="Die Opferung des Gefangenen" label="Die Opferung des Gefangenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="14083" end="14109" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28152231" start="14118" end="14135" title="Die Bakchantinnen" label="Die Bakchantinnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="14397" end="14413" title="William Congreve" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q60469" start="14479" end="14495" title="Angelus Silesius" label="Angelus Silesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q104136" start="14590" end="14604" title="Ludwig Derleth" label="Ludwig Derleth"/>
<link wikidata="Q76332" start="14730" end="14755" title="Rudolf Alexander Schröder" label="Rudolf Alexander Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q76332" start="14850" end="14875" title="Rudolf Alexander Schröder" label="Rudolf Alexander Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q29473" start="16335" end="16352" title="Pietro Metastasio" label="Pietro Metastasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q86440" start="16461" end="16472" title="The Tempest" label="The Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q51513" start="16618" end="16639" title="Hugo von Hofmannsthal" label="Hugo von Hofmannsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84897" start="17231" end="17244" title="Eduard Melkus" label="Eduard Melkus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76483" start="17524" end="17542" title="Rainer Maria Rilke" label="Rainer Maria Rilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="17639" end="17645" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="17660" end="17679" title="Friedrich Hölderlin" label="Friedrich Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78476" start="17837" end="17848" title="Georg Trakl" label="Georg Trakl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="18148" end="18161" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q57187" start="18864" end="18877" title="Stefan George" label="Stefan George"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="19713" end="19720" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="19785" end="19806" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="21281" end="21308" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q94044" start="21365" end="21439" title="Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold for Services to the Republic of Austria" label="Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold for Services to the Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q304386" start="21448" end="21484" title="Grand Austrian State Prize for Music" label="Grand Austrian State Prize for Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q946960" start="21493" end="21523" title="Order of St. Gregory the Great" label="Order of St. Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132636" start="21564" end="21600" title="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q306590" start="21609" end="21648" title="Austrian Decoration for Science and Art" label="Austrian Decoration for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q694323" start="21680" end="21717" title="Society of Friends of Music in Vienna" label="Society of Friends of Music in Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752902" start="21760" end="21795" title="List of émigré composers who came to live and work in Britain" label="List of émigré composers in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q20752641" start="22771" end="22787" title="Werner Grünzweig" label="Werner Grünzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q213815" start="23150" end="23158" title="Hans Gál" label="Hans Gál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493977" start="23450" end="23464" title="Jürgen Maehder" label="Jürgen Maehder"/>
<link wikidata="Q50258421" start="24618" end="24633" title="David Frühwirth" label="David Frühwirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q694323" start="24715" end="24744" title="Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde" label="Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141489" wikidata="Q235243" url="?curid=1141489" title="Melanie Thornton">
<text>Melanie Janene Thornton (May 13, 1967 – November 24, 2001) was an American pop and dance music singer. She was the lead singer of the Eurodance group La Bouche from 1994 to 1999, alongside American rapper and backing vocalist Lane McCray. Their two most successful singles, &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; and &quot;Be My Lover&quot;, were released in 1994 and 1995 respectively. After leaving the group, Thornton began a solo career and found success, primarily in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland before her death in November 2001. Her solo songs include &quot;Love How You Love Me&quot;, &quot;Heartbeat&quot;, &quot;Makin&#x27; Oooh Oooh (Talking About Love)&quot; and &quot;Wonderful Dream (Holidays are Coming)&quot;.

On the night of November 24, 2001, shortly after her final performance in Leipzig, Thornton was among the 24 people that died in the crash of Swiss airline&#x27;s Crossair Flight 3597 in Bassersdorf, Switzerland.

==Early life==
Melanie Janene Thornton was born in Charleston, South Carolina and began studying voice from the age of six, as well as learning to play the piano and the clarinet. Inspired by singers whom she idolized and grew up listening to such as Aretha Franklin and Roberta Flack, Thornton would mimic the female vocalists she watched on television and/or heard on radio. Later on, she financed her college studies with appearances in talent shows and smaller band concerts. Throughout that period, she frequented a club called The Peacock Lounge, getting up and doing jam sessions when the live band invited people up to sing.

==Career==
===1991–1994: Career beginnings===
She had long dreamt of a career in music and in February 1991, Thornton went to Germany. Her sister lived there with her U.S. Army husband and Thornton had dual citizenship in Germany and the United States. Her uncle, Bob Chisolm, a singer and piano player, encouraged her to give the German nightclub circuit a try. She had been singing in a Macon, Ga., band, Danger Zone, pulling down $50 on a good night. However, Bob Chisolm told her that on a bad night in Germany she would make $150. Thornton provided guest vocals for a lot of dance projects on their single releases, such as Orange Blue&#x27;s &quot;If You Wanna Be (My Only)&quot;, Comic&#x27;s &quot;I Surrender to Your Love&quot;, 100%&#x27;s &quot;Power of the Light&quot;, Trance-Vision&#x27;s &quot;Take Me 2 Heaven 2 Nite&quot; or Men Behind&#x27;s &quot;Feel the life&quot; and &quot;How Can I.&quot;

===1994–1999: La Bouche and &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot;===

Thornton tried it and soon found work in studios recording demos. It was her recording of the song &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; that caught the attention of producer Frank Farian, the mastermind of the infamous 1980s duo Milli Vanilli. Farian took her under his wing, teaming her with rapper Lane McCray in the duo La Bouche, which is French for &quot;The Mouth&quot;. La Bouche went on to become one of the biggest Eurodance groups of the 1990s, with a string of hits, worldwide. They released two studio albums &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot; and &quot;S.O.S.&quot;, with &quot;A Moment of Love&quot; being the European version of &quot;S.O.S.&quot;, the remix album &quot;All Mixed Up&quot; followed by a string of hits like &quot;Sweet Dreams (Ola Ola E)&quot;, &quot;Be My Lover&quot;, &quot;Fallin&#x27; in Love&quot;, &quot;I Love to Love&quot;, &quot;Bolingo (Love is in the Air)&quot;, &quot;You Won&#x27;t Forget Me&quot; or &quot;S.O.S.&quot; In February 1999, she would leave La Bouche to be replaced by Natascha Wright as the new front-woman. Next to La Bouche, Thornton continued providing guest vocals on singles such as Orange Blue&#x27;s &quot;Sunshine of My Life&quot; and &quot;Runaway&quot;, 100%&#x27;s &quot;The Way It Is&quot; and on Le Click&#x27;s U.S. chart debut &quot;Tonight is the Night&quot; in 1995.

===2000–2001: &quot;Ready to Fly&quot;===
She signed a record deal with Sony/Epic Records. Her first solo single was released in November 2000, titled &quot;Love How You Love Me&quot;, a ballad (the CD-maxi includes a few dance remixes). Thornton presented her new single on November 29, 2000, on the RTL Spendenmarathon, and on December 1 at the Dome in Berlin. The follow-up singles were &quot;Heartbeat&quot; in March 2001, and &quot;Makin&#x27; Oooh Oooh (Talking About Love)&quot; in September 2001. On May 7, 2001, Thornton released her first (and only) solo album entitled &quot;Ready to Fly&quot; under the label X-Cell, distributed by Sony/Epic Records. The album featured a mixture of soul and dance tracks that showed off her powerful voice. There was also a special edition of the album released later on November 26, 2001, featuring some remix bonus tracks and bonus songs such as the single &quot;Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)&quot;. Thornton continued to do club appearances in the United States under the billing &quot;Melanie Thornton, formerly of La Bouche&quot;. She was featured on Joy-Lab&#x27;s single release &quot;Freedom (Free Your Mind)&quot; in 2001.

==Death==

On November 24, 2001, Thornton and the German-Dutch Eurodance Trio Passion Fruit performed in Leipzig for the Christmas Coca-Cola tour, and 2 hours later they took the flight from Berlin to Zürich, Switzerland on Crossair Flight #3597 for an upcoming night club performance and TV appearances (among others, the broadcast &quot;Die Bar&quot; on TV3, which were cancelled after the crash). During the flights final moments the flight captain, Hans Lutz descended the plane too early to spot the run way at Zürich Airport and the plane crashed into a hill in a local forest in the town of Bassersdorf, Switzerland.

Thornton was among the 24 passengers that died in the crash at the age of 34 years old. 2 members from Passion Fruit, Maria Serrano Serrano and Nathalie van het Ende also died in the crash, while 1 member, Debby St. Maarten was among the 9 survivors.

A memorial service for Thornton was held at the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church in Berlin on November 30, where German singer Sarah Connor sang &quot;Love How You Love Me&quot;. Thornton was buried at Mount Pleasant Memorial Gardens, in Mount Pleasant, Charleston County, South Carolina.

===Aftermath and posthumous releases===
Although Thornton&#x27;s death occurred on the eve of the Christmas season, Coca-Cola decided to air the commercial featuring Thornton&#x27;s &quot;Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)&quot; as planned. The original commercial has aired in Germany every year since 2001 around Christmas time, and the song has been in the German single charts every year since. It has also aired in several other countries. On November 25, 2002, the single &quot;In Your Life&quot; by La Bouche with Thornton, returning posthumously on lead vocals, was released to commemorate the first anniversary of her death. Included is an &quot;in memory&quot; dedication from Lane McCray and SonyBmg/X-Cell Records. The single has been included in the first La Bouche &quot;Best of&quot; compilation (Credited as &quot;La Bouche feat. Melanie Thornton&quot;) on May 21, 2002. On December 1, 2003, another remix compilation called &quot;Memories – Her Most Beautiful Ballads&quot; was released containing her ballads and songs in acoustic ballad versions. On April 2, 2007, the second La Bouche compilation &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; was released.

==Discography==
===Studio albums===
===Compilation albums===
* 1996: &quot;All Mixed Up&quot; Album) (December 16, 1996)
* 2002: &quot;Best of&quot; 
* 2003: &quot;Memories – Her Most Beautiful Ballads&quot; 
* 2007: &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; 

===Singles===
=== Singles (as featured artist) ===
* 1993: &quot;Feel the Life&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;If You Wanna Be (My Only)&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;I Surrender to Your Love&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;Power of the Light&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;Take Me 2 Heaven 2 Nite&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;How Can I&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;Nobody&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;Tonight Is the Night&quot; 
* 1994: &quot;Freedom (Free Your Mind)&quot; 
* 1995: &quot;Skate with me&quot; 

==References==
==Literature==
* Lois Chisolm: &quot;Sweet Dreams Fulfilled: The Melanie Thornton Story&quot;. Lois Thornton Chisolm, 2012.

==External links==

* Melanie Thornton Youth Arts Foundation teaching children creative arts
* Dance artist info page on the singer
* English/German Melanie Thornton &amp; La Bouche Website
* Image page featuring stills from her final concerts, in German</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235243" start="0" end="23" title="Melanie Thornton" label="Melanie Janene Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="83" end="94" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="134" end="143" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="150" end="159" title="La Bouche" label="La Bouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485423" start="226" end="237" title="Lane McCray" label="Lane McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978775" start="280" end="292" title="Sweet Dreams (La Bouche song)" label="Sweet Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750724" start="309" end="320" title="Be My Lover (La Bouche song)" label="Be My Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370847" start="673" end="710" title="Wonderful Dream (Holidays are Coming)" label="Wonderful Dream (Holidays are Coming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="793" end="800" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q569392" start="882" end="902" title="Crossair Flight 3597" label="Crossair Flight 3597"/>
<link wikidata="Q69734" start="906" end="917" title="Bassersdorf" label="Bassersdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="984" end="1010" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="1184" end="1199" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231484" start="1204" end="1217" title="Roberta Flack" label="Roberta Flack"/>
<link wikidata="Q62437" start="2700" end="2712" title="Frank Farian" label="Frank Farian"/>
<link wikidata="Q850540" start="2755" end="2768" title="Milli Vanilli" label="Milli Vanilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485423" start="2826" end="2837" title="Lane McCray" label="Lane McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q572077" start="2849" end="2858" title="La Bouche" label="La Bouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="2950" end="2959" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416419" start="3784" end="3792" title="Le Click" label="Le Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="3932" end="3936" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="3937" end="3949" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852145" start="4446" end="4458" title="Ready to Fly (Melanie Thornton album)" label="Ready to Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968481" start="5125" end="5138" title="Passion Fruit (group)" label="Passion Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="5152" end="5159" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="5238" end="5244" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="5248" end="5254" title="Zurich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="5256" end="5267" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q569392" start="5271" end="5292" title="Crossair Flight 3597" label="Crossair Flight #3597"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367403" start="5403" end="5406" title="TV3 (Swiss TV channel)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114" start="5563" end="5577" title="Zurich Airport" label="Zürich Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q69734" start="5645" end="5670" title="Bassersdorf" label="Bassersdorf, Switzerland."/>
<link wikidata="Q153951" start="5972" end="6002" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010216" start="6160" end="6174" title="Mount Pleasant, South Carolina" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181015" start="6176" end="6209" title="Charleston County, South Carolina" label="Charleston County, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="7000" end="7007" title="Best of" label="Best of"/>
<link wikidata="Q723849" start="7338" end="7351" title="Greatest Hits" label="Greatest Hits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141491" wikidata="Q738746" url="?curid=1141491" title="Slættaratindur">
<text>Slættaratindur (English: &quot;Flat peak&quot;) is the highest mountain in the Faroe Islands, at an elevation of 880 metres. It is located in the northern part of Eysturoy, between the villages of Eiði, Gjógv, and Funningur. Funningur lies at the foot of the mountain, however, the summit is not visible from the village.

Its name means &quot;flat summit&quot;. It can be climbed in about four hours, and although the routes are steep, technical climbing skills are not necessary to reach the summit. In clear weather, the summit gives views over the entire archipelago. Slættaratindur is one of ten mountains in the Faroe Islands which rise to over 800 m above sea level. Gráfelli, the second-highest peak at 856 m, lies just to the north-east of Slættaratindur.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q738746" start="0" end="14" title="Slættaratindur" label="Slættaratindur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16" end="23" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="63" end="71" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="79" end="92" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q200939" start="163" end="171" title="Eysturoy" label="Eysturoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691775" start="197" end="201" title="Eiði" label="Eiði"/>
<link wikidata="Q939708" start="203" end="208" title="Gjógv" label="Gjógv"/>
<link wikidata="Q585236" start="214" end="223" title="Funningur" label="Funningur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="559" end="570" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="663" end="672" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028361" start="674" end="682" title="Gráfelli" label="Gráfelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141494" wikidata="Q350785" url="?curid=1141494" title="Salif Diao">
<text>Salif Alassane Diao (born 10 February 1977) is a Senegalese former professional footballer who played as a defensive midfielder.

Diao moved from Senegal to France when he was seventeen and started his career at Monaco, with whom he helped with the Trophée des Champions and Division 1. He failed to hold down a regular place at Monaco and moved to Sedan in 2000. Diao then had an impressive 2002 World Cup with Senegal, which attracted the attention of several Premier League sides. It was Liverpool who won the race and signed Diao for £5 million in 2002.

His time at Liverpool was unsuccessful and he was sent out on loan to Birmingham City, Portsmouth and Stoke City. He joined the latter Stoke permanently on a free transfer in 2007 and helped the club to promotion to the Premier League in 2008.

==Career==
===Monaco===
Diao was born in Kédougou, Tambacounda Region. He began his career in his native country before moving to France at the age of seventeen. He begin his professional career playing for Monaco in 1996, but did not feature for the club at all in the 1996–1997 season and was loaned out the Ligue 2 side Épinal, where he played two matches for the club. He returned to Monaco for the 1997–98 season, where he played 12 times in his second season at the club. He was also part of the Monaco side that won Division 1 in the 1999–2000 season. He also won a runner-up medal in the 2002 African Cup of Nations, where Senegal lost in extra time to Cameroon.

===Sedan Ardennes===
In 2001, he signed for Sedan. He played 32 games in all competitions in his first season at Sedan in the 2001–02 season, including three matches in the UEFA Cup. He made his first start of the on 28 July 2001 in their 1–1 draw away at Bastia. He made 22 appearances for Sedan in his second season at the club, with an extra two games in the UEFA Cup. His last game for Sedan came in their 1–1 draw with Lorient on 6 April 2002, before joining English club Liverpool.

===Liverpool===
He was signed by former Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier from French club Sedan for £5 million (€7.5m) just before the 2002 World Cup in South Korea and Japan. He helped Senegal reach the quarter-finals, most notably in scoring a memorable goal against Denmark in the first round, although he was subsequently red-carded.

At the club, he tended to be used out of position by Houllier, often played at centre back or full back, and as a result never had the chance to demonstrate whether he was capable of playing a central midfield role for the club, although the evidence did suggest he was somewhat out of his depth. His first Liverpool goal came against Spartak Moscow in the Champions League. He scored a total of three goals, only one coming in the league, in a 1–0 win at Leeds United in October 2002. He was left out of Liverpool&#x27;s squad for the victorious 2003 Football League Cup Final despite playing often in the earlier rounds, including the semi-final first leg against Sheffield United.

Diao was played in his correct position by Rafa Benítez, but several poor displays saw him displaced by Xabi Alonso, notably after a 4–2 win at Fulham. Liverpool were 2–0 down when Diao was substituted; he had been at fault for one of the goals Fulham scored whilst attempting a bizarre back heel. Despite not having featured for months, Diao was present in Istanbul when Liverpool won the Champions League in 2005. He appeared only once in the campaign, coming on as a substitute away at Olympiacos in the group stage. It was during the 2004–05 season that Diao scored his last Liverpool goal against Millwall in the League Cup; he played his last game for Liverpool at Norwich City in January 2005.

In January 2005, Birmingham City took Diao, who had struggled to make Liverpool&#x27;s first team, on loan for the rest of the season, but he had his spell at Birmingham ended by injury almost immediately. The arrival of Rafael Benítez and defensive midfielder Mohamed Sissoko signalled the end of his Liverpool career. Although Sissoko was branded the &quot;new Vieira&quot; by Benítez, Diao had received this same tag from Houllier upon his arrival at Liverpool.

Diao was not issued a squad number by Liverpool for the 2005–06 season, with his number 15 being given to new signing Peter Crouch. He joined Portsmouth in August 2005 on a season-long loan, but spent much of the season out injured. At the end of the season, Pompey manager Harry Redknapp decided not to take up the option to sign him permanently because of his injury-proneness. In July 2006, Diao was taken on trial by Premiership side Charlton Athletic. He failed a medical at the club, thus ending his chances of signing.

===Stoke City===
On 10 October 2006, Diao joined Stoke City on loan. He made his debut for Stoke four days later in a 4–0 win away at Leeds United. He became a consistent player for Stoke, holding the team together, slowing down the tempo and speed of the game. It is thought that the revival of Stoke City during the 2006–07 season was in a large part due to Diao&#x27;s hard-working performances. On 25 January 2007, his contract at Stoke was extended until the end of the season. At the end of the 2006–07 season, Diao was released by Liverpool and was expected to sign for Stoke, but did not sign a deal with the club because he was worried about his fitness levels.

He eventually signed permanently for Stoke on a one-and-a-half-year deal in December 2007.
Diao put in some decent performances for Stoke, including games against former club Liverpool and man of the match performances against Chelsea and Sunderland. In June 2009, he was offered a new one-year contract to stay at the Britannia Stadium, which he accepted. He scored his first goal for the club in an away win at Portsmouth in February 2010. It was only Diao&#x27;s second ever league goal, with his first coming six years before.

Diao left Stoke after he rejected a new contract, which would have given a joint role as a club ambassador and player. However, Diao changed his mind and agreed to sign a new contract with Stoke. During the 2010–11 season, Diao played eleven times for Stoke and was an unused substitute in the 2011 FA Cup Final. In the 2011–12 season, Diao was used sparingly by Pulis, with Diao playing mostly in the UEFA Europa League; he left the club at the end of the 2011–12 season, after turning down a coaching role.

==International career==
Diao has appeared 39 times for Senegal, scoring four goals in the process since 2000, including a strike against Denmark at the 2002 FIFA World Cup after a series of quick passes by his teammates to set him up. He was later sent off in the same match for a high tackle. Diao was in the Senegal squad that went to the 2002 African Cup of Nations where Senegal finished second after losing in the final to Cameroon and was part of the Senegal side that went to the 2004 African Cup of Nations.

He was also in the side that reached the quarter-finals of the 2002 FIFA World Cup and played games including their 1–0 win over then current champions France, as well as scoring in their 1–1 draw with Denmark before being sent off which meant he missed their next two games but returned for their quarter final exit to Turkey. He has also been involved in Senegal&#x27;s qualification campaigns for the past three World Cups in 2002, 2006 and 2010. After Senegal failed to qualify for the 2010 World Cup Senegal fans went on a rampage, Diao, along with Stoke City team-mates Abdoulaye Faye and Ibrahima Sonko, were caught up in crowd trouble in Dakar.

==Personal life==
Diao a founder of non-profit organisation, Sport4Charity. He is also involved with Caap-Afrika.

==Post-retirement==
In 2015, Diao began taking his coaching badges, working at the Liverpool Academy while doing so.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Senegal&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Diao goal&quot;.

==Honours==
===Club===
:Source:

Monaco
*Division 1: 1999–2000
*Trophée des Champions: 1997–98

Liverpool
*Football League Cup: 2002–03

Stoke City
*Football League Championship runner-up: 2007–08
*FA Cup runner-up: 2010–11

===National===
Senegal
*Africa Cup of Nations runner-up:2002

==References==
==External links==
*Player profile at LFChistory.net
*Premier League profile of Salif Diao
*BBC Profile of Salif Diao</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350785" start="0" end="19" title="Salif Diao" label="Salif Alassane Diao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="80" end="90" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="107" end="127" title="defensive midfielder" label="defensive midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="212" end="218" title="AS Monaco FC" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q653544" start="249" end="270" title="Trophée des Champions" label="Trophée des Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="275" end="285" title="Ligue 1" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q608988" start="349" end="354" title="CS Sedan Ardennes" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="392" end="406" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207441" start="412" end="419" title="Senegal national football team" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="462" end="476" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="491" end="500" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="629" end="644" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="646" end="656" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="661" end="671" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q586498" start="845" end="853" title="Kédougou" label="Kédougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q848554" start="855" end="873" title="Tambacounda Region" label="Tambacounda Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="1011" end="1017" title="AS Monaco FC" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573797" start="1127" end="1133" title="SAS Épinal" label="Épinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="1327" end="1337" title="Ligue 1" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q725800" start="1400" end="1427" title="2002 African Cup of Nations" label="2002 African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q175309" start="1465" end="1473" title="Cameroon national football team" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q608988" start="1520" end="1525" title="CS Sedan Ardennes" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1649" end="1657" title="UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q208399" start="1732" end="1738" title="SC Bastia" label="Bastia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48911" start="1900" end="1907" title="FC Lorient" label="Lorient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="1953" end="1962" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q295615" start="2023" end="2038" title="Gérard Houllier" label="Gérard Houllier"/>
<link wikidata="Q608988" start="2056" end="2061" title="CS Sedan Ardennes" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="2101" end="2115" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207441" start="2152" end="2159" title="Senegal national football team" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="2235" end="2242" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="2384" end="2395" title="centre back" label="centre back"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="2399" end="2408" title="Fullback (association football)" label="full back"/>
<link wikidata="Q29112" start="2640" end="2654" title="FC Spartak Moscow" label="Spartak Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="2761" end="2773" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612536" start="2852" end="2882" title="2003 Football League Cup Final" label="2003 Football League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="2971" end="2987" title="Sheffield United" label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="3033" end="3045" title="Rafa Benítez" label="Rafa Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q208104" start="3094" end="3105" title="Xabi Alonso" label="Xabi Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="3134" end="3140" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="3348" end="3356" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q19628" start="3479" end="3489" title="Olympiacos F.C." label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="3592" end="3600" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="3608" end="3618" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="3661" end="3673" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="3709" end="3724" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="3913" end="3927" title="Rafael Benítez" label="Rafael Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q216557" start="3953" end="3968" title="Mohamed Sissoko" label="Mohamed Sissoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q46347" start="4055" end="4061" title="Patrick Vieira" label="Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q180939" start="4276" end="4288" title="Peter Crouch" label="Peter Crouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="4300" end="4310" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="4432" end="4446" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="4596" end="4613" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="4734" end="4744" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="4819" end="4831" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="5532" end="5541" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="5584" end="5591" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="5596" end="5606" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q500922" start="5676" end="5693" title="Britannia Stadium" label="Britannia Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="5770" end="5780" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q686677" start="6096" end="6110" title="2010–11 Stoke City F.C. season" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976901" start="6183" end="6200" title="2011 FA Cup Final" label="2011 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624259" start="6209" end="6223" title="2011–12 Stoke City F.C. season" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="6291" end="6309" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624259" start="6346" end="6353" title="2011–12 Stoke City F.C. season" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="6537" end="6544" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="6552" end="6571" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q725800" start="6741" end="6768" title="2002 African Cup of Nations" label="2002 African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q588183" start="6887" end="6914" title="2004 African Cup of Nations" label="2004 African Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="6980" end="6999" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="7069" end="7075" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="7119" end="7126" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q483856" start="7237" end="7243" title="Turkey national football team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q308394" start="7493" end="7507" title="Abdoulaye Faye" label="Abdoulaye Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q523818" start="7512" end="7526" title="Ibrahima Sonko" label="Ibrahima Sonko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="7563" end="7568" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380229" start="7769" end="7786" title="Liverpool F.C. Reserves and Academy" label="Liverpool Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="8021" end="8031" title="Ligue 1" label="Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231109" start="8033" end="8042" title="1999–2000 French Division 1" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q653544" start="8044" end="8065" title="Trophée des Champions" label="Trophée des Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="8087" end="8106" title="EFL Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747836" start="8108" end="8115" title="2002–03 Football League Cup" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="8129" end="8157" title="EFL Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q949944" start="8169" end="8176" title="2007–08 Football League Championship" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="8178" end="8184" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190245" start="8196" end="8203" title="2010–11 FA Cup" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="8229" end="8250" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q725800" start="8261" end="8265" title="2002 Africa Cup of Nations" label="2002"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141495" wikidata="Q699016" url="?curid=1141495" title="Maxx (group)">
<text>Maxx is a German Eurodance project that was internationally successful in the mid-90s with the hit singles &quot;Get-A-Way&quot;, &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand It)&quot; and &quot;You Can Get It&quot;. The name &#x27;Maxx&#x27; is a special acronym for Maximum Xstasy.

==History==
===Group origins (1993)===

The Maxx project was the result of the successful but short-lived collaboration between German record producer Juergen Wind (J. Wind) and German music executive David Brunner. After teaming together to release &quot;Another Night&quot; by M.C. Sar &amp; The Real McCoy under Hansa Records/BMG Berlin, Wind and Brunner began collaborating with British songwriter Bruce Hammond Earlam (from Bruce &amp; Bongo) to develop the debut Maxx single &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; under the record label Blow Up/Intercord. Earlam wrote the raggamuffin rap lyrics for the new single while simultaneously teaching Maxx rapper Boris Köhler how to rap in the raggamuffin style. Due to his contractual issues with EMI, he had to write for the project without being publicly credited. For promotional purposes, Köhler received Earlam&#x27;s songwriting credits. Wind produced the music and wrote the chorus lyrics with his co-producer Frank Hassas. Brunner handled the marketing and promotion of the music and was credited as the Executive Producer. Each team member shared song credits equally. They also used aliases to keep themselves anonymous and to avoid problems with Hansa Records/BMG Berlin. Wind was &quot;George Torpey&quot;, Brunner was &quot;The Hitman&quot;, Hassas was &quot;Dakota O&#x27;niel&quot;, Köhler was &quot;Gary Bokoe&quot; and Real McCoy rapper Olaf Jeglitza was &quot;Dawhite&quot;. Jeglitza had been falsely tied to the project due to his heavy involvement as a shareholder and as a team member in Wind&#x27;s production company Freshline Records. In reality, he had no involvement in the production or songwriting of Maxx. The production team name &quot;The Movement&quot; was used in the song credits.

===Success with &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; and &quot;No More&quot; (1994)===

The debut Maxx single &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; featured vocals from Köhler and session singer Samira Besic. Due to unknown circumstances, Besic departed the project before filming could begin on the music video for the single. A dancer and model named Eliz Yavuz (Alice Montana) was quickly hired to take Besic&#x27;s place and mime her vocals for the video. In the early stages of the promotion for the single, Yavuz and Köhler were featured together in the early press materials for Maxx. Yavuz was also briefly advertised as the voice behind the single. When released on 27 October 1993 in Germany, &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; became an overnight success in the country reaching No. 11 on the charts and remaining there for over 26 weeks. It later earned Gold status in Germany for selling over 250,000 units.&lt;ref name=&quot;Gold/Platin-Datenbank&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The single was also a major success in neighbouring countries like Austria where it reached No. 3 and in Switzerland where it reached No. 8. In the United Kingdom, &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; had reached No. 4 on the charts and had later earned Silver status in the country for selling over 200,000 units. The single was reached No. 8 in Ireland. Thanks to the promotional efforts of Remixed Records, the single was an even bigger success in Scandinavia. In Sweden, it charted at No. 3, in Denmark at No. 4, Finland at No. 5, and Norway at No. 8. &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; was also a success in Belgium, The Netherlands and France. The single also managed to peak at No.11 on the Eurochart Hot 100.

After an intense search in Germany for a singer, British singer Linda Meek was discovered early in 1994. After joining the project as the new lead singer, she immediately began performing live shows with Köhler in Europe as Maxx. She then recorded vocals for the follow-up single &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand It)&quot; with Köhler in Germany. The new single was officially released on 1 March 1994 and was a big success like its predecessor reaching No. 10 in Germany and the Top 5 in over 18 countries. The success of both singles lead to three recurring appearances on &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; in the United Kingdom and performances on other major music chart shows like &quot;Dance Machine&quot; in France, &quot;Superclassifica Show&quot; in Italy and other televised MTV specials in Europe. By mid-1994, &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; had sold over 1.1 million units across Europe. While Meek didn&#x27;t originally sing vocals on &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; or appear in the music video for that single, she became associated with the single by the media due to her continuously performing the song live in concert with Köhler. Meek was also featured in various German language pop culture/teen magazines alongside Köhler. In the magazine &quot;BRAVO&quot;, she was referred to as &quot;Die Stimme von Maxx: Garys neue Partnerin ist Die&quot; &quot;Engländerin Linda Meek&quot; (&quot;The Voice of Maxx: Gary&#x27;s New Partner Is the Englishwoman Linda Meek&quot;).

Following the success of the two Maxx hits, Wind, Hassas and Earlam immediately began work on the debut Maxx album &quot;To the Maxximum&quot;. A total of thirteen new music tracks were produced for the new album. Wind and Hassas were also simultaneously producing the album &quot;Space Invaders&quot;, the sophomore album of M.C. Sar &amp; The Real McCoy. &quot;To the Maxximum&quot; was officially released on 16 June 1994 and had reached No. 22 on the German charts. The album was also a major success in Scandinavia, reaching No.10 in Sweden and No. 6 in Finland. While the album was a commercial success in Europe, it did not match the huge commercial sales of the first two singles. The album reached No. 66 in the United Kingdom.

The Maxx album track &quot;You Can Get It&quot; was then picked to be the third single and was released in September 1994. The single reached No. 21 in the UK and No.13 in Finland. &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; had then peaked at No. 3 on the Canadian dance/urban chart and &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand It)&quot; at No. 4. While still commercially successful in Europe, &quot;You Can Get It&quot; did not reach the same level of success as &quot;Get-A-Way&quot; and &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand it).&quot; On 31 October 1994, a new Maxx song titled &quot;Power of Love&quot; was released exclusively on a Bravo Hits compilation music CD called &quot;Bravo Dance X-Mas&quot;.

===Decline and hiatus (1995)===
The Maxx album track &quot;I Can Make You Feel Like&quot; had been selected to be the fourth single release in May 1995. The single only managed to chart in the United Kingdom peaking at No. 56. The fifth and final Maxx single, &quot;Move Your Body&quot; was released in October 1995. The single heavily sampled the hit song &quot;I Like to Move It&quot; by Reel 2 Real featuring The Mad Stuntman. The single only charted in Austria at No. 18 and in Finland at No.16. A music video for &quot;Move Your Body&quot; was filmed starring Meek and Köhler. The duo also performed the single live on ZDF Television in Germany for the music program &quot;Power Vision&quot;. Due to creative indifferences and major business disputes within the production and management team behind the scenes, the Maxx project disbanded prematurely in late 1995.

=== Comeback ===

Late in December 2016, an official Maxx website surfaced online announcing the reunion between Meek and the Maxx founders Brunner and Wind after almost two decades.&lt;ref name=&quot;http://www.maxxmusic90s.com&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; On 25 August 2017, Meek made her comeback performance as Maxx at the We Love the 90&#x27;s Estonia festival in Tallinn. 

Meek is known under her new name Elyse G Rogers; works with the full support and agreement from the original founders of Maxx, and continues touring worldwide with rapper Twitch, who performs in the raggamuffin style rap verses on stage. Elyse sometimes does live performances and collaborations with other 90s artists on social media. 
==Discography==

=== Studio albums ===
===Singles===
=== Compilation features ===
* 1994: &quot;Power of Love&quot; – &quot;Bravo Dance X-Mas&quot;&lt;ref name=&quot;https://www.discogs.com&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

===Remixes===
* 1993: &quot;Get-A-Way (Remixes)&quot;
* 1993: &quot;Get-A-Way (UK Remixes)&quot;
* 1994: &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand It) (Remixes)&quot;
* 1994: &quot;No More (I Can&#x27;t Stand It) (UK Remixes)&quot;
* 1994: &quot;You Can Get It (Remixes)&quot;
* 2017: &quot;Get-A-Way (Reloaded)&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q699016" start="0" end="4" title="Maxx (group)" label="Maxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q216961" start="17" end="26" title="Eurodance" label="Eurodance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553749" start="113" end="122" title="Get-A-Way" label="Get-A-Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q25218789" start="136" end="167" title="No More (I Can&amp;#x27;t Stand It)" label="No More (I Can&amp;#x27;t Stand It)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770942" start="184" end="198" title="You Can Get It" label="You Can Get It"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906390" start="530" end="543" title="Another Night (Real McCoy song)" label="Another Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q41108" start="553" end="582" title="Real McCoy (band)" label="M.C. Sar &amp;amp; The Real McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180277" start="589" end="602" title="Hansa Records" label="Hansa Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q991439" start="703" end="720" title="Bruce &amp;amp; Bongo" label="Bruce &amp;amp; Bongo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="808" end="817" title=":de:Intercord" label="Intercord"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="3633" end="3650" title="Eurochart Hot 100" label="Eurochart Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="4235" end="4250" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q27817348" start="5241" end="5256" title="To the Maxximum" label="To the Maxximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770310" start="5401" end="5415" title="Another Night (Real McCoy album)" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446342" start="6595" end="6619" title="I Can Make You Feel Like" label="I Can Make You Feel Like"/>
<link wikidata="Q284422" start="6899" end="6916" title="I Like to Move It" label="I Like to Move It"/>
<link wikidata="Q509886" start="6926" end="6937" title="Reel 2 Real" label="Reel 2 Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692769" start="6948" end="6964" title="The Mad Stuntman" label="The Mad Stuntman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989" start="7160" end="7174" title="ZDF" label="ZDF Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="7769" end="7776" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141496" wikidata="Q150091" url="?curid=1141496" title="Neo-Impressionism">
<text>Neo-Impressionism is a term coined by French art critic Félix Fénéon in 1886 to describe an art movement founded by Georges Seurat. Seurat&#x27;s most renowned masterpiece, &quot;A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte&quot;, marked the beginning of this movement when it first made its appearance at an exhibition of the Société des Artistes Indépendants (Salon des Indépendants) in Paris. Around this time, the peak of France&#x27;s modern era emerged and many painters were in search of new methods. Followers of Neo-Impressionism, in particular, were drawn to modern urban scenes as well as landscapes and seashores. Science-based interpretation of lines and colors influenced Neo-Impressionists&#x27; characterization of their own contemporary art. The Pointillist and Divisionist techniques are often mentioned in this context, because they were the dominant techniques in the beginning of the Neo-Impressionist movement.

Some argue that Neo-Impressionism became the first true avant-garde movement in painting. The Neo-Impressionists were able to create a movement very quickly in the 19th century, partially due to its strong connection to anarchism, which set a pace for later artistic manifestations. The movement and the style were an attempt to drive &quot;harmonious&quot; vision from modern science, anarchist theory, and late 19th-century debate around the value of academic art. The artists of the movement &quot;promised to employ optical and psycho-biological theories in pursuit of a grand synthesis of the ideal and the real, the fugitive and the essential, science and temperament.&quot;

==Overview==

===Principles of aesthetic: light, color, and form===
Seurat and his followers tried to give their painting a scientific basis, by painting tiny dabs of primary colors close to each other to intensify the viewer&#x27;s perception of colors by a process of optical mixing. This created greater apparent luminosity because the optical mixing of colors tends towards white, unlike mixing of paints on the palette which tends towards black and reduces intensity. Neo-impressionists also used more precise and geometric shapes to simplify and reveal the relationships between forms. Seurat&#x27;s disciple Paul Signac later used what he felt to be a more poetic spontaneous use of divisionist technique.

The development of color theory by Michel Eugène Chevreul and others by the late 19th century played a pivotal role in shaping the Neo-Impressionist style. Ogden Rood&#x27;s book, &quot;Modern Chromatics, with Applications to Art and Industry&quot;, acknowledged the different behaviors exhibited by colored light and colored pigment. While the mixture of the former created a white or gray color, that of the latter produced a dark, murky color. As painters, Neo-Impressionists had to deal with colored pigments, so to avoid the dullness, they devised a system of pure-color juxtaposition. Mixing of colors was not necessary. The effective utilization of pointillism facilitated in eliciting a distinct luminous effect, and from a distance, the dots came together as a whole displaying maximum brilliance and conformity to actual light conditions.

===Origins of the term===
There are a number of alternatives to the term &quot;Neo-Impressionism&quot; and each has its own nuance:
Chromoluminarism was a term preferred by Georges Seurat. It emphasized the studies of color and light which were central to his artistic style. This term is rarely used today.
Divisionism, which is more commonly used, describes an early mode of Neo-Impressionist painting. It refers to the method of applying individual strokes of complementary and contrasting colors.
Unlike other designations of this era, the term &#x27;Neo-Impressionism&#x27; was not given as a criticism. Instead, it embraces Seurat&#x27;s and his followers&#x27; ideals in their approach to art.
Note: Pointillism merely describes a later technique based on divisionism in which dots of color instead of blocks of color are applied; Signac rejected this term&#x27;s use as synonymous for divisionism.

===The group of Neo-Impressionist painters===
Neo-Impressionism was first presented to the public in 1886 at the Salon des Indépendants. The Indépendants remained their main exhibition space for decades with Signac acting as president of the association. But with the success of Neo-Impressionism, its fame spread quickly. In 1886, Seurat and Signac were invited to exhibit in the 8th and final Impressionist exhibition, later with Les XX and La Libre Esthétique in Brussels.

In 1892, a group of Neo-Impressionist painters united to show their works in Paris, in the Salons of the Hôtel Brébant, 32, boulevard Poissonnière. The following year they exhibited at 20, rue Laffitte. The exhibitions were accompanied by catalogues, the first with reference to the printer: Imp. Vve Monnom, Brussels; the second refers to M. Moline, secretary. Pissarro and Seurat met at Durand-Ruel&#x27;s in the fall of 1885 and began to experiment with a technique using tiny dots of juxtaposing colors. This technique was developed from readings of popular art history and aesthetics (the French administrator, Charles Blanc, and Swiss aesthetician, David Sutter), and manuals for the industrial and decorative arts, science of optics and perception. At this time Pissarro began to be involved with the coterie that helped found the Société des Artistes Independants in 1884. Some members of the group attended gatherings for naturalist and symbolist authors at the home of Robert Caze who was an ex-communard and radical Republican journalist. It was here that the painters got to know each other, and many showed their work at independents&#x27; shows for all their lives. Pissarro asked Seurat and Signac to participate in the eighth impressionist exhibit in May 1886. This is where &quot;A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte&quot; was shown. They had a separate room at the show. The Republicans&#x27; liberalization of press laws in 1881 also aided this avant-garde movement. It made it easier for people to begin their own newspapers, thus allowing more art critics to get published.
The idea of the &quot;modern primitive&quot; drew this group and began with Signac. After Seurat displayed &quot;La Grande Jatte&quot;, the critic Fénéon coined the term Neo-Impressionism. Pissarro, his son Lucien, and Signac also showed work at the same time. Soon other artists began to join the movement including Charles Angrand, Henri-Edmond Cross, Albert Dubois-Pillet, Léo Gausson, Louis Hayet, and Maximilien Luce. The allure of the scientific and new techniques captivated the young artists of this movement. The movement then spread abroad when Seurat and Pissarro were invited to Les Vingt, an avant-garde society in Brussels. This style became the dominant form in Belgium by 1889 and even artists like Van Gogh tried their hand at this style.
Seurat&#x27;s mission as an artist was to celebrate the power of pure color, the expressive power of line, color and value, the reform of Impressionism and of the Beaux-Arts tradition. Seurat &quot;wanted to be perceived as a technician of art, and so he borrowed from science some of the signs of its authority, including the regularity and clarity of pattern.&quot; This can be compared to how Signac &quot;saw and emphasized a connection between anarchism, the Neo-Impressionist technique, the Mediterranean location, and the classical tradition in painting&quot;. Signac also viewed the Mediterranean as the place for anarchist avant-garde art. The Mediterranean was rarely depicted by avant-garde painters partially because of the association between the south of France and academic classicism as well as cultural and political conservatism. By setting his pastorals in the south, Signac followed the literary examples of Stendhal and Guy de Maupassant, who linked the region with liberty. Stendhal &quot;described the south as a place of freedom where the worst faults of capitalist society were less entrenched than in the north.&quot; Stendhal also saw the South as a connection to other &quot;Latin&quot; countries who are &quot;outside the civilized societies&#x27; concern for money.&quot;

===Evolution===
This movement&#x27;s peak years lasted about five years (1886–1891), but did not end with Georges Seurat&#x27;s death in 1891. Impressionism continued to evolve and expand over the next decade with even more distinctive characteristics. Incorporation of political and social ideas, especially anarchism, started showing prominence. After Seurat&#x27;s death by diphtheria and his friend Albert Dubois-Pillet&#x27;s by smallpox in the previous year, the Neo-impressionists began to change and strengthen their image through social and political alliances. They forged links to the anarcho-communists movement and through this, many more young artists were attracted to this &quot;blend of social and artistic theory&quot;. In the later 1890s Signac went back to his earlier belief in the visual harmony of the Neo-impressionist style, and the belief that it signified his ideals. He also emphasized that Neo-Impressionists were not seeking realism. They did not want to imitate, but instead have &quot;the will to create the beautiful... We are false, false like Corot, like Carrière, false, false! But we also have our ideal—to which it is necessary to sacrifice everything&quot;. This return to an earlier style was alienating and caused fissures and tensions within the previously tight-knit community of neo-impressionists.

===Criticism===
At the start of the movement, Neo-Impressionism was not welcomed by the art world and the general public. In 1886, Seurat&#x27;s first exhibition of his now most famous work, &quot;A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte&quot;, inspired torrents of negative criticism. The commotion evoked by this artwork could only be described with words like &quot;bedlam&quot; and &quot;scandal&quot;.

Neo-Impressionists&#x27; use of small segments of color to compose a whole picture was considered even more controversial than its preceding movement; Impressionism had been notorious for its spontaneous representation of fleeting moments and roughness in brushwork. Neo-Impressionism provoked similar responses for opposite reasons. The meticulously calculated regularity of brush strokes was deemed to be too mechanical and antithetical to the commonly accepted notions of creative processes set for the 19th century.

According to modern sources, much of the critique of the Neo-Impressionists at the time is just out of focus. In December 1894, the independent socialist daily &quot;La Petite République&quot; featured a front-page column by critic Adolphe Tabarant. He remarked on the new Neo-Impressionist cooperative gallery in the Rue Laffitte, focusing on Luce and Signac, also known as the young masters: &quot;The art has, perhaps, a tendency toward an ill-tempered synthesis, toward a scientific observation that is too dry. But how it vibrates, and how it rings with truth! What an expenditure of coloring, what a profusion of agitated notions, in which one senses the noble and sincere passions of those young men who, after lamented Seurat, strive to capture all the secrets of light from the sun!&quot;

The Neo-Impressionists were supported from the beginning in 1884 by the &quot;Journal des Artistes&quot;. Other papers also discussed the future Neo-Impressionists together, thus showing that they had formed as a group through tier creation of a democratic exhibit space, not their movement or artistic style.

After the turn of the century, the critic Félix Fénéon critiqued Signac’s idealism in his later work. He compared Signac to Claude and Poussin by saying that Claude Lorrain knew all the details of the real world, and that he was able to express the world contained it by his beautiful spirit. He relates Signac to an &quot;inheritor of landscape tradition that envisioned the realm of harmony&quot;.

==Divisionism==

Divisionism (also called Chromo-luminarism) was the characteristic style in Neo-Impressionist painting defined by the separation of contrasting or complementing colors into individual patches which interacted optically to create shadow and dimension. By requiring the viewer to combine the colors optically instead of physically mixing pigments, Divisionists believed they were achieving the maximum luminosity that was scientifically possible. They also believed that it philosophically represented harmony as unanticipated colors work together equally to form a single image. Georges Seurat founded the style around 1884 as chromo-luminarism, drawing from his understanding of the scientific theories of Michel Eugène Chevreul, Ogden Rood and Charles Blanc, among others. Divisionism developed alongside Pointillism, which is defined specifically by the use of dots of paint but does not primarily focus on the separation of colors.

===Theoretical foundations and development===
Divisionism developed in nineteenth-century painting as artists discovered scientific theories of vision which encouraged a departure from the tenets of Impressionism. Most notably as science surrounding the vibration of light and the effect on retinas developed, color palettes changed. Neo-Impressionists began to place complementary colors side-by-side to create dimension and shadows instead of working in a range of hues. This dividing up of the canvas into individual sections of complementary and contrasting colors led to the name &quot;divisionism&quot;, a term coined by Signac.
Impressionism was a movement that originated in France in the 1870s, characterized by the use of quick, short, broken brushstrokes to accurately capture the momentary effects of light and atmosphere in a scene, usually outdoors. The Impressionists sought to create an &quot;impression&quot; of a momentary scene as perceived by the viewer, rather than a mechanically precise replication of a scene.  Divisionism, also known as Pointillism, developed from Impressionism in the 1880s. The Divisionists used a technique of placing small, distinct dots of color next to one another on the canvas, rather than mixing the colors on the palette. This created a more vibrant and dynamic effect, but also required a higher level of skill and precision.  Neo-Impressionism emerged in the late 19th century, used more precise and geometric shapes to build compositions, and was strongly influenced by the scientific study of color theory and optical color effects, to create a more harmonious and luminous painting.

===Georges Seurat===

Divisionism, along with the Neo-Impressionism movement as a whole, found its beginnings in Georges Seurat&#x27;s masterpiece, &quot;A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte&quot;. Seurat was classically trained in the École des Beaux-Arts, and, as such, his initial works reflected the Barbizon style. Studying under Pierre Puvis de Chavannes, Seurat intensely pursued interests in line and color, color theory, and optical effects, all of which formed the basis of Divisionism. In 1883, Seurat and some of his colleagues began exploring ways to express as much light as possible on the canvas. By 1884, with the exhibition of his first major work, &quot;Bathing at Asnières&quot;, as well as croquetons of the island of La Grande Jatte, Seurat&#x27;s style began taking form with an awareness of Impressionism, but it was not until he finished &quot;La Grande Jatte&quot; in 1886 that he established his theory of chromo-luminarism. Although this painting was originally rejected by the official salon it attracted the Salon des Indépendants where Paul Signac was engaged.

Following the controversial success of &quot;La Grande Jatte&quot;, Camille Pissarro and Paul Signac converted to Neo-Impressionism and, along with Pissarro&#x27;s son Lucien, formed the basis of the Neo-Impressionist and Divisionist movements. Later promoted by Symbolist artists and critics, Divisionism became the avant-garde style of post-Impressionism.
The support Seurat initially received slowly dissipated as he became increasingly hostile towards other artists, believing that they were corrupting his style and technique. By the end of his life few works of his received the attention they used to. &quot;Circus&quot;, an unfinished work exhibited after his death, was barely noticed by critics or the general public.

===Camille Pissarro===
Camille Pissarro, born in 1830, is a notable radical artist and the only painter to exhibit in all eight Impressionist shows from 1874 to 1886. During Pissarro&#x27;s long career he remained at the foreground of French avant-garde art, although his Neo-Impressionist phase is among his most popular and most studied. Pissarro studied under Fritz Melbye, spending the first 15 years of his career painting rural landscapes, market scenes and ports, all of which make subject returns throughout his later career.

During his Impressionist phase, Pissarro switched to a lighter brush stroke and a brighter color palette, frequently applied in sections of unmixed color. This style of Impressionism gave way to joining Seurat in Neo-Impressionism in 1885. He was the first convert to what is now called Divisionism. Pissarro developed what he called &quot;scientific Impressionism&quot; and later left the movement as a whole, finding the compositional rules too strict.

===Paul Signac===

Paul Signac, born in 1863, was Seurat&#x27;s closest friend and the face of the Neo-Impressionist movement. He had no formal art training but was able to refine his skills through travel and replication as he was born into a family of financial stability. Signac was encouraged to remove earth tones from his palette by Seurat, and in turn introduced Seurat to Symbolism, jointly creating the Neo-Impressionist movement. He is also noted for initiating Vincent van Gogh, Théo van Rysselberghe and Henry Van de Velde to the movement.

In 1891, the year after Seurat&#x27;s death, Signac began to introduce abstract visual rhythms and subjectivity into his works and by transit into Neo-Impressionism. Signac&#x27;s creative experimentation inspired artists such as Matisse and Henri-Edmond Cross to further define Neo-Impressionism in the 20th century. His knowledge of the movement lead to illustrating Charles Henry&#x27;s Cerle Chromatique et Rapporteur Esthétique, a widely influential book on color theory and later to his authoring the manifesto of Neo-Impressionism, D’Eugène Delacroix au Néo-Impressionisme in 1899.

===Color theory===

Charles Blanc&#x27;s Grammaire des arts du dessin introduced Seurat to the theories of color and vision that would inspire chromo-luminarism. Blanc&#x27;s work, drawing from the theories of Michel Eugène Chevreul and Eugène Delacroix, stated that optical mixing would produce more vibrant and pure colors than the traditional process of mixing pigments. Mixing pigments physically is a subtractive process with cyan, magenta, and yellow being the primary colors. On the other hand, if colored light is mixed together, an additive mixture results, a process in which the primary colors are red, green and blue. The optical mixture which characterized Divisionism—the process of mixing color by juxtaposing pigments—is different from either additive or subtractive mixture, although combining colors in optical mixture functions the same way as additive mixture, i.e. the primary colors are the same. In reality, Seurat&#x27;s paintings did not actually achieve true optical mixing; for him, the theory was more useful for causing vibrations of color to the viewer, where contrasting colors placed near each other would intensify the relationship between the colors while preserving their singular separate identity.

In Divisionist color theory, artists interpreted the scientific literature through making light operate in one of the following contexts:
* Local color: As the dominant element of the painting, local color refers to the true color of subjects, e.g. green grass or blue sky.
* Direct sunlight: As appropriate, yellow-orange colors representing the sun&#x27;s action would be interspersed with the natural colors to emulate the effect of direct sunlight.
* Shadow: If lighting is only indirect, various other colors, such as blues, reds and purples, can be used to simulate the darkness and shadows.
* Reflected light: An object which is adjacent to another in a painting could cast reflected colors onto it.
* Contrast: To take advantage of Chevreul&#x27;s theory of simultaneous contrast, contrasting colors might be placed in close proximity.

Seurat&#x27;s theories intrigued many of his contemporaries, as other artists seeking a reaction against Impressionism joined the Neo-Impressionist movement. Paul Signac, in particular, became one of the main proponents of divisionist theory, especially after Seurat&#x27;s death in 1891. In fact, Signac&#x27;s book, &quot;D’Eugène Delacroix au Néo-Impressionnisme&quot;, published in 1899, coined the term Divisionism and became widely recognized as the manifesto of Neo-Impressionism.

===Divisionism in France and northern Europe===
In addition to Signac, other French artists, largely through associations in the Société des Artistes Indépendants, adopted some Divisionist techniques, including Camille and Lucien Pissarro, Albert Dubois-Pillet, Charles Angrand, Maximilien Luce, Henri-Edmond Cross and Hippolyte Petitjean. Additionally, through Paul Signac&#x27;s advocacy of Divisionism, an influence can be seen in some of the works of Vincent van Gogh, Henri Matisse, Jean Metzinger, Robert Delaunay and Pablo Picasso.

Following the revolutions of 1848, a strong undercurrent of radical anarchism ran throughout the artistic community of France. The combination of social art and artistic freedom and the departure from traditional color painting techniques attracted radicals to the movement of Neo-Impressionism. However, these radicals were often criticized for depicting a peaceful and thoughtful approach to social revolution, combining science and moral harmony.

In 1907 Metzinger and Delaunay were singled out by the critic Louis Vauxcelles as Divisionists who used large, mosaic-like &#x27;cubes&#x27; to construct small but highly symbolic compositions. Both artists had developed a new sub-style that had great significance shortly thereafter within the context of their Cubist works. Piet Mondrian and Nico van Rijn, in the Netherlands, developed a similar mosaic-like Divisionist technique circa 1909. The Futurists later (1909–1916) would adapt the style, in part influenced by Gino Severini&#x27;s Parisian experience (from 1907), into their dynamic paintings and sculpture.

In Germany, it was Paul Baum and Carl Schmitz-Pleis who, in retrospect, provided the decisive impetus.

===Divisionism in Italy===

The influence of Seurat and Signac on some Italian painters became evident in the First Triennale in 1891 in Milan. Spearheaded by Grubicy de Dragon, and codified later by Gaetano Previati in his &quot;Principi scientifici del divisionismo&quot; of 1906, a number of painters mainly in Northern Italy experimented to various degrees with these techniques. These Italian artists merged Neo-impressionism with Symbolism creating allegorical paintings using a divisionist method. For example, Pellizza da Volpedo applied the technique to social (and political) subjects; in this he was joined by Angelo Morbelli and Emilio Longoni. Among Pellizza&#x27;s Divisionist works were &quot;Speranze deluse&quot; (1894) and &quot;Il sole nascente&quot; (1904). It was, however, in the subject of landscapes that Divisionism found strong advocates, including Segantini, Previati, Morbelli, and Carlo Fornara. Further adherents in painting genre subjects were Plinio Nomellini, Rubaldo Merello, Giuseppe Cominetti, Angelo Barabino, Camillo Innocenti, Enrico Lionne, and Arturo Noci. Divisionism was also an important influence in the work of Futurists Gino Severini (&quot;Souvenirs de Voyage&quot;, 1911); Giacomo Balla (&quot;Arc Lamp&quot;, 1909); Carlo Carrà (&quot;Leaving the scene&quot;, 1910); and Umberto Boccioni (&quot;The City Rises&quot;, 1910).

===Criticism and controversy===
Divisionism quickly received both negative and positive attention from art critics, who generally either embraced or condemned the incorporation of scientific theories in the Neo-Impressionist techniques. For example, Joris-Karl Huysmans spoke negatively of Seurat&#x27;s paintings, saying &quot;Strip his figures of the colored fleas that cover them, underneath there is nothing, no thought, no soul, nothing&quot;. Leaders of Impressionism, such as Monet and Renoir, refused to exhibit with Seurat, and even Camille Pissarro, who initially supported Divisionism, later spoke negatively of the technique.

While most Divisionists did not receive much critical approval, some critics were loyal to the movement, including notably Félix Fénéon, Arsène Alexandre, and Antoine de la Rochefoucauld. Furthermore, Divisionists were often criticized for being too peaceful and logical in revolution. Because their color choices were often planned and scientifically constructed, they lacked the radical freedom that anarchists embodied. French anarchy, particularly after Haussmannization, placed an emphasis on a classless society but Divisionists, and all artists, reinforced classes through middle-class consumerism of their works. These conflicting ideals put Divisionism under the critical lens of radical anarchists.

===Scientific misconceptions===
Although Divisionist artists strongly believed their style was founded in scientific principles, some people believe that there is evidence that Divisionists misinterpreted some basic elements of optical theory. For example, one of these misconceptions can be seen in the general belief that the Divisionist method of painting allowed for greater luminosity than previous techniques. Additive luminosity is only applicable in the case of colored light, not juxtaposed pigments; in reality, the luminosity of two pigments next to each other is just the average of their individual luminosities. Furthermore, it is not possible to create a color using optical mixture which could not also be created by physical mixture. Logical inconsistencies can also be found with the Divisionist exclusion of darker colors and their interpretation of simultaneous contrast.

==Neo-Impressionist paintings==
==Notable artists==

*Charles Angrand
*Paul Baum
*Anna Boch
*Henri-Edmond Cross
*Robert Delaunay
*Albert Dubois-Pillet
*Willy Finch
*Léo Gausson
*Georges Lemmen
*Maximilien Luce
*Henri Matisse
*Jean Metzinger
*Hippolyte Petitjean
*Robert Antoine Pinchon
*Camille Pissarro
*Lucien Pissarro
*Théo van Rysselberghe
*Carl Schmitz-Pleis
*Georges Seurat
*Paul Signac
*Jan Toorop
*Henry van de Velde
===Timeline: Lives of the Neo-Impressionists===

==See also==
* Post-Impressionism
* Stippling
* Pointillism
* Micromontage, similar technique in music

==References==
==Other sources==
*
*Herbert, Robert. &quot;Georges Seurat, 1859–1891&quot;, New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1991. .
*Herbert, Robert, &quot;Neo-Impressionism&quot;, The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, New York, 1968, Library of Congress Card Catalogue Number: 68–16803
*Herbert, Robert. &quot;Georges Seurat, 1859-1891&quot;, New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1991. .
*Ward, Martha (1996). &quot;Pissarro, Neo-impressionism and the Spaces of the Avant-Garde&quot; Chicago, Illinois: Chicago University Press. .
*Haslett, Carrie (2002). &quot;Neo-Impressionism: Artists on the Edge&quot;. Portland, Oregon: Portland Museum of Art. .*Blanc, Charles. &quot;The Grammar of Painting and Engraving. &quot; Chicago: S.C. Griggs and Company, 1891. .
*Block, Jane. &quot;Neo-Impressionism.&quot; &quot;Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. &quot; .
*Block, Jane. &quot;Pointillism.&quot; &quot;Grove Art Online. Oxford Art Online. &quot; .
*Broude, Norma, ed. &quot;Seurat in Perspective. &quot; Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978. .
*Cachin, Françoise. &quot;Paul Signac. &quot; Greenwich, CT: New York Graphic Society, 1971. .
*Clement, Russell T., and Annick Houzé. &quot;Neo-impressionist painters: a sourcebook on Georges Seurat, Camille Pissarro, Paul Signac, Théo van Rysselberghe, Henri Edmond Cross, Charles Angrand, Maximilien Luce, and Albert Dubois-Pillet. &quot; Westport, CT: Greenwood P, 1999. .
*Chevreul, Michel Eugène. &quot;The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colors&quot;. London: Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden, 1860
*Dorra, Henri. &quot;Symbolist Art Theories: A Critical Anthology&quot;. Berkeley: U of California, 1994. 
*Gage, John. &quot;The Technique of Seurat: A Reappraisal.&quot; &quot;The Art Bulletin&quot; 69 (Sep. 1987): 448-54. JSTOR. .
*Hutton, John G. &quot;Neo-impressionism and the search for solid ground: art, science, and anarchism in fin-de-siècle France. &quot; Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State UP, 1994. .
* Puppo, Dario del. &quot;Il Quarto Stato.&quot; &quot;Science and Society&quot;, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 13, 1994.
* Meighan, Judith. &quot;In Praise of Motherhood: The Promise and Failure of Painting for Social Reform in Late-Nineteenth-Century Italy.&quot; &quot;Nineteenth-Century Art Worldwide&quot;, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2002.
* &quot;Radical Light: Italy&#x27;s Divisionist Painters.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot;, August 2008.
* Rewald, John. &quot;Georges Seurat.&quot; New York: Wittenborn &amp; Co., 1946.
* Roslak, Robyn. &quot;Neo-Impressionism and Anarchism in Fin-de-Siecle France: Painting, Politics and Landscape&quot;. N.p., 2007. 
* Signac, Paul. &quot;D’Eugène Delacroix au Neo-Impressionnisme. &quot; 1899. .
* Winkfield, Trevor. &quot;The Signac Syndrome.&quot; &quot;Modern Painters&quot; Autumn 2001: 66–70.
* Tim Parks on divisionist movement of painters in Italy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q150091" start="0" end="17" title="Neo-Impressionism" label="Neo-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164507" start="45" end="55" title="art critic" label="art critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432101" start="56" end="68" title="Félix Fénéon" label="Félix Fénéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q968159" start="92" end="104" title="art movement" label="art movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="116" end="130" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044742" start="179" end="230" title="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte" label="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420385" start="334" end="367" title="Société des Artistes Indépendants" label="Société des Artistes Indépendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="770" end="781" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487023" start="786" end="797" title="Divisionism" label="Divisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="997" end="1008" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="1161" end="1170" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189458" start="1394" end="1406" title="academic art" label="academic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="2238" end="2249" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q271651" start="2372" end="2394" title="Michel Eugène Chevreul" label="Michel Eugène Chevreul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487023" start="3319" end="3335" title="Chromoluminarism" label="Chromoluminarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487023" start="3495" end="3506" title="Divisionism" label="Divisionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="3894" end="3905" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420385" start="4207" end="4229" title="Société des Artistes Indépendants" label="Salon des Indépendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="4526" end="4532" title="Les XX" label="Les XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593366" start="4537" end="4556" title="La Libre Esthétique" label="La Libre Esthétique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448718" start="4760" end="4772" title="rue Laffitte" label="rue Laffitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="4933" end="4941" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q649052" start="4960" end="4971" title="Paul Durand-Ruel" label="Durand-Ruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063751" start="5187" end="5200" title="Charles Blanc" label="Charles Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="5517" end="5526" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780490" start="5576" end="5585" title="communard" label="communard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044742" start="5868" end="5919" title="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte" label="A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q964608" start="6388" end="6394" title="Lucien Pissarro" label="Lucien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063574" start="6498" end="6513" title="Charles Angrand" label="Charles Angrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q555224" start="6515" end="6533" title="Henri-Edmond Cross" label="Henri-Edmond Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831132" start="6535" end="6555" title="Albert Dubois-Pillet" label="Albert Dubois-Pillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270471" start="6557" end="6568" title="Léo Gausson" label="Léo Gausson"/>
<link wikidata="Q595099" start="6570" end="6581" title="Louis Hayet" label="Louis Hayet"/>
<link wikidata="Q545293" start="6587" end="6602" title="Maximilien Luce" label="Maximilien Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q463283" start="6772" end="6781" title="Les Vingt" label="Les Vingt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="6896" end="6904" title="Van Gogh" label="Van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="7100" end="7110" title="Fine art" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="7865" end="7873" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="7878" end="7895" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="9318" end="9323" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q461464" start="9330" end="9338" title="Eugène Carrière" label="Carrière"/>
<link wikidata="Q432101" start="11676" end="11688" title="Félix Fénéon" label="Félix Fénéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="11699" end="11705" title="Paul Signac" label="Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q214074" start="11758" end="11764" title="Claude Lorrain" label="Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="11769" end="11776" title="Poussin" label="Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214074" start="11792" end="11806" title="Claude Lorrain" label="Claude Lorrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q271651" start="12758" end="12780" title="Michel Eugène Chevreul" label="Michel Eugène Chevreul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016126" start="12782" end="12792" title="Ogden Rood" label="Ogden Rood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063751" start="12797" end="12810" title="Charles Blanc" label="Charles Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="13623" end="13636" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13671" end="13677" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="14050" end="14061" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillism"/>
<link wikidata="Q425548" start="14253" end="14260" title="Palette (painting)" label="palette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520130" start="14537" end="14549" title="color theory" label="color theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q143357" start="14948" end="14956" title="Barbizon school" label="Barbizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216873" start="14979" end="15004" title="Pierre Puvis de Chavannes" label="Pierre Puvis de Chavannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="16000" end="16009" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="16489" end="16505" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="17476" end="17487" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="17929" end="17945" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q671883" start="17947" end="17968" title="Théo van Rysselberghe" label="Théo van Rysselberghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154083" start="17973" end="17991" title="Henry Van de Velde" label="Henry Van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063751" start="18620" end="18633" title="Charles Blanc" label="Charles Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q271651" start="18810" end="18832" title="Michel Eugène Chevreul" label="Michel Eugène Chevreul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="18837" end="18853" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="21381" end="21388" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q964608" start="21393" end="21408" title="Lucien Pissarro" label="Lucien Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831132" start="21410" end="21430" title="Albert Dubois-Pillet" label="Albert Dubois-Pillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063574" start="21432" end="21447" title="Charles Angrand" label="Charles Angrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q545293" start="21449" end="21464" title="Maximilien Luce" label="Maximilien Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q555224" start="21466" end="21484" title="Henri-Edmond Cross" label="Henri-Edmond Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q539063" start="21489" end="21508" title="Hippolyte Petitjean" label="Hippolyte Petitjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="21625" end="21641" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="21643" end="21656" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313096" start="21658" end="21672" title="Jean Metzinger" label="Jean Metzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978" start="21674" end="21689" title="Robert Delaunay" label="Robert Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="21694" end="21707" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q151803" start="22487" end="22500" title="Piet Mondrian" label="Piet Mondrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131221" start="22610" end="22619" title="Futurism" label="Futurists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169984" start="22683" end="22696" title="Gino Severini" label="Gino Severini"/>
<link wikidata="Q541671" start="22801" end="22810" title="Paul Baum (artist)" label="Paul Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460751" start="22815" end="22833" title="Carl Schmitz-Pleis" label="Carl Schmitz-Pleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015187" start="23045" end="23062" title="Vittore Grubicy de Dragon" label="Grubicy de Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q913979" start="23086" end="23102" title="Gaetano Previati" label="Gaetano Previati"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="23322" end="23331" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528580" start="23404" end="23423" title="Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo" label="Pellizza da Volpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617111" start="23507" end="23522" title="Angelo Morbelli" label="Angelo Morbelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q661122" start="23527" end="23541" title="Emilio Longoni" label="Emilio Longoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659361" start="23796" end="23809" title="Carlo Fornara" label="Carlo Fornara"/>
<link wikidata="Q589062" start="23861" end="23877" title="Plinio Nomellini" label="Plinio Nomellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942105" start="23879" end="23894" title="Rubaldo Merello" label="Rubaldo Merello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651523" start="23933" end="23950" title="Camillo Innocenti" label="Camillo Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q368254" start="24108" end="24121" title="Giacomo Balla" label="Giacomo Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q168496" start="24152" end="24163" title="Carlo Carrà" label="Carlo Carrà"/>
<link wikidata="Q152797" start="24207" end="24223" title="Umberto Boccioni" label="Umberto Boccioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q210798" start="24511" end="24530" title="Joris-Karl Huysmans" label="Joris-Karl Huysmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="24744" end="24749" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="24754" end="24760" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q432101" start="25023" end="25035" title="Félix Fénéon" label="Félix Fénéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864441" start="25037" end="25053" title="Arsène Alexandre" label="Arsène Alexandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176637" start="25059" end="25086" title="Antoine de la Rochefoucauld" label="Antoine de la Rochefoucauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="25716" end="25737" title="Scientific method" label="scientific principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063574" start="26557" end="26572" title="Charles Angrand" label="Charles Angrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q541671" start="26574" end="26583" title="Paul Baum (artist)" label="Paul Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q466668" start="26585" end="26594" title="Anna Boch" label="Anna Boch"/>
<link wikidata="Q555224" start="26596" end="26614" title="Henri-Edmond Cross" label="Henri-Edmond Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978" start="26616" end="26631" title="Robert Delaunay" label="Robert Delaunay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831132" start="26633" end="26653" title="Albert Dubois-Pillet" label="Albert Dubois-Pillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q914211" start="26655" end="26666" title="Willy Finch" label="Willy Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270471" start="26668" end="26679" title="Léo Gausson" label="Léo Gausson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963612" start="26681" end="26695" title="Georges Lemmen" label="Georges Lemmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q545293" start="26697" end="26712" title="Maximilien Luce" label="Maximilien Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="26714" end="26727" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q313096" start="26729" end="26743" title="Jean Metzinger" label="Jean Metzinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q539063" start="26745" end="26764" title="Hippolyte Petitjean" label="Hippolyte Petitjean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434445" start="26766" end="26788" title="Robert Antoine Pinchon" label="Robert Antoine Pinchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134741" start="26790" end="26806" title="Camille Pissarro" label="Camille Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q964608" start="26808" end="26823" title="Lucien Pissarro" label="Lucien Pissarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q671883" start="26825" end="26846" title="Théo van Rysselberghe" label="Théo van Rysselberghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460751" start="26848" end="26866" title="Carl Schmitz-Pleis" label="Carl Schmitz-Pleis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34013" start="26868" end="26882" title="Georges Seurat" label="Georges Seurat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151573" start="26884" end="26895" title="Paul Signac" label="Paul Signac"/>
<link wikidata="Q369416" start="26897" end="26907" title="Jan Toorop" label="Jan Toorop"/>
<link wikidata="Q154083" start="26909" end="26927" title="Henry van de Velde" label="Henry van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="26992" end="27010" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640859" start="27013" end="27022" title="Stippling" label="Stippling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200034" start="27025" end="27036" title="Pointillism" label="Pointillism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744304" start="27039" end="27051" title="Micromontage" label="Micromontage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221521" start="28040" end="28053" title="Norma Broude" label="Broude, Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q433981" start="28141" end="28158" title="Françoise Cachin" label="Cachin, Françoise"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141498" wikidata="Q4382378" url="?curid=1141498" title="USS Parche (SS-384)">
<text>The first USS &quot;Parche&quot; (SS-384/AGSS-384) was a United States Navy submarine. She bore the name (pronounced with two equal syllables: ) of a butterfly fish, &quot;Chaetodon capistratus&quot;. &quot;Parche&quot; was a Balao-class submarine that operated in World War II.

==Construction and commissioning==
&quot;Parche&quot; was built by the Portsmouth Navy Yard at Kittery, Maine. Her keel was laid on 9 April 1943 and she was christened on 24 July, when her sponsor, Betty Russell, smashed the traditional bottle of champagne across the bow as &quot;Parche&quot; slid into the water for the first time. Russell was the daughter of U.S. District Court Judge Robert Lee Russell, formerly Judge Advocate General of the U.S. Navy. &quot;Parche&quot; was commissioned on 20 November 1943 with Commander Lawson P. Ramage commanding.

==First and Second War Patrols==

On 29 March 1944 the submarine left Pearl Harbor with two other submarines, and , for her first war patrol. After passing Midway Atoll, the three reached the sea lanes south of Formosa 16 April 1944. On 29 April &quot;Bang&quot; reported a large convoy away, and the wolfpack attacked, &quot;Parche&quot; sinking one ship.

&quot;Tinosa&quot; reported a seven-ship convoy on the morning of 3 May and &quot;Parche&quot; headed north at full speed to intercept. An hour after midnight &quot;Parche&quot; was in position and scored three torpedo hits on the leading ship and two hits on the second freighter, sinking both. &quot;Parche&quot; scored two hits on the third freighter, which settled by the stern and began to list to port. Post-war records credited the trio of submarines with five sinkings and 30,542 tons, &quot;Parche&quot; getting credit for &quot;Taiyoku Maru&quot; and &quot;Shoryu Maru&quot;. &quot;Parche&quot; returned to Midway 23 May 1944, after making a thorough photo reconnaissance of military installations on the island of Ishi Gaki Jima.

&quot;Parche&#x27;s&quot; second patrol was again south of Formosa, forming a coordinated attack group with and . &quot;Parche&quot; went to sea 17 June, following her refit. A week later she sighted and sank a patrol vessel with gunfire. On 4 July a Japanese cruiser and destroyer bombarded and depth charged &quot;Parche&quot;.

&quot;Parche&quot; sighted a convoy, MI-11, 29 July 1944 and, cooperating with &quot;Steelhead&quot;, closed in, sinking 4,471-ton cargo ship &quot;Manko Maru&quot; and 10,238-ton tanker &quot;Koei Maru&quot;. During this night surface action &quot;Parche&quot; barely avoided being rammed by one ship. &quot;Parche&quot; collaborated with &quot;Steelhead&quot; in sinking an 8,990-ton transport, the &quot;Yoshino Maru&quot; (originally the &quot;Kleist&quot;, built in Danzig, 1906 for North German Lloyd, surrendered to the British in 1919, and acquired by the Nippon Yusen Kaisha in 1922). &quot;Steelhead&quot; sank two other ships, a transport and a cargo vessel. Another tanker and a cargo ship were damaged. For this action &quot;Parche&quot; received the Presidential Unit Citation and her commander, CDR Lawson P. Ramage (later Vice Admiral), received the Medal of Honor. The attack became known as &quot;Ramage&#x27;s Rampage&quot;. On 1 August the sub departed for Saipan where she moored 5 August, arriving Pearl Harbor 16 August.

==Third, Fourth, and Fifth War Patrols==

On her third war patrol, 10 September to 2 December, one of the longest of the war, &quot;Parche&quot; did not encounter any targets.

After a refit, the ship got underway 30 December for rotating patrol in the Nansei Shoto. She discovered a freighter and a tanker at anchor in Naze Ko 19 January, firing six bow tubes at the tanker for five distinct hits and four stern tubes at the freighter for two possible hits. On 7 February &quot;Parche&quot; sighted and sank the 984-ton &quot;Okinoyama Maru&quot;. Fueling at Midway 16 February, the sub continued to Pearl Harbor, where she arrived 20 February.

Japanese shipping, decimated by continual submarine and air attacks, was becoming increasingly difficult to find. When &quot;Parche&quot; left Pearl Harbor 19 March 1945, she headed directly for the east coast of Honshū, Japan. &quot;Parche&quot; sank escorting 615-ton Minesweeper No. 3 off Kobe Zaki 9 April. On 11 April &quot;Parche&quot; made a gun attack, sinking a small freighter of about 800 tons. She torpedoed another small vessel the next day. On 13 April &quot;Parche&quot; sank a fishing trawler. Two hours later she again opened fire on a small observation boat, leaving it blazing stem to stern. Two Japanese planes caused her to dive, leaving all her guns loose and much of her ammunition exposed. A heavy explosion shook her on the way down, but inflicted no damage.

On 22 April &quot;Parche&quot; sighted three small tankers in column, proceeding north along the coast south of Okama Saki. &quot;Parche&quot; launched three torpedoes at the second tanker and then shifted to the third, which was left down by the stern covered with a cloud of smoke. The sub sailed for Midway, arriving 30 April.

==Sixth War patrol==

&quot;Parche&quot; got underway 25 May for her sixth patrol, the last of World War II, joining the &quot;Lifeguard League&quot; south of Honshū. She stayed on station off Honshū until 18 June, ready to pick up any aviators who might be forced down. No rescues were necessary, and on the 18th she proceeded to Tsugara Strait.

Her first torpedo contact came 21 June when she sighted a gunboat rounding Shiriya Saki. The gunboat was soon joined by a sub chaser and then by a freighter. Picking the freighter as the best target, &quot;Parche&quot; launched four torpedoes from her forward tubes for one hit, which threw up a veil of dense white smoke. Expecting counter-measures, the sub went under, accompanied by the breaking-up noises of freighter &quot;Hizen Maru&quot;.

&quot;Parche&quot; attacked three luggers escorted by a small flat vessel on the afternoon of the next day, and sank two. She sank several trawlers by gunfire on 23 June. Two days later she sighted three large ships and six escorts headed north along the coast, one of the most tempting convoys seen for some months in Japanese home waters. After &quot;Parche&#x27;s&quot; attack the escorts shook the sub up considerably with depth charges four and a half hours, before she managed to work away and resume her patrol, leaving an ex-Gunboat sunk and another ship badly damaged.

After another round of life guard duty for the carrier planes of Task Force 38, on 17 July, &quot;Parche&quot; rendezvoused with to take aboard three fliers, and set course for Midway, arriving 23 July, and mooring Pearl Harbor 28 July.

One of the most highly decorated boats of the renowned World War II Pacific Submarine Force, USS &quot;Parche&quot; made six war patrols, earning five battle stars and one Presidential Unit Citation award for 2 war patrols.

==Post World War II operations==
After World War II &quot;Parche&quot;, was assigned to Operation Crossroads as a target ship for the atomic bomb tests at Bikini Atoll. &quot;Parche&quot; survived both the airburst and the underwater burst, coming through relatively undamaged.

After decontamination, she proceeded to Mare Island Naval Shipyard at Vallejo, California. She was then decommissioned on 10 December 1946 and moved to join the reserve fleet Alameda, California in March 1947. On 1 December 1962 her classification was changed to Auxiliary Submarine, AGSS-384 and assigned as a Naval Reserve Training Submarine in Oakland, California.

&quot;Parche&#x27;s&quot; name was stricken from the Navy List on 8 November 1969, and she was sold on 18 June 1970 for scrap. All that remains of her is the original bridge structure, shears, and upper gun from the war which remain enshrined at the Naval Submarine Base Pearl Harbor, and her conning tower barrel, which is on display at USS Bowfin Submarine Museum &amp; Park, Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.

== References ==
*
== External links ==
* USS Parche SS-384 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4382378" start="10" end="50" title="USS Parche (SS-384)" label="USS &amp;quot;Parche&amp;quot; (SS-384/AGSS-384)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="57" end="75" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="76" end="85" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q271004" start="150" end="164" title="butterfly fish" label="butterfly fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165517" start="172" end="193" title="Chaetodon capistratus" label="Chaetodon capistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q699842" start="226" end="247" title="Balao-class submarine" label="Balao-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="265" end="277" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="351" end="371" title="Portsmouth Navy Yard" label="Portsmouth Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q973112" start="375" end="382" title="Kittery, Maine" label="Kittery"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="384" end="389" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q582062" start="395" end="399" title="keel" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14592615" start="404" end="408" title="Keel-laying" label="laid"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="527" end="536" title="champagne" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q301897" start="548" end="551" title="Bow (ship)" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="642" end="661" title="United States district court" label="U.S. District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998740" start="668" end="686" title="Robert Lee Russell" label="Robert Lee Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773617" start="697" end="719" title="Judge Advocate General&amp;#x27;s Corps, U.S. Navy" label="Judge Advocate General"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475832" start="761" end="773" title="Ship commissioning" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="799" end="808" title="Commander (United States)" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q946975" start="809" end="825" title="Lawson P. Ramage" label="Lawson P. Ramage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="995" end="1007" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1050" end="1057" title="Taiwan" label="Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q254266" start="1140" end="1148" title="Wolfpack (naval tactic)" label="wolfpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q714339" start="1922" end="1936" title="Ishigaki Island" label="Ishi Gaki Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q24863064" start="2677" end="2689" title="Yoshino Maru" label="Yoshino Maru"/>
<link wikidata="Q652374" start="2758" end="2776" title="Norddeutscher Lloyd" label="North German Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="3034" end="3060" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="3136" end="3150" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51679" start="3247" end="3253" title="Saipan" label="Saipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="3568" end="3580" title="Nansei Shoto" label="Nansei Shoto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3635" end="3642" title="Naze Ko" label="Naze Ko"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="4175" end="4181" title="Honshū" label="Honshū"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4254" end="4263" title="Kobe Zaki" label="Kobe Zaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4859" end="4869" title="Okama Saki" label="Okama Saki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5409" end="5423" title="Tsugara Strait" label="Tsugara Strait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5501" end="5513" title="Shiriya Saki" label="Shiriya Saki"/>
<link wikidata="Q783186" start="5907" end="5913" title="lugger" label="lugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308902" start="6012" end="6019" title="Naval trawler" label="trawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q496770" start="6517" end="6530" title="Fast Carrier Task Force" label="Task Force 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6745" end="6757" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607946" start="6862" end="6888" title="Presidential Unit Citation (US)" label="Presidential Unit Citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q569545" start="7003" end="7023" title="Operation Crossroads" label="Operation Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="7049" end="7060" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q152225" start="7070" end="7082" title="Bikini Atoll" label="Bikini Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q657784" start="7234" end="7260" title="Mare Island Naval Shipyard" label="Mare Island Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q208445" start="7264" end="7283" title="Vallejo, California" label="Vallejo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q490744" start="7369" end="7388" title="Alameda, California" label="Alameda, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="7541" end="7560" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475803" start="7616" end="7625" title="Naval Vessel Register" label="Navy List"/>
<link wikidata="Q116148617" start="7813" end="7846" title="Naval Submarine Base Pearl Harbor" label="Naval Submarine Base Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="7941" end="7953" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="7955" end="7961" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141499" wikidata="Q7118196" url="?curid=1141499" title="PAR2">
<text>PAR2 may refer to:

* Parchive, an error correction system for computer files. The second version is known as PAR2.
* Protease activated receptor 2, a G-protein coupled receptor protein
* PAR2, one of the pseudoautosomal regions of the X and Y chromosomes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q497118" start="22" end="30" title="Parchive" label="Parchive"/>
<link wikidata="Q17918484" start="118" end="147" title="Protease activated receptor 2" label="Protease activated receptor 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115752" start="205" end="227" title="pseudoautosomal region" label="pseudoautosomal region"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141502" wikidata="Q159233" url="?curid=1141502" title="Sash!">
<text>Sash! (; stylised as SASH!) is a German DJ/production team, fronted by Sascha Lappessen (born 10 June 1970) who works in the recording studio with Ralf Kappmeier, Karl Xander, and Thomas &quot;Alisson&quot; Lüdke. They have sold over 22 million albums worldwide and earned more than 65 gold and platinum awards. In the UK, their first four hit singles incorporated vocals in different languages (French, Spanish, English and Italian).

==Musical career==
===1995–1997: Formation and &quot;It&#x27;s My Life – The Album&quot;===

Sascha Lappessen, Thomas &quot;Alisson&quot; Lüdke, and Ralf Kappmeier founded SASH! in 1995. The previous year, the three had worked together, under the name of &#x27;Careca&#x27;, to produce a piece called &quot;Indian Rave.&quot; In 1996, SASH! released &quot;It&#x27;s My Life&quot;, which became a European club hit. In 1997, with Sabine Ohmes as the singer, SASH! released &quot;Encore une fois&quot;. It reached number 2 in the UK Singles Chart, as well as reaching the top 10 of five countries&#x27; singles charts and the top 20 of seven countries&#x27; singles charts.

In the same year, SASH! produced &quot;Ecuador&quot;, and &quot;Stay&quot;, which both also reached No. 2 in the UK Singles Chart.

===1998–1999: &quot;Life Goes On&quot;===

In 1998, SASH! released the first single from his second album, &quot;La Primavera&quot;, which reached No. 3 in the UK, &quot;Mysterious Times&quot; which became their fourth UK No.2, (No. 2), and &quot;Move Mania&quot;, (No. 8). The following year, &quot;Colour the World&quot; peaked at No. 15 in the UK.

===2000-2003: &quot;Trilenium&quot; and &quot;S4! SASH!&quot;===

In 1999, SASH! released &quot;Adelante&quot;, the first single from album &quot;Trilenium&quot;. It peaked at No. 2 in the UK Singles Chart in January 2000, their fifth single to reach that position.

&quot;Encore Une Fois – The Greatest Hits&quot; is the group&#x27;s fourth album and was released on 30 October 2000.

In 2002, SASH! released the song &quot;Ganbareh&quot;, which means &quot;go for it&quot;. The song &quot;Run&quot; with Boy George was the next single release, with the new album released thereafter. The third single from the album &quot;S4!Sash!&quot; was &quot;I Believe&quot;, which featured TJ Davis, and was released in 2003.

===2007: &quot;10th Anniversary&quot;===

&quot;10th Anniversary&quot; is the sixth album by German DJ SASH!. It includes 16 singles, a &quot;reloaded&quot; version of &quot;Ecuador&quot;, previously unreleased songs, plus a bonus DVD including videoclips to all the songs from the album.
After fifteen years, all singles were released on one album, &quot;The Best Of&quot;. A new song called &quot;Raindrops&quot; reached No. 9 in the UK chart.

===2010-present===
On 28 April 2023, Sash! released the single &quot;Rock My Body&quot;, in collaboration with Dutch-Moroccan DJ and producer R3hab and Romanian singer Inna. The single interpolates &quot;Ecuador&quot;.

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;It&#x27;s My Life&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Life Goes On&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Trilenium&quot; (2000)
* &quot;S4!Sash!&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Life Is a Beach&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Life Changes&quot; (2013)

==References==
==External links==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159233" start="0" end="5" title="Sash!" label="Sash!"/>
<link wikidata="Q159233" start="21" end="26" title="Sash!" label="SASH!"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="40" end="42" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="43" end="53" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="125" end="141" title="recording studio" label="recording studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="319" end="321" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="340" end="350" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="396" end="402" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="404" end="411" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="413" end="420" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="425" end="432" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375539" start="865" end="877" title="Encore (musician)" label="Sabine Ohmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375558" start="914" end="929" title="Encore une fois" label="Encore une fois"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="964" end="980" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347797" start="1142" end="1161" title="Ecuador (song)" label="&amp;quot;Ecuador&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604998" start="1173" end="1177" title="Stay (Sash! song)" label="Stay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142122" start="1354" end="1366" title="La Primavera (song)" label="La Primavera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883705" start="1411" end="1427" title="Mysterious Times" label="Mysterious Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141625" start="1488" end="1498" title="Move Mania" label="Move Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958906" start="1541" end="1557" title="Colour the World" label="Colour the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q16671201" start="1689" end="1697" title="Adelante (Sash! song)" label="Adelante"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375553" start="1866" end="1901" title="Encore Une Fois – The Greatest Hits" label="Encore Une Fois – The Greatest Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="2099" end="2109" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459120" start="2217" end="2225" title="S4!Sash!" label="S4!Sash!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546984" start="2359" end="2375" title="10th Anniversary (Sash! album)" label="10th Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716765" start="2667" end="2678" title="The Best Of (Sash! album)" label="The Best Of"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284791" start="2710" end="2719" title="Raindrops (Encore une fois)" label="Raindrops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414998" start="2900" end="2905" title="R3hab" label="R3hab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12349" start="2926" end="2930" title="Inna" label="Inna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347797" start="2962" end="2969" title="Ecuador (song)" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155792" start="3017" end="3034" title="It&amp;#x27;s My Life – The Album" label="It&amp;#x27;s My Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544817" start="3056" end="3068" title="Life Goes On (Sash! album)" label="Life Goes On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841990" start="3090" end="3099" title="Trilenium" label="Trilenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459120" start="3121" end="3129" title="S4!Sash!" label="S4!Sash!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544845" start="3151" end="3166" title="Life Is a Beach" label="Life Is a Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334338" start="3188" end="3200" title="Life Changes (Sash! album)" label="Life Changes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141505" wikidata="Q724215" url="?curid=1141505" title="David Moores">
<text>David Richard Moores (15 March 1946 – 22 July 2022) was a British football executive, chairman of Liverpool F.C. from 1991 to 2007 and later the club&#x27;s honorary life president.

==Liverpool F.C.==
He became chairman of Liverpool F.C. on 18 September 1991. He owned 17,850 shares which represented 51% of the club. His uncle, Sir John Moores, was chairman of Everton F.C., although he was a small shareholder. John Moores created Littlewoods and made the Moores family one of the wealthiest in the UK. Littlewoods was sold in 2002 for £750m.

The family owned their stake in Liverpool F.C. for over 50 years. However, Moores increasingly sought external investment to help the club develop a new ground, and ended up selling it in 2007, to American investors Tom Hicks and George Gillett, in preference to Sheikh Mohammed and DIC. The deal turned sour soon after.

In 2010, Moores said that &quot;significant shareholders like Granada and Steve Morgan were insistent the board of Liverpool F.C. should accept the Gillett and Hicks offer and left me in no doubt about my legal duty to accept the offer&quot;.

In a letter to &quot;The Times&quot; in May 2010, Moores admitted that he &quot;hugely regrets&quot; selling Liverpool to the American duo. Moores called on Gillett and Hicks to step aside and find a suitable buyer for the club. Moores wrote: &quot;I call upon them now to stand back, accept their limitations as joint owners, acknowledge their role in the club&#x27;s current demise, and stand aside, with dignity&quot;.

Under the chairmanship of Moores, Liverpool had a turbulent period between 1991 and 1994 under manager Graeme Souness. When Moores sacked Souness in January 1994, it was the first time a Liverpool manager had been sacked since 1956. Moores said at the time that the decision to sack Souness was made because &quot;the results have been well below what is expected by the club and its supporters.&quot;

Under Moores, Liverpool went through their most barren spell for three decades. Though they won the most club competitions over the sixteen years, this excluded the most prized English Premiership. In 2005, Liverpool won a fifth UEFA Champions League after defeating AC Milan in the final.

After the departure of Moores, Kenny Dalglish returned to the manager&#x27;s position amid rumours that he had wanted to return in the mid-1990s, but was frustrated by the hesitancy and inconsistency of the decision-makers at Liverpool. Dalglish returned as manager in January 2011 but left the club at the end of the 2011–12 season.

==Personal life==
Moores&#x27;s first wife Kathy Anders was a beauty queen and model, who became Miss England in 1974. After just 18 months of marriage, Anders died in a car crash in September 1977, aged 26, when Moores&#x27; Jaguar car overturned into a ditch on a quiet country road in Lancashire. Moores went to hospital with serious head injuries. It was the second family tragedy that year for the Moores family. Five months earlier in April 1977, Moores&#x27;s elder brother Nigel died in a car crash in the South of France.

Moores was married to wife Marge in 1983 until her death in 2022. Moores was the heir to the Littlewoods Business empire. Lady Grantchester, daughter of Sir John Moores was the family head which was ranked joint 32nd in the 2009 Sunday Times Rich List with assets worth £1.2 bn.

Moores died at the age of 76 on 22 July 2022, just weeks after Marge&#x27;s death.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724215" start="0" end="20" title="David Moores" label="David Richard Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="98" end="112" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="224" end="238" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4308215" start="334" end="345" title="John Moores (British businessman)" label="John Moores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="363" end="375" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6653170" start="434" end="445" title="Littlewoods" label="Littlewoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q553219" start="763" end="772" title="Tom Hicks" label="Tom Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q738449" start="777" end="791" title="George N. Gillett, Jr." label="George Gillett"/>
<link wikidata="Q57655" start="810" end="825" title="Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum" label="Sheikh Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310562" start="830" end="833" title="Dubai International Capital" label="DIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="931" end="938" title="Granada Television" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576662" start="943" end="955" title="Steve Morgan (businessman)" label="Steve Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1134" end="1143" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q310352" start="1639" end="1653" title="Graeme Souness" label="Graeme Souness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="2168" end="2189" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="2206" end="2214" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q757107" start="2222" end="2227" title="2005 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q187198" start="2261" end="2275" title="Kenny Dalglish" label="Kenny Dalglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859083" start="2662" end="2674" title="Miss England" label="Miss England"/>
<link wikidata="Q612780" start="3326" end="3348" title="Sunday Times Rich List" label="Sunday Times Rich List"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141509" wikidata="Q707449" url="?curid=1141509" title="Censorinus">
<text>Censorinus () was a Roman grammarian and miscellaneous writer.
==Name==
From its grammatical form, Censorinus is presumably his cognomen, the shared surname of a branch of a Roman family (). The cognomen would typically be used by those descended from, adopted by, or related by prominent marriage to someone who had held the office of censor. Censorinus&#x27;s given name () and family name () are unknown, although the Marcii Censorini were by far the most prominent family to use the cognomen. The author is sometimes distinguished as ().

==Life==
Little is known of Censorinus, although he lived during the 3rd century and apparently dedicated to his patron Quintus Caerellius as a birthday gift.

==Works==
Censorinus was the author of a lost work as well as the surviving . 

 (Latin for &quot;On the Natal Day&quot; or &quot;On the Birthday&quot;) or (&quot;Little Work on the Birthday&quot;) was apparently written in 238 for the birthday of Censorinus&#x27;s patron Quintus Caerellius. The contents are of a varied character: the natural history of man, the influence of the stars and &quot;genii,&quot; music, religious rites, astronomy, the doctrines of the Greek philosophers, and antiquarian subjects. The second part deals with chronological and mathematical questions, and has been of great service in determining the principal epochs of ancient history. The whole is full of curious and interesting information. The style is clear and concise, although somewhat rhetorical, and the —for the period—good. The chief authorities used were Varro and Suetonius. Some scholars, indeed, hold that the entire work is practically an adaptation of the lost &quot;Pratum&quot; of Suetonius. The fragments of a work &quot;De Naturali Institutione&quot;, dealing with astronomy, geometry, music, and versification, and usually printed with the &quot;De Die Natali&quot; of Censorinus, are not by him. Part of the original manuscript, containing the end of the genuine work, and the title and name of the author of the fragment are lost.

==Legacy==
A bright crater in the Sea of Tranquility on the Moon has been named after him.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Editions===
* .
* .
* .
* , omitting the first 11 chapters.
* .


===Bibliography===


==External links==
* Corpus Grammaticorum Latinorum: complete texts and full bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q707449" start="0" end="10" title="Censorinus" label="Censorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="20" end="25" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="26" end="36" title="Philologist" label="grammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="128" end="136" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q250358" start="253" end="263" title="Roman adoption" label="adopted by"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299269" start="289" end="297" title="Roman marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="336" end="342" title="Roman censor" label="censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="362" end="372" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="380" end="391" title="family name" label="family name"/>
<link wikidata="Q54553260" start="421" end="437" title="Marcii Censorini" label="Marcii Censorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="785" end="790" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q654361" start="1101" end="1106" title="Genius (mythology)" label="genii"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="1121" end="1136" title="Ritual" label="religious rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1138" end="1147" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="1170" end="1188" title="Greek philosophers" label="Greek philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="1194" end="1205" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="1479" end="1487" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="1553" end="1558" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1563" end="1572" title="Suetonius&amp;#x27; minor works" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="1783" end="1791" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="1793" end="1798" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="1804" end="1817" title="Metre (poetry)" label="versification"/>
<link wikidata="Q210353" start="2062" end="2068" title="Censorinus (crater)" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="2076" end="2094" title="Mare Tranquillitatis" label="Sea of Tranquility"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141510" wikidata="Q206928" url="?curid=1141510" title="Lítla Dímun">
<text>Lítla Dímun is a small, uninhabited island between the islands of Suðuroy and Stóra Dímun in the Faroe Islands. It is the smallest of the main 18 islands, being less than a square kilometre (247 acres) in area, and is the only uninhabited one. The island can be seen from the villages of Hvalba and Sandvík.

==Etymology==
The name means &quot;Little Dímun&quot;, in contrast to &quot;Stóra Dímun&quot;, &quot;Great Dímun&quot;. According to Fridtjof Nansen, &quot;Dímun&quot; may represent a pre-Norse, Celtic toponymic element meaning &quot;double-neck&quot;. Stora and Litla Dímun shows a pairing of two distinctive but separate localities in one name. Gammeltoft concluded Dímun is a Scandinavian place name for a double-peaked feature of a particular appearance, reflecting a linguistic contact between Scandinavians and Gaels.

==Description==
The lowest third of the island is sheer cliff, with the rest rising to the mountain of Slættirnir, which reaches . The island is only inhabited by Faroe sheep and seabirds. Getting ashore is difficult, and can be performed only in perfect weather. The cliffs can be climbed with the aid of ropes placed by the owners of the sheep.

===Important Bird Area===
The island has been identified as an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International because of its significance as a breeding site for seabirds, especially European storm petrels (5000 pairs) and Atlantic puffins (10,000 pairs).

There are no land animals beside sheep.

==History==
The island has never been inhabited by humans, but sheep were kept there from ancient times, being mentioned in the 13th-century work the &quot;Færeyinga Saga&quot; (Saga of the Faroese). The saga also features the island as the site of a battle between Brestur, father of Sigmundur, and Gøtuskeggjar. The battle resulted in the death of Sigmund&#x27;s father and his men and the deportation of Sigmund to Norway, where he befriended Olaf Tryggvasson, the King of Norway from 995 to 1000.

The island used to be property of the Danish King, but it was difficult to get anyone to settle the island as it is very steep and hard to land at, and it was thus decided to sell it; it was mostly men from Hvalba who had used and rented the island until then. The auction was held in Hvalba on 24 July 1852, and the final bid was 4,820 Rigsdaler or 9,640 Dkk, quite a sum for the time. Men from Hvalba and Sandvík together outbid the Factor for the royal sales-station in Tvøroyri, who kept pushing the price up.

The island was then given to the men from Hvalba and Sandvík as Copyhold inheritance, against 40 Dkk in copyhold rent, and 10 Dkk every time there was a new owner. This money was in 1911 released with 1,000 Dkk, and thus did Lítla Dímun become the only privately owned island in the Faroes.

===Shipwreck===
In 1918, the Danish schooner &quot;Caspe&quot;, carrying a cargo of salt, was driven onto Lítla Dímun by a gale. The six crew were able to reach a narrow ledge just above the surf, but they had no stores, and the captain was severely injured. Eventually, they managed to move from the ledge, and found a cabin halfway up the island which had matches, fuel and a lamp. They caught two sheep and a sick bird, and were able to survive for seventeen days before being discovered and rescued by a fishing boat. One of the shipwrecked sailors eventually settled in the Faroes.

==Sheep==
The sheep now living on the island are Faroes sheep, but until the mid-nineteenth century it was occupied by feral sheep, probably derived from the earliest sheep brought to Northern Europe in the Neolithic Period. The last of these very small, black, short-wooled sheep were shot in the 1860s. They were similar in appearance and origin to the surviving Soay sheep, from the island of Soay in the St Kilda archipelago off the west coast of Scotland. Soay is an island of very similar size and topography to Lítla Dímun, and has similarly difficult access.

The modern Faroes sheep of the island are gathered each autumn. People sail to the island in a fishing boat, towing several rowing skiffs. About 40 people then form a chain across the island, driving the 200 or so sheep into a pen on the north side of the island. The sheep are then caught, restrained by tying their feet together, put in nets five at a time and lowered by ropes to the skiffs. Each skiff then takes its load of 15 sheep to the fishing boat, which returns to the island of Suðuroy. The sheep are unloaded on the wharf in the village of Hvalba, where they are placed in rows and distributed to their owners. A few sheep escape the gathering, and from time to time these are shot.

==In popular culture==
In Pierdomenico Baccalario&#x27;s book trilogy Cyboria, New City, a futuristic utopic city, is located in this island and covered by clouds on top to not to be seen in the air.

==Photos==
==References==
=== Secondary sources ===


== External links ==
* Website of Lítla Dímun (aerial photos)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206928" start="0" end="11" title="Lítla Dímun" label="Lítla Dímun"/>
<link wikidata="Q210309" start="66" end="73" title="Suðuroy" label="Suðuroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212040" start="78" end="89" title="Stóra Dímun" label="Stóra Dímun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="97" end="110" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q666627" start="288" end="294" title="Hvalba" label="Hvalba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025816" start="299" end="306" title="Sandvík" label="Sandvík"/>
<link wikidata="Q72292" start="442" end="457" title="Fridtjof Nansen" label="Fridtjof Nansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="511" end="518" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481227" start="997" end="1008" title="Faroe sheep" label="Faroe sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1013" end="1020" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="1245" end="1264" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="1268" end="1290" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1342" end="1349" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q27461" start="1363" end="1384" title="European storm petrel" label="European storm petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26685" start="1403" end="1418" title="Atlantic puffin" label="Atlantic puffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000933" start="1634" end="1648" title="Færeyinga Saga" label="Færeyinga Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q213801" start="1924" end="1940" title="Olaf Tryggvasson" label="Olaf Tryggvasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="2018" end="2029" title="List of Danish monarchs" label="Danish King"/>
<link wikidata="Q666627" start="2187" end="2193" title="Hvalba" label="Hvalba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296536" start="2317" end="2326" title="Danish rigsdaler" label="Rigsdaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q25417" start="2336" end="2339" title="Danish krone" label="Dkk"/>
<link wikidata="Q323336" start="2415" end="2421" title="Factor (agent)" label="Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q754666" start="2453" end="2461" title="Tvøroyri" label="Tvøroyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990719" start="2559" end="2567" title="Copyhold" label="Copyhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="2823" end="2831" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481227" start="3424" end="3436" title="Faroes (sheep)" label="Faroes sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="3494" end="3499" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="3542" end="3547" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3582" end="3591" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q502330" start="3740" end="3750" title="Soay sheep" label="Soay sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574956" start="3771" end="3775" title="Soay, St Kilda" label="Soay"/>
<link wikidata="Q166479" start="3783" end="3803" title="St Kilda, Scotland" label="St Kilda archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q611564" start="4074" end="4079" title="skiff" label="skiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q210309" start="4433" end="4440" title="Suðuroy" label="Suðuroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q666627" start="4496" end="4502" title="Hvalba" label="Hvalba"/>
<link wikidata="Q923530" start="4666" end="4689" title="Pierdomenico Baccalario" label="Pierdomenico Baccalario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141512" wikidata="Q1142022" url="?curid=1141512" title="A Musical Joke">
<text>A Musical Joke () K. 522, (divertimento for two horns in F, and string quartet) is a composition by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart; he entered it in his &quot;&quot; (&quot;Catalogue of All My Works&quot;) on 14 June 1787. Commentators have opined that the piece&#x27;s purpose is satirical – that &quot;[its] harmonic and rhythmic gaffes serve to parody the work of incompetent composers&quot; – though Mozart himself is not known to have revealed his actual intentions.

The beginning of the fourth movement is well-known in Britain as the theme tune to the BBC&#x27;s television coverage of the Horse of the Year Show.

==English name==

The title &quot;A Musical Joke&quot; might be a poor rendering of the German original: &quot;&quot; does not necessarily connote the jocular, for which the word &quot;&quot; would more likely be used. In Fritz Spiegl&#x27;s view, a more accurate translation would be &quot;Some Musical Fun&quot;. The sometimes-mentioned nicknames (&quot;village musicians&#x27; sextet&quot;) and (&quot;farmers&#x27; symphony&quot;) were added after Mozart&#x27;s death; these names ridicule the players more than inept composers.

==Structure and compositional elements==


The piece consists of four movements and takes about 20 minutes to perform.
# Allegro (sonata form), F major
# Menuetto and trio, F major (trio in B major)
# Adagio cantabile, C major
# Presto (sonata rondo form), F major

Compositorial comedic devices include:
*secondary dominants replacing necessary subdominant chords;
*dissonance in the horns;
*parallel fifths
*whole-tone scales in the violin&#x27;s high register;
*clumsy orchestration, backing a thin melodic line with a heavy, monotonous accompaniment in the last movement;
*going to the wrong keys for a sonata-form structure (the first movement, for example, never succeeds in modulating to the dominant, and simply jumps there instead after a few failed attempts);
*starting the slow movement in the wrong key (G major instead of C major);
*a pathetic attempt at a fugato, also in the last movement.

The piece is notable for one of the earliest known uses of polytonality (though not the earliest, being predated by Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber&#x27;s &quot;Battalia&quot;), creating the gesture of complete collapse at the finale. This may be intended to produce the impression of grossly out-of-tune string playing, since the horns alone conclude in the tonic key. The lower strings behave as if the tonic has become B, while the violins and violas switch to G major, A major and E major, respectively.

==References==
==External links==
*
*, Dennis Brain, Neill Sanders (horn); Manoug Parikian (violin); London Philharmonic Orchestra, Guido Cantelli</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162478" start="18" end="20" title="Köchel catalogue" label="K."/>
<link wikidata="Q647653" start="27" end="39" title="divertimento" label="divertimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757829" start="48" end="53" title="natural horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="64" end="78" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="100" end="123" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="553" end="556" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q238715" start="591" end="613" title="Horse of the Year Show" label="Horse of the Year Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468456" start="838" end="850" title="Fritz Spiegl" label="Fritz Spiegl"/>
<link wikidata="Q929848" start="1220" end="1229" title="movement (music)" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q212044" start="1280" end="1291" title="sonata form" label="sonata form"/>
<link wikidata="Q913790" start="1294" end="1301" title="F major" label="F major"/>
<link wikidata="Q205734" start="1304" end="1321" title="Minuet and trio" label="Menuetto and trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q795134" start="1340" end="1347" title="B-flat major" label="B major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022293" start="1369" end="1376" title="C major" label="C major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151776" start="1387" end="1404" title="sonata rondo form" label="sonata rondo form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411564" start="1456" end="1474" title="secondary dominant" label="secondary dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q536541" start="1496" end="1507" title="subdominant" label="subdominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="1517" end="1527" title="dissonance (music)" label="dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q495018" start="1543" end="1558" title="parallel fifths" label="parallel fifths"/>
<link wikidata="Q844877" start="1560" end="1576" title="whole-tone scale" label="whole-tone scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367000" start="1622" end="1635" title="orchestration" label="orchestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728362" start="1966" end="1973" title="G major" label="G major"/>
<link wikidata="Q181014" start="2020" end="2026" title="fugato" label="fugato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358845" start="2115" end="2127" title="polytonality" label="polytonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q153455" start="2172" end="2198" title="Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber" label="Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber"/>
<link wikidata="Q210411" start="2410" end="2419" title="tonic key" label="tonic key"/>
<link wikidata="Q277793" start="2524" end="2531" title="A major" label="A major"/>
<link wikidata="Q934895" start="2536" end="2543" title="E-flat major" label="E major"/>
<link wikidata="Q919550" start="2599" end="2611" title="Dennis Brain" label="Dennis Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989582" start="2613" end="2626" title="Neill Sanders" label="Neill Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286501" start="2635" end="2650" title="Manoug Parikian" label="Manoug Parikian"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="2661" end="2690" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q712014" start="2692" end="2706" title="Guido Cantelli" label="Guido Cantelli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141514" wikidata="Q2575867" url="?curid=1141514" title="Ufton Nervet">
<text>Ufton Nervet is a village and civil parish in West Berkshire, England centred west southwest of the large town of Reading and 7 miles
east of Thatcham. Ufton Nervet has an elected civil parish council.

==Toponymy==
&quot;Ufton&quot; is derived from the Old English &quot;Uffa-tūn&quot; = &quot;Uffa&#x27;s farmstead&quot;; the Domesday Book of 1086 records it as &quot;Offetune&quot;.

==Geography==
Ufton Nervet is a strip parish about long and up to wide, running roughly north-northwest – south-southeast between the Kennet valley and the crest of low hills in its south. It is bounded to the north by the A4 road, to the south by a minor road linking Burghfield and Tadley, and to the west and east by a mixture of field boundaries and minor roads. It includes a section of the River Kennet, the Kennet Navigation and the railway between Reading and Taunton.

Ufton Nervet village is a nucleated village close to the parish&#x27;s eastern boundary, less than a mile from Burghfield Common and Sulhamstead. Two minor roads link the village with the A4, crossing the canal and the railway line in the valley bottom. Both lanes cross the canal by swing bridges. The larger, Tyle Mill Road, passes through part of Sulhamstead and crosses the railway by a bridge. The smaller, Ufton Lane, passes through Ufton Green and used to cross the railway by a level crossing, replaced by a bridge in December 2016. Other lanes link the village with Burghfield Common, Sulhamstead Abbots and Mortimer. Its direct link with Padworth to the west is a footpath past Ufton Court; the only road links with Padworth are circuitous ones via the southern or northern edges of the parish.

==History==

===Archaeology===
Excavation of a site at Ufton Green found a number of scattered Mesolithic stone artefacts. They are interpreted as evidence of stone-working to make tools or weapons.

===Manors===
Three manors have existed in this area: Ufton Robert, Ufton Nervet and Ufton Pole. The Domesday Book records the first two.

The original Ufton Nervet, also called Ufton Richard, was about northwest of the current village, at the current site of Ufton Green. It had its own parish church of St John the Baptist, the ruined west wall of which survives and is a scheduled monument. The place was named after Richard Neyrvut, later corrupted to Nervet, who held the manor in the 13th century.
Ufton Robert manor house was just west of the current village. Its moat and a set of three medieval fishponds survive and are also a scheduled monument. An artificial stream, controlled by a set of sluices, fed the moat and ponds. Excavations in the 19th century found bridge piles, a gateway and other foundations.
The Perkyns family held the manor from about 1411. When they bought the manor of Ufton Pole in 1560 they merged the two manors and moved the main residence to Ufton Pole. This is now Ufton Court, a large Elizabethan manor house about southwest of the village. The house was built in about 1568, altered in the 17th and 18th centuries, restored in 1838 and is now a Grade I listed building.

In 1434–35 the parishes of Ufton Nervet and Ufton Robert were merged and Ufton Robert&#x27;s parish church of St Peter was made the church of the merged parish. Although the original parish of Ufton Nervet had ceased to exist, this eventually became the name of the current village and parish. After the merger, Ufton Robert&#x27;s parish church of St John the Baptist fell into decay, but its west wall survived by being adopted as the dividing wall between two cottages. In 1886 the cottages were demolished, re-exposing the west wall which now stands isolated in a pasture.

===Parish church===
The Church of England parish church of Saint Peter was built in 1862 on the site of an earlier church. It is a Gothic Revival rendition of 14th-century Decorated Gothic. The walls are predominantly rag-stone with ashlar dressings. It has a chancel, north chapel (used as an organ chamber), nave of three bays, west tower with tall octagonal shingled spire, and south porch.

The present St Peter&#x27;s contains church monuments salvaged from the old church. They include one to Richard Perkins (died 1560) with Corinthian columns, one to Francis and Anna Perkyns (died 1615–16 and 1635) with recumbent effigies and a brass to William and Constantia Smith (died 1627 and 1610). St Peter&#x27;s has stained glass windows from two London makers: Charles Clutterbuck and Lavers and Barraud.

In front of the porch is a mature yew tree. The church is redundant] as the ecclesiastical parish church is today that of &quot;Sulhamstead Abbots and Bannister with Ufton Nervet&quot; which is in the upper part of Sulhamstead.

In 1720 Oriel College, Oxford, bought the advowson of Ufton Nervet. Some eminent fellows of the college went on to serve as rectors of the parish, including Henry Beeke (1789-1819, botanist and creator of income tax), James Fraser (1860-1870, future Bishop of Manchester), and Thomas Brooking Cornish (1878-1906, former headmaster of the King&#x27;s School, Macclesfield).

==Transport==
The River Kennet flows through the north of the parish. Between 1718 and 1723 it was made navigable by digging a series of cuts controlled by locks. One cut starts about downstream from Aldermaston and ends at Ufton Bridge, where it was controlled by Ufton Lock. The lock gates have now been removed but the lock chamber survives. Between 1794 and 1810 the Kennet and Avon Canal was built from Newbury to Bath. The Kennet Navigation is now managed as part of the canal.

The Berkshire section of the Berks and Hants Railway from to was built through the north of the parish and opened in 1847. The nearest station is , by road.

===Rail crash===

The Ufton Nervet crash took place in the parish on 6 November 2004. Seven people were killed and 70 injured when the 17:35 1C92 from London to was partially derailed by colliding with a stationary car on the level crossing, before subsequently passing over a set of points for the Down Goods Loop at Towney, causing a major derailment. The inquest concluded that the car driver, who was killed in the collision, committed suicide.
Road deaths at the crossing after the major crash in 2004 have followed in 2009, 2010, 2012 and 2014, bringing the total number of fatalities to eleven. 

On 18 April 2016, work began on constructing a single-carriageway bridge over the railway, at a cost of £7 million. It was completed and opened on 16 December 2016.

==References==
==Sources==
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2575867" start="0" end="12" title="Ufton Nervet" label="Ufton Nervet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473780" start="46" end="60" title="West Berkshire" label="West Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="114" end="121" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026304" start="142" end="150" title="Thatcham" label="Thatcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="254" end="265" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="328" end="341" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624092" start="419" end="431" title="strip parish" label="strip parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966303" start="610" end="617" title="A4 road (England)" label="A4 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530517" start="656" end="666" title="Burghfield Common" label="Burghfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q773052" start="671" end="677" title="Tadley" label="Tadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987365" start="783" end="795" title="River Kennet" label="River Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="801" end="818" title="River Kennet#Navigation" label="Kennet Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265965" start="827" end="862" title="Reading to Taunton line" label="railway between Reading and Taunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068215" start="891" end="908" title="nucleated village" label="nucleated village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289256" start="998" end="1009" title="Sulhamstead" label="Sulhamstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q950431" start="1149" end="1161" title="swing bridge" label="swing bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982217" start="1482" end="1490" title="Stratfield Mortimer" label="Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691579" start="1513" end="1521" title="Padworth" label="Padworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1766" end="1776" title="Prehistoric Britain#Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="1890" end="1896" title="Manorialism" label="manors"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="2158" end="2171" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="2178" end="2194" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="2244" end="2262" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="2387" end="2398" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="2441" end="2445" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2465" end="2473" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877547" start="2873" end="2884" title="Ufton Court" label="Ufton Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365000" start="2894" end="2905" title="Elizabethan architecture" label="Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3055" end="3078" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="3191" end="3199" title="Saint Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="3683" end="3714" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="3718" end="3729" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="3790" end="3804" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3831" end="3847" title="English Gothic architecture#Decorated Gothic" label="Decorated Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282754" start="3877" end="3886" title="rag-stone" label="rag-stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="3892" end="3898" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="3919" end="3926" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="3969" end="3973" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124247" start="3983" end="3987" title="Bay (architecture)" label="bays"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835372" start="4091" end="4107" title="English church monuments" label="church monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="4191" end="4201" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="4202" end="4208" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q899459" start="4297" end="4302" title="monumental brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452687" start="4423" end="4442" title="Charles Edmund Clutterbuck" label="Charles Clutterbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502615" start="4447" end="4465" title="Lavers, Barraud and Westlake" label="Lavers and Barraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="4502" end="4510" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew tree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4544" end="4572" title="ecclesiastical parish church" label="ecclesiastical parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="4705" end="4726" title="Oriel College, Oxford" label="Oriel College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146818" start="4739" end="4747" title="advowson" label="advowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="4778" end="4785" title="fellow" label="fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717974" start="4854" end="4865" title="Henry Beeke" label="Henry Beeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="4902" end="4912" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161089" start="4915" end="4927" title="James Fraser (bishop)" label="James Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917914" start="4947" end="4967" title="Bishop of Manchester" label="Bishop of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744474" start="5035" end="5067" title="King&amp;#x27;s School, Macclesfield" label="King&amp;#x27;s School, Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="5227" end="5232" title="Lock (water transport)" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q258642" start="5271" end="5282" title="Aldermaston" label="Aldermaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421566" start="5336" end="5346" title="Ufton Lock" label="Ufton Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412795" start="5442" end="5463" title="Kennet and Avon Canal" label="Kennet and Avon Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q655874" start="5479" end="5486" title="Newbury, Berkshire" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="5490" end="5494" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q820955" start="5585" end="5608" title="Berks and Hants Railway" label="Berks and Hants Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5940" end="5954" title="Level crossing#United Kingdom" label="level crossing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141518" wikidata="Q358214" url="?curid=1141518" title="Josemi">
<text>José Miguel González Rey (born 15 November 1979), known as Josemi, is a Spanish former footballer. Mainly a right back, he also played as a central defender.

He appeared in 178 La Liga matches over nine seasons (one goal), with Málaga, Villarreal and Mallorca, also representing Liverpool for one and a half seasons where he won two major titles including the 2005 Champions League. He later competed professionally in Greece, before moving to the newly formed Indian Super League.

==Club career==
===Early career===
Born in Torremolinos, Málaga, Josemi started his professional career at Málaga CF, arriving from local amateurs Torremolinos Club de Fútbol in 1998. He started appearing for his new club with the reserve team, in Tercera División.

After one match in 2000–01&#x27;s closer, a 0–4 away loss against Deportivo de La Coruña on 17 June 2001, Josemi went on to become an essential defensive element for the Andalusia side, helping them to the 2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup and soon attracting interest from bigger European clubs.

===Liverpool===
Subsequently, Josemi became Rafael Benítez&#x27;s first signing as Liverpool manager, for £2 million in the summer of 2004. He played 15 games in the Premier League in his debut season and, after an initial run, he was sent off in the club&#x27;s 4–2 victory at Fulham on 16 October 2004, his subsequent ban leading to Steve Finnan re-establishing himself as first-choice right-back.

Josemi made seven appearances (five starts) in the Reds&#x27; victorious campaign in the UEFA Champions League, but struggled to make the substitutes bench in the knockout stages, and also lost his place in the first half of 2005–06, suggesting he would soon leave Anfield.

===Return to Spain===
On 29 December 2005, it was announced that Liverpool and Villarreal CF had agreed to swap Josemi and Jan Kromkamp in the January 2006 transfer window. He made a good start and appeared in 22 league matches in 2006–07, but only took part in only one the following season for the eventual La Liga runners-up.

In July 2008, Josemi signed for RCD Mallorca. He scored his first goal as a professional on 23 November, in a 2–2 home draw against former owners Málaga. In his second year he was challenged by new signing Felipe Mattioni, but ended up contributing with 28 games as the Balearic Islands side finished fifth and qualified for the UEFA Europa League.

===Later years===
At nearly 31, Josemi left Spain for the second time in August 2010, signing a three-year contract with Iraklis Thessaloniki FC. After only one season – which brought Superleague Greece relegation due to irregularities – however, he returned to his country and joined FC Cartagena in Segunda División, on a two-year deal.

On 21 August 2014, after two seasons in Greece with Levadiakos F.C. and Skoda Xanthi F.C. respectively, Josemi was a third-round draft pick for Atlético de Kolkata in the inaugural draft of the Indian Super League draft. He made his debut in the competition in the opening match, starting a 3–0 home victory over Mumbai City FC, and formed a formidable stopper partnership with Arnab Mondal during his first year, acting as team captain in the final win over the Kerala Blasters in the absence of countryman Luis García, where he also won the Fittest Player of the Match award.

Following his successful debut season, on 12 June 2015 Josemi renewed his contract with Atlético for one more year. He was released on 13 November, after being ruled out for the remainder of the campaign due to injury.

On 22 September 2016, after almost a year with a club, 36-year-old Josemi announced his retirement. In February 2017, he returned to Málaga as match delegate.

==Club statistics==


==Honours==
Málaga
*UEFA Intertoto Cup: 2002

Liverpool
*UEFA Champions League: 2004–05
*UEFA Super Cup: 2005
*Football League Cup: Runner-up 2004–05
*FIFA Club World Championship runner-up: 2005

Atlético Kolkata
*Indian Super League: 2014

==References==
==External links==
* Profile at the Liverpool F.C. website
* 
* 
* Liverpool historic profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q358214" start="0" end="24" title="Josemi" label="José Miguel González Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q358214" start="59" end="65" title="Josemi" label="Josemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="87" end="97" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="108" end="118" title="Defender (association football)#Full-back" label="right back"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="140" end="156" title="Defender (association football)#Centre-back" label="central defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="178" end="185" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8857" start="229" end="235" title="Málaga CF" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297" start="237" end="247" title="Villarreal CF" label="Villarreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8835" start="252" end="260" title="RCD Mallorca" label="Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="280" end="289" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q757107" start="361" end="382" title="2005 Champions League Final" label="2005 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="462" end="481" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q492737" start="527" end="539" title="Torremolinos" label="Torremolinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q95028" start="541" end="547" title="Province of Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8857" start="591" end="600" title="Málaga CF" label="Málaga CF"/>
<link wikidata="Q780509" start="715" end="727" title="Atlético Malagueño" label="reserve team"/>
<link wikidata="Q749736" start="732" end="748" title="Tercera División" label="Tercera División"/>
<link wikidata="Q677224" start="770" end="777" title="2000–01 La Liga" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q8760" start="817" end="839" title="Deportivo de La Coruña" label="Deportivo de La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="921" end="930" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="957" end="980" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="1083" end="1097" title="Rafael Benítez" label="Rafael Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="1122" end="1131" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="1145" end="1146" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1205" end="1219" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q456869" start="1223" end="1239" title="2004–05 FA Premier League" label="his debut season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="1274" end="1282" title="Ejection (sports)" label="sent off"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="1317" end="1323" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q239914" start="1374" end="1386" title="Steve Finnan" label="Steve Finnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="1502" end="1521" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="victorious campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="1529" end="1550" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850936" start="1578" end="1595" title="Substitute (association football)" label="substitutes bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001847" start="1603" end="1618" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League knockout stage" label="knockout stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q269486" start="1665" end="1672" title="2005–06 FA Premier League" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="1705" end="1712" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297" start="1794" end="1807" title="Villarreal CF" label="Villarreal CF"/>
<link wikidata="Q313054" start="1838" end="1850" title="Jan Kromkamp" label="Jan Kromkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q622822" start="1871" end="1886" title="transfer window" label="transfer window"/>
<link wikidata="Q476653" start="1946" end="1953" title="2006–07 La Liga" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q244367" start="1986" end="2006" title="2007–08 La Liga" label="the following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="2024" end="2031" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8835" start="2077" end="2089" title="RCD Mallorca" label="RCD Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q208362" start="2202" end="2217" title="2009–10 La Liga" label="his second year"/>
<link wikidata="Q337639" start="2251" end="2266" title="Felipe Mattioni" label="Felipe Mattioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="2315" end="2331" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q206657" start="2356" end="2365" title="2010–11 UEFA Europa League" label="qualified"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="2374" end="2392" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q592241" start="2516" end="2539" title="Iraklis Thessaloniki F.C." label="Iraklis Thessaloniki FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194166" start="2552" end="2562" title="2010–11 Superleague Greece" label="one season"/>
<link wikidata="Q235114" start="2579" end="2597" title="Superleague Greece" label="Superleague Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q611653" start="2680" end="2692" title="FC Cartagena" label="FC Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q35615" start="2696" end="2712" title="Segunda División" label="Segunda División"/>
<link wikidata="Q824450" start="2787" end="2802" title="Levadiakos F.C." label="Levadiakos F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q750437" start="2807" end="2824" title="Skoda Xanthi F.C." label="Skoda Xanthi F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16836329" start="2879" end="2898" title="Atlético de Kolkata" label="Atlético de Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17988763" start="2906" end="2921" title="2014 ISL Inaugural International Draft" label="inaugural draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="2929" end="2948" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845355" start="3048" end="3062" title="Mumbai City FC" label="Mumbai City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794407" start="3113" end="3125" title="Arnab Mondal" label="Arnab Mondal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834816" start="3133" end="3147" title="2014 Indian Super League season" label="his first year"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="3159" end="3171" title="Captain (association football)" label="team captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702233" start="3175" end="3184" title="2014 Indian Super League Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842784" start="3198" end="3213" title="Kerala Blasters" label="Kerala Blasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q295416" start="3243" end="3254" title="Luis García (footballer, born 1978)" label="Luis García"/>
<link wikidata="Q18701836" start="3505" end="3517" title="2015 Indian Super League season" label="the campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="3736" end="3754" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="3756" end="3760" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="3773" end="3794" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="3796" end="3803" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="3805" end="3819" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q748083" start="3821" end="3825" title="2005 UEFA Super Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="3827" end="3846" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606640" start="3858" end="3865" title="2004–05 Football League Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="3867" end="3895" title="FIFA Club World Championship" label="FIFA Club World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q311588" start="3907" end="3911" title="2005 FIFA Club World Championship Final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056350" start="3931" end="3950" title="Indian Super League" label="Indian Super League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834816" start="3952" end="3956" title="2014 Indian Super League season" label="2014"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141524" wikidata="Q5200813" url="?curid=1141524" title="Cyril Maude">
<text>Cyril Francis Maude (24 April 1862 — 20 February 1951) was an English actor-manager.

==Biography==
Maude was born in London and educated at Wixenford and Charterhouse School. In 1881, he was sent to Adelaide, South Australia, on the clipper ship &quot;City of Adelaide&quot; to regain his health. He returned to Britain without having regained his health, but nursing the ambition to be an actor.
He studied acting under Charles Cartwright and Roma Le Thiere, but was forced to leave the country again for health reasons. He travelled to Canada and America, fulfilling his acting ambition with Daniel Bandman&#x27;s company in Denver, Colorado in 1884.

Between 1896 until 1905 he was co-manager of the Haymarket Theatre in London with Frederick Harrison. There he became known for his quietly humorous acting in many parts. However in 1900 he managed the production of the Little Minister at the Regent Theatre in Salford. 

In 1906 he went into management on his own account, and in 1907 he opened the Playhouse, also in London. Between 1911 and 1919 he acted largely in the United States where he played new comedies. He returned to London in 1919 and established himself at the Criterion Theatre.

Maude became very well known for his role in &quot;Grumpy&quot; as a spoilt old man, who as a retired lawyer solved a crime to keep his loved ones happy. Maude took this play to Australia and toured Adelaide, Melbourne, Brisbane and Sydney where it was immensely popular. In 1923 he toured America with Lydia Bilbrook and Mabel Terry-Lewis in &quot;If Winter Comes&quot;, playing at Chicago in April and New York in the autumn.

==Films==
He starred in several films in the 1930s, including &quot;Grumpy&quot;. In 1947, he appeared at the age of 85 in the film &quot;While the Sun Shines&quot;.

==Personal life==

Maude was the eldest son of Captain Charles Henry Maude, a captain in the Indian Army, and the Honorable Georgina Hanbury-Tracy. His maternal grandfather was Thomas Hanbury-Tracy, 2nd Baron Sudeley.

In 1888, Maude married actress Winifred Emery, the daughter of Samuel Anderson Emery and granddaughter of John Emery, both well-known actors in their day. Their children included Margery Maude, who became an actress; Pamela Cynthia Maude (1893–1975); and John Cyril Maude, who became a barrister, judge and Member of Parliament. Pamela Maude married Major William La Touche Congreve VC, DSO, MC on 1 June 1916. He was killed in action on 20 July 1916 during World War I, for which he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross. On 22 December 1919 she married the Hon. William Fraser, DSO, MC (1890–1964), who later became a Brigadier.

They also brought up a niece, Winifred Isabel Emery (1890–1972), after the girl was abandoned by Emery&#x27;s brother in 1895. This niece, together with her pupil Ruby Preece, was present when dramatist W. S. Gilbert died in his lake at Grim&#x27;s Dyke in May 1911. Winifred Isabel Emery was the mother of poet David Gascoyne.

==Actors&#x27; Orphanage Fund==
In 1905, Maude succeeded Sir Henry Irving as the President of the Actors&#x27; Orphanage Fund. During his tenure, he established the first orphanage for actors&#x27; children at Croydon, inaugurated innovative fundraising schemes and events, attracted royal patronage, and secured committee members from among leading actors of the day. He served until 1914. 

==Death==
Maude died at Torquay, Devon on 20 February 1951.

==Filmography==
* &quot;Beauty and the Barge&quot; (1914)
* &quot;Peer Gynt&quot; (1915)
* &quot;The Greater Will&quot; (1915)
* &quot;The Headmaster&quot; (1921)
* &quot;Grumpy&quot; (1930)
* &quot;These Charming People&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Counsel&#x27;s Opinion&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Orders Is Orders&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Girls Will Be Boys&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Heat Wave&quot; (1935)
* &quot;While the Sun Shines&quot; (1947)

==References==
==Sources==
* 

==External links==
*
*portrait Gallery of Cyril Maude at the New York Public Library (NYPL)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5200813" start="0" end="19" title="Cyril Maude" label="Cyril Francis Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677709" start="70" end="83" title="actor-manager" label="actor-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238579" start="141" end="150" title="Wixenford School" label="Wixenford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067870" start="155" end="174" title="Charterhouse School" label="Charterhouse School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="200" end="208" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="210" end="225" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036248" start="253" end="269" title="City of Adelaide (1864)" label="City of Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q65807725" start="422" end="440" title="Charles Cartwright" label="Charles Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q110355955" start="445" end="459" title="Roma Le Thiere" label="Roma Le Thiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217035" start="595" end="616" title="Daniel E. Bandmann" label="Daniel Bandman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="628" end="644" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="704" end="721" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="916" end="923" title="Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677709" start="948" end="958" title="Actor-manager" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203366" start="1005" end="1014" title="Playhouse Theatre, London" label="Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1078" end="1091" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002925" start="1183" end="1200" title="Criterion Theatre" label="Criterion Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777253" start="1254" end="1260" title="Grumpy (1930 film)" label="Grumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="1412" end="1421" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="1423" end="1431" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1436" end="1442" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9025730" start="1506" end="1520" title="Lydia Bilbrook" label="Lydia Bilbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q581704" start="1525" end="1542" title="Mabel Terry-Lewis" label="Mabel Terry-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1586" end="1593" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1607" end="1615" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777253" start="1700" end="1706" title="Grumpy (1930 film)" label="Grumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790384" start="1976" end="2015" title="Thomas Hanbury-Tracy, 2nd Baron Sudeley" label="Thomas Hanbury-Tracy, 2nd Baron Sudeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025383" start="2049" end="2063" title="Winifred Emery" label="Winifred Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410767" start="2081" end="2102" title="Samuel Anderson Emery" label="Samuel Anderson Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760309" start="2197" end="2210" title="Margery Maude" label="Margery Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247220" start="2273" end="2289" title="John Cyril Maude" label="John Cyril Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2325" end="2345" title="Member of Parliament" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912363" start="2374" end="2400" title="Billy Congreve" label="William La Touche Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="2401" end="2403" title="Victoria Cross" label="VC"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="2405" end="2408" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="2410" end="2412" title="Military Cross" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="2531" end="2545" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009357" start="2583" end="2602" title="Brigadier the Hon. William Fraser" label="Hon. William Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="2604" end="2607" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="2609" end="2611" title="Military Cross" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="2644" end="2653" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059288" start="2819" end="2830" title="Patricia Preece" label="Ruby Preece"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="2859" end="2872" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609183" start="2893" end="2909" title="Grim&amp;#x27;s Dyke" label="Grim&amp;#x27;s Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q176372" start="2968" end="2982" title="David Gascoyne" label="David Gascoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q32505" start="3046" end="3058" title="Henry Irving" label="Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677739" start="3083" end="3110" title="Actors&amp;#x27; Charitable Trust" label="Actors&amp;#x27; Orphanage Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="3195" end="3202" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209055" start="3402" end="3409" title="Torquay" label="Torquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="3411" end="3416" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877918" start="3463" end="3483" title="Beauty and the Barge (1914 film)" label="Beauty and the Barge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18709041" start="3505" end="3514" title="Peer Gynt (1915 film)" label="Peer Gynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879252" start="3536" end="3552" title="The Greater Will" label="The Greater Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599953" start="3574" end="3588" title="The Headmaster (film)" label="The Headmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777253" start="3610" end="3616" title="Grumpy (1930 film)" label="Grumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783357" start="3638" end="3659" title="These Charming People" label="These Charming People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176611" start="3681" end="3703" title="Counsel&amp;#x27;s Opinion" label="Counsel&amp;#x27;s Opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100753" start="3725" end="3741" title="Orders Is Orders" label="Orders Is Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564675" start="3763" end="3781" title="Girls Will Be Boys" label="Girls Will Be Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527715" start="3803" end="3812" title="Heat Wave (1935 film)" label="Heat Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993640" start="3834" end="3854" title="While the Sun Shines" label="While the Sun Shines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141528" wikidata="Q5309050" url="?curid=1141528" title="Drum Corps International">
<text>Drum Corps International (DCI) is a governing body for drum and bugle corps. Founded in 1971 and known as &quot;marching music&#x27;s major league,&quot; DCI develops and enforces rules of competition and judges at sanctioned drum and bugle corps competitions throughout the United States and Canada. It is headquartered in Indianapolis, Indiana. In 2023, Drum Corps Associates (DCA) and DCI joined to become the sole governing body for drum and bugle corps in North America.

== History ==
===20th century===
In 1971, at the urging of then-director of The Cavaliers Don Warren and Troopers director Jim Jones, the directors from Blue Stars, Madison Scouts, and Santa Clara Vanguard, cooperated to form the &quot;Midwest Combine&quot;. The Combine corps would market themselves to show promoters as a package.

The partnership was a reaction to perceived inflexibility of the American Legion and VFW, who were the primary sponsors of competing drum corps and the hosts of the only high-prestige national championships. Another source of contention was low-to-nonexistent appearance fees paid to independent corps who were neither sponsored nor affiliated with any veterans post. Only those independent corps who placed among the top three at either of the national championships were paid any appearance fees, which deterred many corps from competing. Many local show sponsors and promoters rarely paid appearance fees to any corps. A similar combine of five drum corps had formed in the Northeast known informally as the Alliance.

Its members were: 27th Lancers, Garfield Cadets, Boston Crusaders, Blessed Sacrament Golden Knights, and Blue Rock. Despite objections from veterans associations, and boycotts by adjudicators, both the Combine and the Alliance remained intact for the 1971 competitive season. After discussions during the VFW National Championships, the members of both groups agreed to meet at the next American Legion Uniformed Group Rules Congress to discuss forming a new, independent, governing body. Also invited to the meeting were the Anaheim Kingsmen, Argonne Rebels, and De La Salle Oaklands. Drum Corps International was established by thirteen corps on or after October 21, 1971.

Given difficulties experienced during the 1971 season, members agreed not to interfere with the long-established regional competition circuits, especially those sponsored by the veterans organizations, but to boycott the other prestige championships, such as the Fleetwood Record&#x27;s World Open Championship. The members also agreed to develop their own adjudicators committee instead of relying on any existing association. Additionally, member corps would be allowed to compete where they wished with few exceptions. However, all member corps would be required to attend a specific number of sanctioned competitions as well as an annual World Championship which would be scheduled in late-August after the other championships. Members also agreed to remain united if boycotting a particular event, show sponsor, or business, such as the boycott against Fleetwood Records over rights issues, if such an action proved necessary. The first World Championship was hosted at Warhawks Stadium on the campus of University of Wisconsin–Whitewater on August 18, 1972. In attendance were thirty-nine corps from fifteen states and one Canadian province. The Anaheim Kingsmen Drum and Bugle Corps was named the inaugural DCI World Champion.

Following the creation of DCI, the Combine evolved into Drum Corps Midwest (DCM), while the Alliance became Drum Corps East, sometimes called Drum Corps Atlantic. Both DCM and Drum Corps East offered a regional circuit of competitions and a regional championship prior to the &quot;national tour&quot; of sanctioned competitions. DCI gradually expanded its schedule to begin earlier in the competitive season, and thus participation declined at non-sanctioned competitions.

Many of the regional circuits which pre-dated DCI, continued into the 1990s, with their high-profile competitions eventually being replaced by sanctioned competitions. Other high-prestige championships, were eventually absorbed into the DCI schedule, many becoming regional championships or annual events such as the Eastern Classic at J. Birney Crum Stadium, the largest high school football stadium in the Mid-Atlantic U.S., or the U.S. Open in Marion, Ohio. VFW Nationals and the American Legion National Championships are no longer hosted. American Legion and VFW posts in the Midwest or New England host drum corps competitions as fundraising events, some of which are sanctioned by DCI.

===21st century===
On March 25, 2020, in response to the coronavirus pandemic, member corps voted unanimously to cancel the 2020 competitive season.

== About ==
DCI is a 501(c)(3) organization governed by a board of directors, with an executive director responsible for day-to-day operations. The board of directors is composed of three representatives who are directors of member corps, and three at-large members who are not affiliated with any corps. The current chair of the board of directors is Kathy Black with Nate Boudreaux serving as executive director.

Drum Corps Associates (DCA), a governing body for all-age or senior drum corps, is not affiliated with DCI, however the two organizations are strategic partners. DCI describes all-age corps as providing value to the drum corps activity, and permits all age corps to compete at sanctioned competitions. On May 31, 2023, DCI and DCA announced a partnership to create an All-Age Class for the 2024 and 2025 competitive seasons.

=== Mission ===
As the self-styled &quot;Marching Music&#x27;s Major League&quot;, DCI&#x27;s mission is to create an environment for participating corps &quot;to engage in education, competition, entertainment, and the promotion of individual growth.&quot; The organization also emphasizes positive life-transforming experiences for all participants.

=== Membership ===
Drum Corps International lists 50 members, as of the end of 2024. Of these, one is in Sherbrooke, Canada. The rest are based in the US, California being the best represented by far. Though DCI holds a world championship, international corps are ineligible. No events are scheduled outside the US in 2025.

To become a DCI member, or to maintain membership, a corps must pass an evaluation by the board of directors. The evaluation requires corps to submit data on their financial health, fundraising capacity and income, participants, staffing, and explanations of their administrative structure. All corps are required to be tax-exempt organizations.

Once approved by the board, a new corps must achieve certain competitive requirements, such as attending World Championships. The corps must then be approved by a majority of other members at a meeting following World Championships, usually the annual rules congress later in the year.

All-age corps are ineligible for membership, but they may qualify as &quot;touring&quot; corps during a competitive season. International corps, or corps based outside the United States and Canada, are also ineligible for membership. However, an international corps that adopts DCI&#x27;s regulations, specifically instrumentation and participant age limits, may also qualify as a touring corps in either Open or World Class.

=== Age limit ===
DCI limits the age of participants for Open Class and World Class corps to &quot;21 years of age and younger.&quot; A participant who is 22 years before June 1 is unable to compete. Some European and Asian drum corps associations have no age limit. Corps from those associations are allowed to compete at sanctioned competitions, and at World Championships in International Class.

Due to the cancellation of the 2020 DCI season caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, DCI extended their age-out limit by one year for the 2021 DCI season, making the age limit of participants to 22 years of age and younger. A 23 year old would also be eligible to march in 2021 if they were born on or after June 1. Member corps are allowed to set their own age limit to be younger than 21.

In 2024, the all-age corps of Drum Corps Associates (DCA) became DCI&#x27;s All-Age Class for at least the 2024 and 2025 seasons. The All-Age class is judged under DCA rules, and the championship moved to Indianapolis with the other DCI classes.

=== Marketing and broadcasts ===
Individual drum corps derive a large part of their revenues from marketing their product, specifically memorabilia and souvenir sales. DCI derives income from ticket sales, and is the sole distributor of official media, such as championship DVDs and audio CDs. DCI is also the exclusive producer of all broadcasts of sanctioned competitions, including online streaming. Edited versions of World Championship Open Class finals were televised by PBS from 1975 until 2004. From 2005 to 2007, a two-hour highlights program of World Championship Division I finals was broadcast by ESPN2.

Since 2004, World Championship World Class prelims have been broadcast to movie theaters by Fathom Events under the title &quot;Big, Loud &amp; Live&quot;. In 2011, Fathom Events added the &quot;DCI Tour Premiere&quot;. DCI previously livestreamed a number of competitions throughout the season, including the entirety of World Championship, via the former &quot;DCI FanNetwork&quot;. FloSports engaged in a multi-year agreement to livestream select competitions via the FloMarching platform. Frequent hosts of the broadcasts and streaming events include former WWAY news anchor Steve Rondinaro, and percussionist Dennis DeLucia.

=== Other programs ===
In 2013, DCI launched two new competitive musical activities for small groups: SoundSport and DrumLine Battle. These activities are not restricted by an age limit, nor do they have the same competitive requirements as drum corps. BANDtastic! began in 2014.

==== SoundSport ====
The stated goal of SoundSport is to provide a competitive performance experience in a low-cost, local setting. Musical ensembles of more than five members, using any musical instruments, perform a 5-7 minute marching music show in an area measuring × .

Two SoundSport teams Guardians and Watchmen became Open Class member corps in the 2014. Southwind, inactive from 2007 to 2013, competed as a SoundSport team in 2014, and returned to competition as an Open Class member in 2015.

==== DrumLine Battle ====
Intended for drumlines, or battery percussion ensembles with no wheeled percussion. Competing drumlines are staged in two competitive zones opposite each other, with each demonstrating their skills as an ensemble in alternating rounds of two minutes each. Adjudicators do not restrict their evaluation to technical proficiency, and include showmanship and audience reaction.

In 2014, E-Sarn from Thailand, competed in the DrumLine Battle held during World Championship week, defeating fifteen other competitors. River City Rhythm, from Anoka, Minnesota, also competed in 2014, becoming a touring corps in 2015.

==== BANDtastic! ====
BANDtastic is a program of middle school honor bands sponsored by DCI. The program originated in 2013 with the Indiana &quot;INpact&quot; honor band, organized in conjunction with World Championships. Similar groups have since been organized in Georgia, Tennessee, Texas, Florida, and most recently Minnesota.

The activities are held in conjunction with a local DCI competition, and World Class corps partner.

=== World Championships ===

The week-long championship have been hosted at college or professional sports arenas in eighteen U.S. cities and Montreal. Since 2009, World Class Championships have been hosted at Lucas Oil Stadium in Indianapolis, Indiana. In 2015, DCI announced World Championships would remain in Indianapolis through 2028. In 2023, DCI and Visit Indy announced that they extended the contract through 2033. Championships were traditionally held the third week of August. However, the second week of August has been the preferred date due to trends in scholastic and collegiate schedules which pushed the start of the school year from early-September to late-August.

In 2009 and 2010, the Open Class preliminary competition was hosted at Ames Field in Michigan City, Indiana with semifinals and finals hosted at Lucas Oil Stadium. From 2011 to 2018 the Open Class preliminaries and finals were hosted at Ames Field. Open Class Championship was moved to Wildcat Stadium on the campus of Indiana Wesleyan University in Marion, Indiana in 2019.

DrumLine Battle and SoundSport competitions were added to the week&#x27;s activities in 2014.

==== Past championships locations ====
==== Individual &amp; Ensemble (I&amp;E) ====
The Individual &amp; ensemble festival, also known as I&amp;E, is also hosted near the championship site. Participants from all member corps are eligible to compete demonstrating their ability on their preferred instrument, or as part of a small ensemble or instrument choir. Color guard and dance categories are also available. In 2005, I&amp;E was expanded to include woodwind and vocal categories.

Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, all I&amp;E events were shifted to a digital format in 2020 and 2021. No I&amp;E festival has taken place, in any format, since 2022.

== Active corps ==
== Classification and adjudication ==
DCI utilizes a single adjudication handbook with corps subdivided by size, and not skill level. A multi-tier classification and adjudication system was in use prior to 2008, with Division I and Division IIIII utilizing different handbooks, while also being subdivided by size.

=== Current classes ===

Currently, DCI groups corps from the United States and Canada into three classes based on competitive level. Corps from Europe, Asia, Latin America, and anywhere other than the U.S. and Canada are grouped into the International Class. Corps from all classes compete together but are ranked separately. In the past, classes have been fully or partially determined by the number of marching members in each corps; at present, all corps may march up to a maximum of one hundred sixty five (165) members.

World Class (formerly Division I) corps are the groups that have chosen to compete at the highest level and have proven to DCI leadership they have the ability to survive at this level both competitively and financially. The higher a corps is ranked at the DCI Championships, the higher the performance fees they will earn for the following season&#x27;s performances.

Open Class (formerly Divisions II &amp; III) corps are committed to a lesser competitive level and are generally smaller, although several corps have marched with maximum membership. In September 2007, DCI combined the former Divisions II and III into this new class.

International Class is for corps based outside the U.S. and Canada who wish to compete at sanctioned competitions. Corps in this class are allowed to follow the guidelines of their national governing body, such as: no age restrictions, smaller membership requirements, or the use of woodwind instruments. International corps which abide by DCI rules would be eligible to compete as Open or World Class corps.

All-Age Class is class available to all corps whose members do not meet DCI&#x27;s age limits. A competitive All-Age Class and All-Age Class Championships were made available for the 2024 and 2025 seasons in partnership with DCA.

==== Historic classes and divisions ====
==== Member limits ====
* From 1972 to 1992, Open Class corps were limited to 128 members.
* Class A corps generally had 90 or fewer members, however the membership limit was 128.
* All-Girl Class was restricted to girls only; there was no equivalent all-boy class.
* Class A60, and the later Division III, required between 15 and 60 members. Between 2004 and 2007 all Division III corps were required to march between 30 and 60 members.
* From 1992 to 2007, Division II had the same membership limit as Division I, however few corps reach this limit.
* In 2004, the Division I membership limit was increased from 128 to 135.
* The membership limit for World Class, the new Open Class, and International Class was increased to 150 in 2007.
* In 2018, the membership limit per corps was increased to 154.
* In 2022, the membership limit per corps was increased to 165. Due to the size of the corps, all on-field judges were limited to the sidelines.
* In 2024, the All-Age class limit was set to 128 members with its inclusion in DCI, the same as it had been with DCA.

=== Adjudication ===
DCI&#x27;s Adjudication Manual is based on three broad categories, Visual, Music and Effect. Visual and Music categories are further subdivided into three analysis captions. If more than one adjudicator is utilized in any caption, their scores are averaged before being factored. All-age corps may request to be adjudicated using scoring sheets provided by DCA. Before the creation of the DCI All-Age Class, any All-age corps were able to compete exclusively at DCI sanctioned competitions prior to attending the DCA World Championships, which was traditionally hosted on or before Labor Day weekend.
== Past champions ==
Below is a list of past champions organized by class. DCI realigned its class structure in 1992, and again in 2008. DCI does not record or announce &quot;de facto&quot; champions.


=== All-age division champions ===

All-age class divisions are based on ensemble size, and are similar to class alignments utilized by Drum Corps Associates.
== See also ==
* Drum Corps Associates
* Winter Guard International
* Bands of America

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="0" end="24" title="Drum Corps International" label="Drum Corps International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309050" start="26" end="29" title="Drum Corps International" label="DCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261230" start="55" end="75" title="Drum and bugle corps (modern)" label="drum and bugle corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="275" end="288" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="293" end="299" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="324" end="336" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="338" end="345" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="356" end="377" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721773" start="553" end="566" title="The Cavaliers Drum and Bugle Corps" label="The Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845570" start="582" end="590" title="Troopers Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929917" start="630" end="640" title="Blue Stars Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Blue Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6728080" start="642" end="656" title="Madison Scouts Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Madison Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419345" start="662" end="682" title="Santa Clara Vanguard Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Santa Clara Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="876" end="891" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556413" start="896" end="899" title="Veterans of Foreign Wars" label="VFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="1488" end="1497" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297507" start="1551" end="1563" title="27th Lancers Drum and Bugle Corps" label="27th Lancers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720910" start="1565" end="1580" title="The Cadets Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Garfield Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947870" start="1582" end="1598" title="Boston Crusaders Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Boston Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750884" start="2059" end="2075" title="Anaheim Kingsmen Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Anaheim Kingsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297507" start="2077" end="2091" title="Argonne Rebels Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Argonne Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169059" start="3184" end="3200" title="Perkins Stadium" label="Warhawks Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551772" start="3218" end="3252" title="University of Wisconsin–Whitewater" label="University of Wisconsin–Whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750884" start="3361" end="3398" title="Anaheim Kingsmen Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Anaheim Kingsmen Drum and Bugle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104831" start="4255" end="4277" title="J. Birney Crum Stadium" label="J. Birney Crum Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="4291" end="4311" title="high school football" label="high school football"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="4327" end="4344" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q985636" start="4366" end="4378" title="Marion, Ohio" label="Marion, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q468865" start="4463" end="4478" title="American Legion" label="American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556413" start="4483" end="4486" title="Veterans of Foreign Wars" label="VFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="4500" end="4507" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4511" end="4522" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="4670" end="4690" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="4784" end="4806" title="501(c)(3) organization" label="501(c)(3) organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="5179" end="5200" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="5506" end="5509" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="DCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="8161" end="8182" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="8855" end="8858" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566015" start="8987" end="8992" title="ESPN2" label="ESPN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944815" start="9087" end="9100" title="Fathom Events" label="Fathom Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="9230" end="9240" title="livestream" label="livestream"/>
<link wikidata="Q69652198" start="9466" end="9477" title="FloMarching" label="FloMarching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957096" start="9557" end="9561" title="WWAY" label="WWAY"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9609" end="9623" title="Dennis DeLucia" label="Dennis DeLucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18152126" start="10203" end="10212" title="Guardians Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571478" start="10270" end="10279" title="Southwind Drum and Bugle Corps" label="Southwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980611" start="10449" end="10457" title="drumline" label="drumline"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="10833" end="10841" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710506" start="10949" end="10966" title="River City Rhythm Drum and Bugle Corps" label="River City Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q567530" start="10973" end="10989" title="Anoka, Minnesota" label="Anoka, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="11625" end="11633" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q867160" start="11693" end="11710" title="Lucas Oil Stadium" label="Lucas Oil Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="11714" end="11735" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12238" end="12248" title="Michigan City High School#Ames Field" label="Ames Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q989282" start="12252" end="12274" title="Michigan City, Indiana" label="Michigan City, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023698" start="12486" end="12513" title="Indiana Wesleyan University" label="Indiana Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q286068" start="12517" end="12532" title="Marion, Indiana" label="Marion, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="16928" end="16931" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="DCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="17153" end="17162" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17511" end="17532" title="Drum Corps Associates#Past champions" label="Drum Corps Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309048" start="17551" end="17572" title="Drum Corps Associates" label="Drum Corps Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026235" start="17575" end="17601" title="Winter Guard International" label="Winter Guard International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854706" start="17604" end="17620" title="Bands of America" label="Bands of America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141533" wikidata="Q5309079" url="?curid=1141533" title="Drum and bugle corps">
<text>Drum and bugle corps is a name used to describe several related musical ensembles. 

* Drum and bugle corps (modern), a musical marching unit
* Drum and bugle corps (classic), musical ensembles that descended from military bugle and drum units returning from World War I and succeeding wars
* Fanfare band, a variant ensemble composed of related instruments, prevalent in Europe

==See also==
* Corps of drums, a musical unit of several national armies</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5309079" start="0" end="20" title="Drum and bugle corps" label="Drum and bugle corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261230" start="87" end="116" title="Drum and bugle corps (modern)" label="Drum and bugle corps (modern)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309077" start="144" end="174" title="Drum and bugle corps (classic)" label="Drum and bugle corps (classic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19812" start="293" end="305" title="Fanfare band" label="Fanfare band"/>
<link wikidata="Q9355428" start="395" end="409" title="Corps of drums" label="Corps of drums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141535" wikidata="Q260630" url="?curid=1141535" title="Penelope Heyns">
<text>Penelope (&quot;Penny&quot;) Heyns OIS (born 8 November 1974) is a South African former swimmer, who is best known for being the only woman in the history of the Olympic Games to have won both the 100 m and 200 m breaststroke events – at the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games – making her South Africa&#x27;s first post-apartheid Olympic gold medallist following South Africa&#x27;s re-admission to the Games in 1992. Along with Australian champion Leisel Jones, Heyns is regarded as one of the greatest breaststroke swimmers.

== Sporting career ==

Heyns was the youngest member of the South African Olympic team at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona. She was also a member of the South African squad at the 1994 Commonwealth Games, where she won a bronze medal in the 200 m breaststroke event.

Heyns broke her first world record, the 100 m breaststroke, in Durban in March 1996. Heyns was again part of the South African Olympic team in Atlanta in 1996, where she won the gold medal for the 100 m breaststroke (also breaking the world record for the event) as well as the gold medal for the 200 m breaststroke (also breaking the Olympic record for the event). This made her the only woman in the history of the Olympic Games to have won both the 100 m and 200 m breaststroke events. During the 1998 Goodwill Games in New York, Heyns set the 50 m breaststroke world record. In 1999, Heyns set a spate of eleven world records in three months, swimming at events on three different continents. This made her the simultaneous holder of five out of the possible six breaststroke world records, a feat that had never been achieved before in the history of swimming.

Heyns was named by Swimming World magazine as the Female World Swimmer of the Year in 1996 and 1999. She was also a member of the South African Olympic team at the 2000 Olympic Games in Sydney. She won a bronze medal in the 100 m breaststroke.

Heyns retired from competitive swimming in 2001. In 2004 Heyns was an athlete&#x27;s commission member of the International Swimming Federation (FINA). She is a businesswoman, motivational and public speaker, and television presenter. She has also completed an autobiography.

Heyns was voted 52nd in the Top 100 Great South Africans in 2004. She has an Olympic size swimming pool named after in the town of Sasolburg, Free State
In 2024 Penny Heyns’ double gold win at Atlanta Olympics was judged as one of the top moments in South African women’s sport.

==See also==
* List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame
* List of Olympic medalists in swimming (women)
* World record progression 50 metres breaststroke

== References ==
== External links ==
* Penny Heyns Homepage



&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q260630" start="0" end="34" title="Penelope Heyns" label="Penelope (&amp;quot;Penny&amp;quot;) Heyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100502" start="35" end="38" title="Order of Ikhamanga" label="OIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="88" end="95" title="swimmer" label="swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="162" end="175" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q326163" start="213" end="225" title="breaststroke" label="breaststroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="247" end="254" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="255" end="268" title="1996 Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="313" end="322" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q270686" start="442" end="454" title="Leisel Jones" label="Leisel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="615" end="635" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="639" end="648" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116532" start="706" end="729" title="1994 Commonwealth Games" label="1994 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="857" end="863" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q849939" start="1299" end="1313" title="Goodwill Games" label="Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603450" start="1680" end="1703" title="Swimming World magazine" label="Swimming World magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="1825" end="1843" title="2000 Olympic Games" label="2000 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q189289" start="2016" end="2049" title="International Swimming Federation" label="International Swimming Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="2167" end="2180" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428733" start="2211" end="2239" title="SABC3&amp;#x27;s Great South Africans" label="Top 100 Great South Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q963786" start="2314" end="2335" title="Sasolburg, Free State" label="Sasolburg, Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251703" start="2478" end="2536" title="List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame" label="List of members of the International Swimming Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078522" start="2539" end="2584" title="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (women)" label="List of Olympic medalists in swimming (women)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135515" start="2587" end="2634" title="World record progression 50 metres breaststroke" label="World record progression 50 metres breaststroke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141536" wikidata="Q1911052" url="?curid=1141536" title="Sean Lock">
<text>Sean Lock (22 April 1963 – 16 August 2021) was an English comedian and actor. He began his comedy career as a stand-up comedian and in 2000, he won the British Comedy Award, in the category of Best Live Comic, and was nominated for the Perrier Comedy Award. He was a team captain on the Channel 4 comedy panel show &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats&quot; from 2005 to 2015, and on &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown&quot; from 2012 until his death in 2021.

Lock frequently appeared on stage, television and radio. His routines were often surreal and delivered in a deadpan style. He also wrote material for Bill Bailey, Lee Evans and Mark Lamarr. Lock was voted the 55th-greatest stand-up comic on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Stand-Ups&quot; in 2007, and he was upgraded to 19th in the updated 2010 list. He was a frequent guest on other panel shows, including BBC&#x27;s &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot;, &quot;QI&quot; and &quot;They Think It&#x27;s All Over&quot;.

==Early life==
Lock was born in Chertsey, Surrey, on 22 April 1963, the youngest of four children. His father, Sidney, worked in the building industry; his mother, Mary (née McCreesh), was from Cullaville, County Armagh. Lock was raised in Woking, Surrey, where he attended St John the Baptist School.

During Lock&#x27;s teenage years, he watched art-house films on BBC Two, and named Andrei Tarkovsky&#x27;s 1979 science-fiction film &quot;Stalker&quot; as one that affected him greatly. In 1981, he left education with a grade E in A-level English. Afterwards, his father got him a job stripping concrete panels off buildings. After spending seven years as a labourer, he travelled, taking on different jobs. For six weeks, he worked on a French farm as a goat herder and worked on a kibbutz in Israel. During this period, he also worked as a toilet cleaner and a Department of Health and Social Security office worker. During his work as a labourer, he developed skin cancer.

He then decided to pursue acting and enrolled at the Drama Centre London, though he soon realised he had made an error. He quit and returned to being a labourer. After Lock saw comedians like Alexei Sayle and Paul Merton performing in comedy clubs, he decided to pursue comedy. Throughout this time, he visited comedy shows in London pubs and started doing open-mic spots as a hobby. In 1988, Lock had his first official gig at a pub in Stoke Newington, London. After being paid £15 for his 20minutes, he realised he could pursue being a comedian as a career.

==Career==
Lock&#x27;s early television work included a supporting role alongside Rob Newman and David Baddiel in the 1993 series &quot;Newman and Baddiel in Pieces&quot; including touring with them as their support act. Frank Skinner and Eddie Izzard are credited as major influences on his comedy. 

A popular belief is that Lock was the first stand-up comedian to perform at Wembley Arena, as he was the support act for Newman and Baddiel. But, while Lock was the support act, he only featured in skits in the middle of the show.

===&quot;15 Minutes of Misery&quot; and &quot;15 Storeys High&quot;===
Lock made regular appearances on various radio panel shows and script-edited for Bill Bailey&#x27;s 1998 BBC2 series, &quot;Is It Bill Bailey?&quot;. In December 1998, he launched his own show on BBC Radio 4, &quot;15 Minutes of Misery&quot;, originally as a five-episode pilot. These shows also featured actors Kevin Eldon and Hattie Hayridge. The premise involved Lock eavesdropping on his neighbours in his south London tower block (all played by Lock, Eldon and Hayridge) using a bugging device fitted by his plumber, &quot;Hot Bob&quot; (Eldon), which was known as &quot;The Bugger King&quot; (and had &quot;nothing to do with meat or sex&quot;). &quot;15 Minutes of Misery&quot; lasted for one series of six programmes in late 1998 and early 1999.

In 1999, &quot;15 Minutes of Misery&quot; was expanded into the half-hour series &quot;15 Storeys High&quot;, co-written by Lock and Martin Trenaman. From ostensibly the same tower block, Lock&#x27;s character was now given a flatmate (the hapless Errol) and a job at the local swimming baths, as well as a somewhat dour and intolerant demeanour. The bugging device was no longer used, but the antics of Lock&#x27;s neighbours still featured heavily in the show. The plots for this series were more linear in a &quot;traditional&quot; sitcom style, although they still showed Lock&#x27;s brand of dark, surreal humour. &quot;15 Storeys High&quot; would transfer to television after two radio series, with Lock&#x27;s character renamed &#x27;Vince&#x27;, for a further two series in 2002 and 2004. Initially aired on BBC Choice, it follows a cynical Vince and his naive flatmate Errol (Benedict Wong). It attracted a cult following after its release as a VHS box set and on DVD.

===Other work===
In 1995, Lock played an escaped murderer in an episode of &quot;The World of Lee Evans&quot;, alongside Lee Evans and Phil Daniels. Lock wrote the screenplay for Andrew Kötting&#x27;s 2001 feature film &quot;This Filthy Earth&quot;, based on the novel &quot;La Terre&quot; by Émile Zola. In 2004, Lock had a guest appearance on television&#x27;s first-ever &quot;dope opera&quot;, &quot;Top Buzzer&quot;, written by Johnny Vaughan.

In 2005, he became a regular team captain on the Channel 4 panel game &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats&quot;. In an article at the time of his death, &quot;The Guardian&quot; said Lock &quot;will be best remembered as a team captain for the first 18 series of... &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats&quot;... and he quickly emerged as its biggest star.&quot; He was a team captain on &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats&quot; between 2005 and 2015, and on its spin-off &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown&quot; between 2012 and 2021.

In spring 2006, he hosted his own entertainment show on Channel 4 called &quot;TV Heaven, Telly Hell&quot;. Lock narrated the BBC production &quot;World Cup Goals Galore&quot; in 2006. In 2008, he appeared on &quot;The Big Fat Quiz of the Year&quot;, on a team with James Corden. Lock also appeared on many popular British TV panel shows, including &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot;, &quot;QI&quot; and &quot;They Think It&#x27;s All Over&quot;. He was also a celebrity guest in &quot;The Last Leg&quot;. Lock became &quot;The Curator&quot; for the second radio series of &quot;The Museum of Curiosity&quot;, in 2009, taking over from Bill Bailey.

In 2010, Lock took part in &quot;Channel 4&#x27;s Comedy Gala&quot;, a benefit show held in aid of Great Ormond Street Children&#x27;s Hospital, filmed live at The O2 Arena. He also appeared in a spoof video produced by Shelter, the housing charity, to highlight the problem of rogue landlords. In 2011, he took over from John Sergeant as the host of the Dave comedy panel show &quot;Argumental&quot;. In 2019, Lock featured in episode 4 of the BBC comedy series &quot;Mandy&quot;.

==Comedic style==
Lock was known for his surreal style, deadpan delivery and dry humour. The &quot;Guardian&quot; stated that he was &quot;celebrated for his carefully crafted surreal content and imaginative observational wit&quot;. Lock stated that comedy is not always easy, saying: &quot;The real secret ... is every day spending tedious hours straining over a blank sheet of paper trying to think of something funny. Some days I&#x27;d rather try and lay an egg.&quot;

Ed Power of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; described his persona as &quot;studiedly obtuse&quot;. He said Lock&#x27;s topics included political correctness, &quot;existential woe&quot;, and the difficulties of being a football supporter which gave him &quot;irresistible everyman quality&quot;. Power described him as &quot;a Samuel Beckett trapped inside a Tommy Cooper punchline.&quot; Power also suggested that his persona was so convincing because it matched his off-stage persona. Fellow comedian Harry Hill said, &quot;People are tempted to pigeonhole him as dark or surreal but he was more than that. He had a playful side; a wide-eyed wonder at the world&quot;.

During an interview with Bill Bailey on the Channel 4 show &quot;Comic&#x27;s Choice&quot;, Lock listed Sam Kinison and Lenny Bruce as his main comedy influences. On the BBC Radio 2 show &quot;Talking Comedy&quot;, he listed Paul Merton, Steven Wright, Jasper Carrott, Les Dawson, Jerry Sadowitz, Kenneth Williams and Hylda Baker as his favourite comedians.

==Personal life==
Lock and his wife, Anoushka Nara Giltsoff, had two daughters, born in 2004 and 2006, and a son born in 2009. The family lived in the Muswell Hill area of London.

Lock was diagnosed with skin cancer in 1990, attributing the condition to overexposure to the sun while working as a builder in the early 1980s. After seeing his doctor, he was referred to a dermatologist at Guy&#x27;s Hospital, London, and made a full recovery. In May 2012, he gave his support to a Sun Awareness event at the hospital.

Lock was a supporter of Chelsea F.C. and was an active supporter of the Muswell Hill soup kitchen. In December 2020, Lock made a video to help raise funds for Edible London, a charity that aimed to provide ingredients for a million meals to help those struggling in lockdown. In the clip, he quipped, &quot;I&#x27;m Sean Lock. You may know me as that bloke off the telly whose name you can&#x27;t remember.&quot;

==Death and tributes==
Lock died of cancer at his home, on 16 August 2021, aged 58. According to Bill Bailey, a close friend of Lock, he had been diagnosed with advanced lung cancer a few years earlier. 

Those who paid tribute included fellow &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats&quot; performers Jimmy Carr and Jon Richardson; &quot;Countdown&quot;’s Rachel Riley and Susie Dent; many comedians; Chelsea F.C.; &quot;QI&quot;; and Channel 4. Harry Hill wrote a piece in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, describing him as &quot;the comedian&#x27;s comedian&quot;. On 19 August 2021, Channel 4 aired a tribute to Lock, showing his stand-up show &quot;Keep It Light&quot; along with an episode of &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown&quot;. Chelsea Football Club paid tribute to Lock on 11 September during their fixture against Aston Villa with a one-minute applause during the 58th (the age at which he died) minute of the match.

Fans of Lock called for his book &quot;The Tiger Who Came for a Pint&quot;, a parody book read on &quot;8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown&quot; based on the children&#x27;s book &quot;The Tiger Who Came to Tea&quot;, to be published, with some fans suggesting the proceeds should go to cancer research in his honour. In addition, the tribute night of programming prompted fans and friends, including Kathy Burke, to call for the BBC to add &quot;15 Storeys High&quot; to its online service. Following this, the BBC released both series of the show onto its iPlayer service on 27 August 2021.

In August 2022, Bill Bailey completed a charity walk in memory of Lock, raising more than £110,000 for Macmillan Cancer Support.

==Stand-up shows==
===DVD releases===
==Filmography==
===Television===
===Radio===
==Awards and nominations==
Lock was voted the 55th-greatest stand-up comic on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Stand-Ups&quot; in 2007 and as the 19th-greatest stand-up comic in the updated 2010 list. 
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Sean Lock at the British Film Institute
* Sean Lock writes the foreword for the novel &quot;Nappy Rash&quot; by Mark Kotting on Wrecking Ball Press 
* from Channel 4</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1911052" start="0" end="9" title="Sean Lock" label="Sean Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="110" end="127" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="152" end="172" title="National Comedy Awards" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="193" end="208" title="National Comedy Awards#2000" label="Best Live Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284722" start="236" end="256" title="Edinburgh Comedy Awards" label="Perrier Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="287" end="296" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144186" start="321" end="337" title="8 Out of 10 Cats" label="8 Out of 10 Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049097" start="376" end="407" title="8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown" label="8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616750" start="558" end="565" title="deadpan" label="deadpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944744" start="600" end="611" title="Bill Bailey" label="Bill Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q725412" start="613" end="622" title="Lee Evans (comedian)" label="Lee Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072754" start="627" end="638" title="Mark Lamarr" label="Mark Lamarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="862" end="865" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="879" end="902" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286698" start="916" end="918" title="QI" label="QI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783773" start="935" end="964" title="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over (TV series)" label="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070428" start="1005" end="1013" title="Chertsey" label="Chertsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="1015" end="1021" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="1106" end="1123" title="construction" label="building industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130076" start="1167" end="1177" title="Cullaville" label="Cullaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="1179" end="1192" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q646225" start="1213" end="1219" title="Woking" label="Woking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593756" start="1247" end="1273" title="St John the Baptist School, Woking" label="St John the Baptist School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="1321" end="1335" title="art film" label="art-house film"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="1340" end="1347" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q853" start="1359" end="1375" title="Andrei Tarkovsky" label="Andrei Tarkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="1388" end="1408" title="science fiction film" label="science-fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q200437" start="1415" end="1422" title="Stalker (1979 film)" label="Stalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="1508" end="1515" title="A-level" label="A-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="1516" end="1523" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575361" start="1732" end="1743" title="goatherd" label="goat herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="1760" end="1767" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260328" start="1840" end="1880" title="Department of Health and Social Security" label="Department of Health and Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="1940" end="1951" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255631" start="2007" end="2026" title="Drama Centre London" label="Drama Centre London"/>
<link wikidata="Q970287" start="2146" end="2158" title="Alexei Sayle" label="Alexei Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q786637" start="2163" end="2174" title="Paul Merton" label="Paul Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483346" start="2391" end="2406" title="Stoke Newington" label="Stoke Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348019" start="2597" end="2607" title="Rob Newman (comedian)" label="Rob Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q526242" start="2612" end="2625" title="David Baddiel" label="David Baddiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018503" start="2651" end="2679" title="Newman and Baddiel in Pieces" label="Newman and Baddiel in Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489658" start="2736" end="2749" title="Frank Skinner" label="Frank Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q254022" start="2754" end="2766" title="Eddie Izzard" label="Eddie Izzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="2893" end="2906" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018502" start="2938" end="2956" title="Newman and Baddiel" label="Newman and Baddiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075387" start="3244" end="3262" title="Is It Bill Bailey?" label="Is It Bill Bailey?"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3316" end="3327" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396222" start="3432" end="3443" title="Kevin Eldon" label="Kevin Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498512" start="3448" end="3463" title="Hattie Hayridge" label="Hattie Hayridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550887" start="3962" end="3977" title="15 Storeys High" label="15 Storeys High"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776762" start="4008" end="4023" title="Martin Trenaman" label="Martin Trenaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="4478" end="4492" title="surreal humour" label="surreal humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810437" start="4691" end="4701" title="BBC Choice" label="BBC Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329808" start="4760" end="4773" title="Benedict Wong" label="Benedict Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776140" start="4935" end="4957" title="The World of Lee Evans" label="The World of Lee Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q725412" start="4975" end="4984" title="Lee Evans (comedian)" label="Lee Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671473" start="4989" end="5001" title="Phil Daniels" label="Phil Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757660" start="5033" end="5047" title="Andrew Kötting" label="Andrew Kötting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755607" start="5129" end="5137" title="La Terre" label="La Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="5147" end="5157" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824433" start="5258" end="5268" title="Top Buzzer" label="Top Buzzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196754" start="5287" end="5301" title="Johnny Vaughan" label="Johnny Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="5353" end="5362" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049337" start="5363" end="5373" title="Panel show" label="panel game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144186" start="5380" end="5396" title="8 Out of 10 Cats" label="8 Out of 10 Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5450" end="5462" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049097" start="5742" end="5773" title="8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown" label="8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="5860" end="5869" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672343" start="5883" end="5904" title="TV Heaven, Telly Hell" label="TV Heaven, Telly Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416096" start="6019" end="6047" title="The Big Fat Quiz of the Year" label="The Big Fat Quiz of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="6070" end="6082" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="6159" end="6182" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286698" start="6196" end="6198" title="QI" label="QI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783773" start="6215" end="6244" title="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over (TV series)" label="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745855" start="6291" end="6303" title="The Last Leg" label="The Last Leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955138" start="6384" end="6407" title="The Museum of Curiosity" label="The Museum of Curiosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072299" start="6488" end="6516" title="Channel 4&amp;#x27;s Comedy Gala" label="Channel 4&amp;#x27;s Comedy Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850936" start="6526" end="6538" title="Benefit concert" label="benefit show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349705" start="6554" end="6598" title="Great Ormond Street Hospital" label="Great Ormond Street Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364202" start="6615" end="6627" title="The O2 Arena" label="The O2 Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493943" start="6675" end="6682" title="Shelter (charity)" label="Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257309" start="6777" end="6790" title="John Sergeant (journalist)" label="John Sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228206" start="6810" end="6814" title="U&amp;amp;Dave" label="Dave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789753" start="6839" end="6849" title="Argumental" label="Argumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852080" start="6924" end="6929" title="Mandy (TV series)" label="Mandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="6979" end="6986" title="Surreal humour" label="surreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616750" start="6994" end="7001" title="deadpan" label="deadpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616750" start="7015" end="7025" title="deadpan" label="dry humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="7430" end="7449" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="7470" end="7477" title="persona" label="persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="7547" end="7568" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="7576" end="7587" title="Existentialism" label="existential"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="7739" end="7753" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q612027" start="7771" end="7783" title="Tommy Cooper" label="Tommy Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="7915" end="7925" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q944744" start="8109" end="8120" title="Bill Bailey" label="Bill Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="8128" end="8137" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257274" start="8149" end="8168" title="Comic&amp;#x27;s Choice" label="Comic&amp;#x27;s Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q333505" start="8188" end="8199" title="Sam Kinison" label="Sam Kinison"/>
<link wikidata="Q460876" start="8204" end="8215" title="Lenny Bruce" label="Lenny Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="8254" end="8265" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q786637" start="8309" end="8320" title="Paul Merton" label="Paul Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969967" start="8322" end="8335" title="Steven Wright" label="Steven Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597366" start="8337" end="8351" title="Jasper Carrott" label="Jasper Carrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529406" start="8353" end="8363" title="Les Dawson" label="Les Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184375" start="8365" end="8379" title="Jerry Sadowitz" label="Jerry Sadowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="8381" end="8397" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956081" start="8402" end="8413" title="Hylda Baker" label="Hylda Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432670" start="8594" end="8606" title="Muswell Hill" label="Muswell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192102" start="8648" end="8659" title="skin cancer" label="skin cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="8815" end="8828" title="dermatology" label="dermatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="8832" end="8851" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="8987" end="8999" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2142654" start="9048" end="9060" title="soup kitchen" label="soup kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="9229" end="9237" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="lockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="9328" end="9333" title="Television" label="telly"/>
<link wikidata="Q944744" start="9474" end="9485" title="Bill Bailey" label="Bill Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9538" end="9546" title="Non-small-cell_lung_cancer#Advanced/metastatic_NSCLC" label="advanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="9547" end="9558" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q964454" start="9661" end="9671" title="Jimmy Carr" label="Jimmy Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423112" start="9676" end="9690" title="Jon Richardson" label="Jon Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416117" start="9716" end="9728" title="Rachel Riley" label="Rachel Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649020" start="9733" end="9743" title="Susie Dent" label="Susie Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="9806" end="9816" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="10096" end="10117" title="chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="10184" end="10195" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560128" start="10470" end="10495" title="The Tiger Who Came to Tea" label="The Tiger Who Came to Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q444306" start="10686" end="10697" title="Kathy Burke" label="Kathy Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550887" start="10732" end="10747" title="15 Storeys High" label="15 Storeys High"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724723" start="10982" end="11006" title="Macmillan Cancer Support" label="Macmillan Cancer Support"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="11361" end="11383" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037698" start="11472" end="11491" title="Wrecking Ball Press" label="Wrecking Ball Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="11500" end="11509" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141538" wikidata="Q250978" url="?curid=1141538" title="Djimi Traoré">
<text>Djimi Traoré (born 1 March 1980) is a former professional footballer who works as a coach for the Right to Dream Academy. He played as a left-back or centre-back. Born in France, Traoré played for Mali, and at club level, he played for Laval, Liverpool – with whom he won multiple honours including the 2004–05 Champions League – Lens, Charlton Athletic, Portsmouth, Rennes, Birmingham City, Monaco, Marseille and Seattle.

==Club career==

===Liverpool===
Traoré started his career at home club Laval before moving on to Liverpool. He made his debut for the Reds on 14 September 1999 in a 5–1 win over Hull City in the League Cup.

In the 2001–02 season, Traoré was loaned to Lens for the season, during which he made 19 appearances. He returned to Anfield for the 2002–03 season, scoring his first (and what turned out to be his only) Liverpool goal in the UEFA Cup against Steaua București.

Traoré spent the 2003–04 season, manager Gérard Houllier&#x27;s last at the club, in the reserve team, of which he was captain, and almost left Liverpool for their Merseyside neighbours Everton on the 2004 transfer deadline day, but was convinced to remain at Liverpool by their new manager Rafael Benítez.

The defender&#x27;s career appeared to have been revitalised by Benítez: While the defender had appeared poor positionally, and seemed reluctant to attack, particularly during the 2004–05 season, he showed more willingness to support the left winger, as well as improving his positional play.

Traoré scored an own goal in the third round of the 2004–05 FA Cup against then Championship side Burnley, as he attempted a turn and drag-back within his own six-yard box.
It turned out to be the only goal of the game and handed Burnley a 1–0 victory over their Premiership opponents.

Traoré remained a regular at Liverpool, and eventually made the starting line-up as Liverpool qualified for the 2005 Champions League Final against Milan. After conceding the free kick that led to Paolo Maldini&#x27;s goal in the opening minute, In the second half his play improved, and a goalline clearance to deny Andriy Shevchenko a likely winner contributed to his winning a Champions League medal as Liverpool fought back from 3–0 down to draw 3–3 and beat Milan 3–2 on penalties.

In the 2005–06 season, Traoré found his first team appearances limited, with John Arne Riise and Stephen Warnock also starting regularly at left back. He was an unused substitute as Liverpool beat West Ham United on penalties to win the 2006 FA Cup Final at the Millennium Stadium. This was to be his last season with Liverpool, and, although he had played some part in Liverpool&#x27;s pre-season in 2006, he was sold to Charlton Athletic for £2 million on 8 August 2006.

===Charlton Athletic and Portsmouth===
Traoré was sent off on his &quot;Addicks&quot; debut on 19 August, after receiving two yellow cards, the latter of which was for preventing a free kick being taken. This was the fifth time in eight seasons a Charlton player had been sent off in the first game of the season. On 16 December, he conceded a penalty against Liverpool, his former club, for a tackle on Jermaine Pennant. He was soon deemed surplus to requirements at Charlton. After only half a season at the Valley, Traoré was allowed to leave the club by new manager Alan Pardew, joining Portsmouth.

====Birmingham City (loan)====
On 10 February 2009, Traoré joined Birmingham City, then of the Football League Championship, on a three-month emergency loan. He sustained a hamstring injury later the same month, and finally made his debut for the club in April as a late substitute against Watford.

===Monaco===
On 18 June 2009, Traore signed a two-year deal with Monaco, moving from Portsmouth after his loan period at Birmingham expired.

===Marseille===
On 18 August 2011, Traoré signed a one-year contract with Ligue 1 club Marseille. He was an unused substitute as Marseille won the 2012 Coupe de la Ligue Final, and left the club at the end of the season.

===Seattle Sounders===
On 23 February 2013, Traoré signed with MLS club Seattle Sounders after a successful preseason trial. He scored his first goal for the club in spectacular fashion, a volley off the underside of the crossbar, during a CONCACAF Champions League quarterfinal match against Tigres. Traoré&#x27;s goal equalized their Champions League match with Tigres 2–2 on aggregate, and preceded Eddie Johnson&#x27;s 75th-minute game-winning goal, allowing the Sounders to become the first MLS club to eliminate a Mexican side in the history of the CONCACAF Champions League. Traoré&#x27;s first ever league goal came on 8 May 2013 as the Sounders beat Sporting Kansas City 1–0 in Kansas City. The goal was a game-winning volley in the 94th minute to give the Sounders just their second win of the 2013 season in their first eight games. Traoré retired at the end of the 2014 season.

==Coaching career==
Traoré was an assistant coach with Seattle Sounders until 12 August 2021.

==Career statistics==


==Honours==
Liverpool
* FA Cup: 2005–06
* Football League Cup: 2002–03; runner-up 2004–05
* FA Charity Shield: 2001
* UEFA Champions League: 2004–05
* FIFA Club World Championship runner-up: 2005

Marseille
* Coupe de la Ligue: 2011–12

Seattle Sounders
* MLS Supporters&#x27; Shield: 2014

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Profile, stats &amp; pics of Djimi Traoré
* 
* Djimi Traoré at Sitercl.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q250978" start="0" end="12" title="Djimi Traoré" label="Djimi Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="58" end="68" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333660" start="98" end="120" title="Right to Dream Academy" label="Right to Dream Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="137" end="146" title="left-back" label="left-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="150" end="161" title="centre-back" label="centre-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q211733" start="197" end="201" title="Mali national football team" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q760736" start="236" end="241" title="Stade Lavallois" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="243" end="252" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q757107" start="303" end="327" title="2005 UEFA Champions League Final" label="2004–05 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191843" start="330" end="334" title="RC Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="336" end="353" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="355" end="365" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19509" start="367" end="373" title="Stade Rennais F.C." label="Rennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="375" end="390" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="392" end="398" title="AS Monaco FC" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="400" end="409" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q760736" start="496" end="501" title="Stade Lavallois" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="522" end="531" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="603" end="612" title="Hull City F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="620" end="630" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q191843" start="677" end="681" title="RC Lens" label="Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835526" start="766" end="780" title="2002–03 Liverpool F.C. season" label="2002–03 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="859" end="867" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="876" end="892" title="FC Steaua București" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602281" start="912" end="926" title="2003–04 Liverpool F.C. season" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q295615" start="936" end="951" title="Gérard Houllier" label="Gérard Houllier"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="1059" end="1069" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="1081" end="1088" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q144048" start="1186" end="1200" title="Rafael Benítez" label="Rafael Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603724" start="1383" end="1397" title="2004–05 Liverpool F.C. season" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386656" start="1549" end="1563" title="2004–05 FA Cup" label="2004–05 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19458" start="1595" end="1602" title="Burnley F.C." label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q757107" start="1896" end="1923" title="2005 Champions League Final" label="2005 Champions League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1932" end="1937" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483027" start="1981" end="1994" title="Paolo Maldini" label="Paolo Maldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q41244" start="2101" end="2118" title="Andriy Shevchenko" label="Andriy Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605441" start="2279" end="2293" title="2005–06 Liverpool F.C. season" label="2005–06 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q189827" start="2349" end="2364" title="John Arne Riise" label="John Arne Riise"/>
<link wikidata="Q241321" start="2369" end="2384" title="Stephen Warnock" label="Stephen Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="2469" end="2484" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584385" start="2509" end="2526" title="2006 FA Cup Final" label="2006 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="2534" end="2552" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462" start="2694" end="2711" title="Charlton Athletic F.C." label="Charlton Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q296416" start="3150" end="3166" title="Jermaine Pennant" label="Jermaine Pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q360491" start="3316" end="3327" title="Alan Pardew" label="Alan Pardew"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="3337" end="3347" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="3416" end="3431" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="3445" end="3473" title="Football League Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="3640" end="3647" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="3715" end="3721" title="AS Monaco FC" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13394" start="3866" end="3873" title="Ligue 1" label="Ligue 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="3879" end="3888" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184111" start="3939" end="3967" title="2012 Coupe de la Ligue Final" label="2012 Coupe de la Ligue Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="4077" end="4080" title="Major League Soccer" label="MLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q632511" start="4086" end="4102" title="Seattle Sounders FC" label="Seattle Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q83335" start="4254" end="4279" title="CONCACAF Champions League" label="CONCACAF Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q849823" start="4307" end="4313" title="Tigres de la UANL" label="Tigres"/>
<link wikidata="Q376267" start="4416" end="4429" title="Eddie Johnson (American soccer)" label="Eddie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q329812" start="4673" end="4693" title="Sporting Kansas City" label="Sporting Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012026" start="4818" end="4829" title="2013 Major League Soccer season" label="2013 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q632511" start="4960" end="4976" title="Seattle Sounders FC" label="Seattle Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="5048" end="5054" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386660" start="5056" end="5063" title="2005–06 FA Cup" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="5066" end="5085" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747836" start="5087" end="5094" title="2002–03 Football League Cup" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606640" start="5106" end="5113" title="2004–05 Football League Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="5116" end="5133" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Charity Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053106" start="5135" end="5139" title="2001 FA Charity Shield" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="5142" end="5163" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="5165" end="5172" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="5175" end="5203" title="FIFA Club World Championship" label="FIFA Club World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q311588" start="5215" end="5219" title="2005 FIFA Club World Championship Final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q476539" start="5233" end="5250" title="Coupe de la Ligue" label="Coupe de la Ligue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184111" start="5252" end="5259" title="2012 Coupe de la Ligue Final" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065079" start="5280" end="5307" title="MLS Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield" label="MLS Supporters&amp;#x27; Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15233253" start="5309" end="5313" title="2014 Major League Soccer season" label="2014"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141545" wikidata="Q7668126" url="?curid=1141545" title="T. Alexander Harrison">
<text>Thomas Alexander Harrison (January 17, 1853, in Philadelphia, PennsylvaniaOctober 13, 1930, in Paris, France), was an American marine painter who spent most of his career in France.

==Career==
He studied at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts in Philadelphia, 1871-72. For nearly six year he worked as a draftsman for a United States government survey expedition mapping the Pacific coast. He studied for a short time at the San Francisco School of Design. In 1879, he moved to Paris and studied at the École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts under Jean-Léon Gérôme and Jules Bastien-Lepage. 
Chafing under the restraints of the schools, he traveled to Brittany, where at Pont-Aven and Concarneau he turned his attention to marine painting and landscape.

A figure-piece he sent to the 1882 Salon attracted attention, a boy daydreaming on the beach, which he called &quot;Châteaux en Espagne&quot; (&quot;Castles in Spain&quot;) (1882, Metropolitan Museum of Art). In the 1885 Salon, he had a large canvas of several nude women called &quot;En Arcadie&quot; (1885, Musée d&#x27;Orsay), a remarkable study of flesh tones in light and shade which had a strong influence on the younger men of the day. This received an honourable mention, the first of many awards conferred upon him. &quot;Les Amateurs&quot; (1882–83, Brauer Museum of Art), was awarded a first medal at the 1889 Paris Exhibition. Other honors included the 1887 Temple Gold Medal of the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, and medals in Munich, Brussels, Ghent, Vienna and elsewhere.

He was decorated by the Legion of Honour, and was an officier of Public Instruction, Paris. He was a member of the Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts, Paris; of the Royal Institute of Painters in Oil Colours, London; of the Secession societies of Munich, Vienna and Berlin; of the National Academy of Design, the Society of American Artists, New York, and other art bodies.

His reputation rests on marine pictures such as &quot;The Wave&quot; (1885, Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts), with long waves rolling in on the beach, and great stretches of open sea under poetic conditions of light and colour.
Cecilia Beaux spent the summer of 1888 in Concarneau, working in a nearby studio. She painted a portrait of Harrison, and wrote of him:
Harrison, now at the apex of his strength, had already met the &quot;Daemon&quot; and thrown him, in his two big pictures &quot;En Arcadie&quot; and &quot;The Wave&quot;. Tall, lanky, and superbly handsome, he easily won all he appeared to care for, and much that he didn&#x27;t want; but he had a religion—it was his art; an industry—it was his painting; and he had an untiring faith toward these. He could not be called a Nature-lover, for he loved Nature perhaps only when married to Art. He saw large and wished to paint large. He was enamoured of the successive opaline surfaces of the low incoming waves and strove for the Sea&#x27;s gift as it comes to one facing it on long beaches. His method was searching, and had the quality of science, perhaps because he had been trained as an engineer, which profession he abandoned for painting.

==Marcel Proust==
Harrison rented a ramshackle cottage near the Brittany town of Beg-Meil, and each evening raced to the dunes to watch the sun set over the ocean. In late-summer 1896, he was joined there by struggling writer Marcel Proust and composer Reynaldo Hahn. He opened their eyes to how light plays on water:

We have seen the sea successively turn blood red, purple, nacreous with silver, gold, white, emerald green, and yesterday we were dazzled by an entirely pink sea specked with blue sails.

Harrison seems to have been the inspiration for the character &quot;C,&quot; in Proust&#x27;s attempted first novel &quot;Jean Santeuil&quot;; along with aspects of the character &quot;Elstir&quot; the painter, in &quot;Remembrance of Things Past&quot;.

==Family==
His brother, L. Birge Harrison (1854–1929), was also a painter. Another brother, Butler Harrison (died 1886), was a figure painter.

==Selected paintings==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7668126" start="0" end="25" title="T. Alexander Harrison" label="Thomas Alexander Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="48" end="60" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="95" end="100" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q158607" start="127" end="133" title="marine painting" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="174" end="180" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952033" start="212" end="245" title="Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts" label="Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="249" end="261" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586735" start="428" end="458" title="San Francisco Art Institute" label="San Francisco School of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q273593" start="506" end="547" title="École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts" label="École nationale supérieure des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q212499" start="554" end="570" title="Jean-Léon Gérôme" label="Jean-Léon Gérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q541859" start="575" end="595" title="Jules Bastien-Lepage" label="Jules Bastien-Lepage"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="658" end="666" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q238377" start="677" end="686" title="Pont-Aven" label="Pont-Aven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17393" start="691" end="701" title="Concarneau" label="Concarneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q158607" start="729" end="744" title="marine painting" label="marine painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="749" end="758" title="landscape painting" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="796" end="801" title="Paris Salon" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="941" end="967" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="1070" end="1088" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958223" start="1321" end="1341" title="Brauer Museum of Art" label="Brauer Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q957317" start="1377" end="1398" title="Exposition Universelle (1889)" label="1889 Paris Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909306" start="1431" end="1448" title="Temple Gold Medal" label="Temple Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1505" end="1511" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1513" end="1521" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="1523" end="1528" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1530" end="1536" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="1577" end="1593" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q502218" start="1832" end="1858" title="National Academy of Design" label="National Academy of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q570182" start="1864" end="1891" title="Society of American Artists" label="Society of American Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952033" start="2002" end="2039" title="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts" label="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q466677" start="2160" end="2173" title="Cecilia Beaux" label="Cecilia Beaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="3368" end="3381" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q432938" start="3395" end="3408" title="Reynaldo Hahn" label="Reynaldo Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q464928" start="3869" end="3895" title="In Search of Lost Time" label="Remembrance of Things Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456364" start="3928" end="3945" title="L. Birge Harrison" label="L. Birge Harrison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141548" wikidata="Q5148700" url="?curid=1141548" title="2004 Colorado Amendment 36">
<text>Amendment 36 was an initiated constitutional amendment on the ballot in Colorado on November 2, 2004. It would have changed the way in which the state apportioned its electoral votes. Rather than assigning all of the state&#x27;s electors to the candidate with a plurality of popular votes, under the amendment, Colorado would have assigned presidential electors proportionally to the statewide vote count, which would be a unique system (Nebraska and Maine assign electoral votes based on vote totals within each congressional district). The amendment did not pass.

== Contents ==
The amendment appeared on the ballot as follows:
== Results ==
The amendment ultimately failed, garnering only 34.78% of the vote:

== References ==
== External links ==
* Proposed text of Colorado Amendment 36
* Official results of vote on Colorado Amendment 36
* Pros and cons of Colorado Amendment 36</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5148700" start="0" end="12" title="2004 Colorado Amendment 36" label="Amendment 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="72" end="80" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799148" start="263" end="272" title="Plurality (voting)" label="plurality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="276" end="289" title="Direct election" label="popular votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="439" end="447" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="452" end="457" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141552" wikidata="Q6644893" url="?curid=1141552" title="List of wapentakes in Yorkshire">
<text>This is a list of [[wapentake]]s in [[Yorkshire]].

==North Riding of Yorkshire==


==East Riding of Yorkshire==


==West Riding of Yorkshire==


==Ainsty and the City of York==

As York acted as the capital of Yorkshire and it is right in the centre at the junction of the three ridings, it (along with the wapentake of Ainsty) had its own neutral area, which was not part of any of the three ridings.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6644893" start="10" end="50" title="List of wapentakes in Yorkshire" label="list of [[wapentake]]s in [[Yorkshire]]."/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="54" end="79" title="North Riding of Yorkshire" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="86" end="110" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="117" end="141" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697497" start="321" end="327" title="Ainsty" label="Ainsty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141554" wikidata="Q514225" url="?curid=1141554" title="Peter Waterfield">
<text>Peter Graham Waterfield (born 12 March 1981) is a British former diver and Olympic silver medalist.

==Diving career==
Waterfield&#x27;s specialist event during his career was the 10-metre platform event, both as solo competitor and in the synchronised event with his former partner Leon Taylor. Despite their noticeable height difference (Peter is only , Leon is almost ) in a discipline normally requiring as much uniformity as possible, they turned in strong synchronised performances. Waterfield and Taylor came in fourth at the men&#x27;s synchronised 10-metre platform in the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. In the diving events at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, they won the silver medal in the men&#x27;s synchronised 10-metre platform – Britain&#x27;s first Olympic diving medal since Brian Phelps in 1960.

In the 2002 Commonwealth Games held in Manchester, Waterfield&#x27;s best solo showing came when he won the 10-metre gold medal. In the 2006 Commonwealth Games he won a silver medal.

For the 2011 season, Waterfield was paired in the synchronised competitions with teenager Tom Daley; Daley had finished 7th in the individual competition at the 2008 Beijing Olympics and was also a British and European champion. During the 2012 London Olympics, Waterfield and Daley achieved an agonising 4th-placed finish in the 10 m synchro diving competition after dropping their 4th dive.

Waterfield announced his retirement from diving in July 2013, at the age of 32, following a decision to cut his funding by UK Sport.

==Personal life==
Born in London, he lives in Southampton with his wife Tania and their two sons, Lewis (born 2001) and Marshall (born 2008). Waterfield is a member of the diving club and was coached during his diving career by Lindsey Fraser. In January 2013, it was announced that Waterfield, who had been losing hair since his early 20s, had undergone a hair transplantation operation in order to look &quot;more appealing to TV companies and big brands seeking sponsors.&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q514225" start="0" end="23" title="Peter Waterfield" label="Peter Graham Waterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="65" end="70" title="diving (sport)" label="diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q517281" start="283" end="294" title="Leon Taylor" label="Leon Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="582" end="602" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="606" end="612" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q756112" start="621" end="634" title="Diving at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="diving events"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="642" end="662" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="666" end="672" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q847956" start="687" end="699" title="silver medal" label="silver medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116773" start="707" end="748" title="Diving at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s synchronized 10 metre platform" label="men&amp;#x27;s synchronised 10-metre platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q912902" start="799" end="811" title="Brian Phelps (diver)" label="Brian Phelps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="815" end="819" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="829" end="852" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="2002 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="861" end="871" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="939" end="949" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q659207" start="958" end="981" title="2006 Commonwealth Games" label="2006 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q313885" start="1096" end="1105" title="Tom Daley (diver)" label="Tom Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1560" end="1566" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="1580" end="1591" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141555" wikidata="Q274901" url="?curid=1141555" title="Carolus-Duran">
<text>Charles Auguste Émile Durand, known as Carolus-Duran (4 July 1837 in Lille – 17 February 1917 in Paris), was a French painter and art instructor. 
He is noted for his stylish depictions of members of high society in Third Republic France.

==Biography==
The son of a hotel owner, his first drawing lessons were with a local sculptor named Augustin-Phidias Cadet de Beaupré (1800–?) at the Académie de Lille; then took up painting with François Souchon, a student of Jacques-Louis David. He went to Paris in 1853, where he adopted the name &quot;Carolus-Duran&quot;.

In 1859, he had his first exhibition at the Salon. That same year, he began attending the Académie Suisse, where he studied until 1861. One of his early influences was the Realism of Gustave Courbet.

From 1862 to 1866, he travelled to Rome and Spain, thanks to a scholarship granted by his hometown. During that time, he moved away from Courbet&#x27;s style and became more interested in Diego Velázquez. 

Upon returning to France, he was awarded his first gold medal at the Salon. His picture &quot;Murdered&quot;, or &quot;The Assassination&quot; (1866), was one of his first successes, but he became best known afterwards as a portrait-painter, and as the head of one of the principal ateliers in Paris, where some of the most brilliant artists of a later generation were his pupils.

In 1867, he became one of the nine members of the &quot;Société Japonaise du Jinglar&quot; (a type of wine); a group that included Henri Fantin-Latour, Félix Bracquemond and Marc-Louis Solon. They would meet once a month in Sèvres for a dinner &quot;à la Japonaise&quot;.

He married , a pastellist and miniaturist who had posed for his painting &quot;The Lady in Gloves&quot; in 1869. They had three children. Their eldest daughter, Marie-Anne, married the playwright Georges Feydeau.

After 1870, he devoted himself almost entirely to portraits. While many of his paintings depicted wealthy patrons in elegant clothing, he also notably painted a portrait of his gardener which stands in contrast to his other works in its loose strokes and earth tones. His success allowed him to open a studio on the Boulevard du Montparnasse, where he also gave painting lessons. He was named a Knight in the Légion d&#x27;honneur in 1872; being promoted to Officer in 1878, Commander in 1889 and Grand Officer in 1900.

In 1889 and 1900 he served on the juries at the Expositions Universelles. In 1890, he was one of the co-founders of the second Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts and he was elected a member of the in 1904. The following year, he was appointed Director of the French Academy in Rome, a position he held until 1913.He was a frequent visitor to the resort at Fréjus, where he owned a small villa. Following his death at age 79, the resort named a plaza and a beach after him.

==Pupils==
His pupils reportedly included John Singer Sargent, Irving Ramsey Wiles, Ralph Wormeley Curtis, Francis Brooks Chadwick, Emma Chadwick Jan Stanisławski (painter), Kenyon Cox Theodore Robinson, Mariquita Jenny Moberly. Mariette Leslie Cotton, Maximilien Luce, James Carroll Beckwith, Will Hicok Low, 
Mary Fairchild MacMonnies Low, Alexandre Jean-Baptiste Brun, Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson, Lucy Lee-Robbins, Ramón Casas i Carbó, Ernest Ange Duez and James Cadenhead

==Selected works==

==References==

Attribution:

==External links==

* Paintings of Carolus-Duran on Insecula
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q274901" start="0" end="28" title="Carolus-Duran" label="Charles Auguste Émile Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q274901" start="39" end="52" title="Carolus-Duran" label="Carolus-Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="69" end="74" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="97" end="102" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155605" start="200" end="212" title="Upper class" label="high society"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="216" end="237" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="389" end="406" title="Academy of Lille" label="Académie de Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085848" start="435" end="451" title="François Souchon" label="François Souchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83155" start="466" end="485" title="Jacques-Louis David" label="Jacques-Louis David"/>
<link wikidata="Q262478" start="611" end="616" title="Salon (Paris)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q337473" start="657" end="672" title="Académie Suisse" label="Académie Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="739" end="746" title="Realism (art)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="750" end="765" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q297" start="956" end="971" title="Diego Velázquez" label="Diego Velázquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072285" start="1257" end="1264" title="atelier" label="atelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q310715" start="1488" end="1507" title="Henri Fantin-Latour" label="Henri Fantin-Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q633574" start="1509" end="1526" title="Félix Bracquemond" label="Félix Bracquemond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755318" start="1531" end="1547" title="Marc-Louis Solon" label="Marc-Louis Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q206493" start="1581" end="1587" title="Sèvres" label="Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q189085" start="1645" end="1655" title="Pastels" label="pastellist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131208654" start="1660" end="1671" title="Portrait miniature" label="miniaturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49465" start="1826" end="1841" title="Georges Feydeau" label="Georges Feydeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922078" start="2160" end="2185" title="Boulevard du Montparnasse" label="Boulevard du Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="2253" end="2274" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q675016" start="2492" end="2524" title="Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts" label="Société Nationale des Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q337494" start="2622" end="2644" title="French Academy in Rome" label="French Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215155" start="2719" end="2725" title="Fréjus" label="Fréjus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155626" start="2879" end="2898" title="John Singer Sargent" label="John Singer Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950852" start="2900" end="2919" title="Irving Ramsey Wiles" label="Irving Ramsey Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129825" start="2921" end="2942" title="Ralph Wormeley Curtis" label="Ralph Wormeley Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643875" start="2944" end="2967" title="Francis Brooks Chadwick" label="Francis Brooks Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942488" start="2969" end="2982" title="Emma Chadwick" label="Emma Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q923415" start="2983" end="3009" title="Jan Stanisławski (painter)" label="Jan Stanisławski (painter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q933739" start="3011" end="3021" title="Kenyon Cox" label="Kenyon Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384543" start="3022" end="3039" title="Theodore Robinson" label="Theodore Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13521916" start="3041" end="3064" title="Mariquita Jenny Moberly" label="Mariquita Jenny Moberly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28791119" start="3066" end="3088" title="Mariette Leslie Cotton" label="Mariette Leslie Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q545293" start="3090" end="3105" title="Maximilien Luce" label="Maximilien Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061583" start="3107" end="3129" title="James Carroll Beckwith" label="James Carroll Beckwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002863" start="3131" end="3145" title="Will Hicok Low" label="Will Hicok Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296173" start="3148" end="3177" title="Mary Fairchild MacMonnies Low" label="Mary Fairchild MacMonnies Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q18507727" start="3179" end="3207" title="Alexandre Jean-Baptiste Brun" label="Alexandre Jean-Baptiste Brun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434408" start="3209" end="3238" title="Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson" label="Robert Alan Mowbray Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52148502" start="3240" end="3256" title="Lucy Lee-Robbins" label="Lucy Lee-Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q725681" start="3258" end="3277" title="Ramón Casas" label="Ramón Casas i Carbó"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056824" start="3279" end="3295" title="Ernest Ange Duez" label="Ernest Ange Duez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130844" start="3300" end="3315" title="James Cadenhead" label="James Cadenhead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141557" wikidata="Q5937178" url="?curid=1141557" title="Human Genome Diversity Project">
<text>The Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) was started by Stanford University&#x27;s Morrison Institute in 1990s along with collaboration of scientists around the world. It is the result of many years of work by Luigi Cavalli-Sforza, one of the most cited scientists in the world, who has published extensively in the use of genetics to understand human migration and evolution. The HGDP data sets have often been cited in papers on such topics as population genetics, anthropology, and heritable disease research.

The project has noted the need to record the genetic profiles of indigenous populations, as isolated populations are the best way to understand the genetic frequencies that have clues into our distant past. Knowing about the relationship between such populations makes it possible to infer the journey of humankind from the humans who left Africa and populated the world to the humans of today. The HGDP-CEPH Human Genome Diversity Cell Line Panel is a resource of 1,063 cultured lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from 1,050 individuals in 52 world populations, banked at the Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH in Paris.

The HGDP is not related to the Human Genome Project (HGP) and has attempted to maintain a distinct identity. The whole genome sequencing and analysis of the HGDP was published in 2020, creating a comprehensive resource of genetic variation from underrepresented human populations and illuminating patterns of genetic variation, demographic history and introgression of modern humans with Neanderthals and Denisovans.

==Studied populations==
The HGDP includes the 51 populations from around the world.
A description of the populations that were studied can be found in a 2005 review paper by Cavalli-Sforza:

==Informed consent==

One of the most important tenets of the HGDP debate has been the social and ethical implications for indigenous populations, specifically the methods and ethics of informed consent. Some questions include:
* How would consent be obtained?
* Would individuals or groups fully understand the project&#x27;s intentions, particularly with regards to language barriers and differing cultural views?
* What is &#x27;informed&#x27; in a cross-cultural context?
* Who would be authorized to actually give consent?
* How would individuals know what happened to their DNA?
* For how long would their information be kept in DNA databases?

These questions are specifically addressed by the HGDP&#x27;s &quot;Model Ethical Protocol for Collecting DNA Samples&quot;.

==Potential benefits==

The scientific community has used the HGDP data to study human migration, mutation rates, relationships between different populations, genes involved in height, and selective pressure. HGDP has been instrumental in assessing human diversity and in providing information about similarities and differences in human populations. The HGDP is the project with the largest scope among the various human diversity databases available.

So far 148 papers have been published using the HGDP database. Authors using HGDP data work in the US, Russia, Brazil, Ireland, Portugal, France, and other countries.

More specifically, HGDP data has been used in studies of evolution and expansion of modern human populations.

Diversity research is relevant in various fields of study ranging from disease surveillance to anthropology. Genomewide-association studies (GWAS) try to associate a genetic mutation with a disease; it is becoming clear that these associations are population-dependent and that understanding human diversity will be a major step toward increasing the power to find genes associated with disease.

To gain a full assessment of human development, scientists must engage in diversity research. This research needs to be conducted as quickly as possible before small native populations such as those in South America become extinct.

Another benefit of genomic diversity mapping would be in disease research. Diversity research could help explain why certain ethnic populations are vulnerable to or resistant to certain diseases and how populations have adapted to vulnerabilities (see race in biomedicine).

The study of human populations has been at the forefront of genomic and clinical research since the Human Genome Project (HGP) was completed. Projects similar to HGDP are the 1000 Genomes Project and the HapMap Project. Each has its own specificities and each has been used by scientists to a large extent for overlapping purposes.

==Potential problems==

Denouncing the project since its outset, some indigenous communities, NGOs, and human rights organizations have objected to the HGDP&#x27;s goals based on issues of scientific racism, colonialism, biocolonialism, and informed consent.

=== Racism ===
The Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Concentration (ETC Group) has been a major critic of the HGDP, speculating that issues of racism and stigmatization could occur should the HGDP be completed. One major concern with the research project has been the potential, in certain countries, for racism resulting from use of HGDP data. Critics feel that when governments are armed with genetic data linked to certain racial groups, those governments might deny human rights based on this genetic data. For example, countries could define races purely in genetic terms and deny a certain person&#x27;s right(s) based on lack of conformity to a certain race&#x27;s genetic model.

=== Uneven application ===
Eight of nine DNA groups under Ctrl/South category belong to Pakistan even though India is in the same group with about seven times the population of Pakistan and with far more numerous racial diversities. However, it is noteworthy that Rosenberg et al. found that the sampled Pakistani populations are more genetically diverse than 15 Indian populations that were explicitly compared.

=== Use of genetic data for non-medical purposes ===
Use of HGDP genetic materials for nonmedical purposes not agreed to by indigenous donors, especially purposes that create possibilities for human rights violations, has been a matter of concern. For example, Kidd et al. described the use of DNA samples from indigenous populations to explore a forensic identification capability based on ethnic origins.

===Creating artificial genetic distinctions===
Anthropologist Jonathan M. Marks stated: &quot;As any anthropologist knows, ethnic groups are categories of human invention, not given by nature.&quot; Some indigenous peoples have refused to take part in the HGDP due to concerns about misuse of the data: &quot;In December [1993], a World Council of Indigenous Peoples in Guatemala repudiated the HGDP.&quot;

==Alternative approaches==
In 1995, the National Research Council (NRC) issued its recommendations on the HGDP. The NRC endorsed the concept of diversity research, also pointing out some concerns with the HGDP procedure. The NRC report suggested alternatives such as keeping sample sources anonymous (i.e., sampling genetic data without tying it to specific racial groups). While such approaches would eliminate the concerns discussed above (regarding racism, weapons development, etc.), they would also prevent researchers from achieving many of the benefits that were to be gained from the project.

Some members of the Human Genome Project (HGP) argued in favor of engaging in diversity research on data gleaned from the Human Genome Diversity Project, although most agreed that diversity research should be done by the HGP and not as a separate project.

A number of the principal collaborators in the HGDP have been involved in the privately funded Genographic Project launched in April 2005 with similar aims.

==References==
==External links==

* Morrison Institute
* Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH
* ETC Group
* National Research Council 
* A critical page about the HGDP from physical anthropologist Jonathan Marks
* The Human Genome Controversy
* Not to be confused with National Cancer Institute, Laboratory of Genomic Diversity</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5937178" start="4" end="34" title="Human Genome Diversity Project" label="Human Genome Diversity Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937178" start="36" end="40" title="Human Genome Diversity Project" label="HGDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="57" end="76" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q315454" start="211" end="231" title="Cavalli-Sforza" label="Luigi Cavalli-Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="447" end="466" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="468" end="480" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="486" end="503" title="Genetic disorder" label="heritable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464989" start="1090" end="1117" title="Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH" label="Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="1160" end="1186" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project (HGP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q821775" start="3319" end="3339" title="Clinical surveillance" label="disease surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="3343" end="3355" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="3674" end="3691" title="Human development (biology)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="3847" end="3860" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752427" start="3935" end="3951" title="Medical research" label="disease research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="4003" end="4009" title="ethnic" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000306" start="4130" end="4149" title="race in biomedicine" label="race in biomedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="4253" end="4279" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project (HGP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="4556" end="4578" title="indigenous communities" label="indigenous communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="4580" end="4583" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863792" start="4590" end="4616" title="human rights organizations" label="human rights organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="4675" end="4692" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="4694" end="4705" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="4727" end="4743" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324452" start="4765" end="4830" title="ETC Group (AGETC)" label="Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Concentration (ETC Group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="5057" end="5063" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119217" start="6324" end="6341" title="Jonathan M. Marks" label="Jonathan M. Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="6466" end="6484" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="6710" end="6735" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="7292" end="7318" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project (HGP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q585511" start="7624" end="7643" title="Genographic Project" label="Genographic Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119217" start="7876" end="7890" title="Jonathan Marks (anthropologist)" label="Jonathan Marks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141577" wikidata="Q434432" url="?curid=1141577" title="Igor Bišćan">
<text>Igor Bišćan (; born 4 May 1978) is a Croatian professional football manager and former player who is the currently head coach of Qatar Stars League club Al-Ahli. In his playing career, he was a versatile player and could play almost every position in the defence or midfield, but featured mostly as a central midfielder, or as a central defender in his latter years.

Bišćan played for his hometown club Dinamo Zagreb, English club Liverpool, with whom he won a Champions League winners medal, Greek club Panathinaikos, and represented the Croatia national team internationally, debuting in UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying match against Macedonia on 13 June 1999.

==Club career==

===Early career===
At the start of his career, Bišćan began to amass an impressive level of playing experience, representing Croatia at youth football level and then captaining his club, Dinamo Zagreb, in the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Cup. He was part of what is considered the most successful era of Dinamo in the Prva HNL, winning two consecutive league titles in 1999 and 2000 and participating in two consecutive group stages of Champions League (Group A, 1998–99 and Group D, 1999–2000). During his four seasons in Croatia, Bišćan scored 11 goals in 84 appearances in domestic leagues, which brought attention of foreign clubs to the promising midfielder.

===Liverpool===
On 8 December 2000, Bišćan contract was bought-out by Liverpool for £5.5 million at the behest of its manager, Gérard Houllier, having been sought by Juventus, Barcelona, Ajax and Milan. His debut came in a Premier League match against Ipswich Town, which Liverpool lost 1–0, with Bišćan coming off the bench to replace Christian Ziege in 71st minute. One week later, he played full 90 minutes against Manchester United at Old Trafford, with Liverpool breaking 3,240 minutes of United&#x27;s undefeated run at their home ground by defeating them 1–0. He made an impressive start to his Liverpool career, briefly displacing Dietmar Hamann from the starting 11 as the defensive midfielder. He made 21 appearances by the end of the 2000–01 season, 15 of which he started and six of which he came off the substitutes&#x27; bench in. He scored his first goal for Liverpool on 14 January 2001, converting in the 18th minute of the 2000–01 League Cup match against Crystal Palace in a 5–0 victory. Unfortunately for Bišćan, he was cup–tied and therefore ineligible to play for Liverpool in their UEFA Cup-winning season.

Although Bišćan was originally signed as a central midfielder, Gérard Houllier felt he was more useful as centre back and often played Bišćan out of his natural position, sometimes even as a winger or full back. Bišćan fell out of favour after his first year at Liverpool, making only 23 appearances in the next two seasons. During this time, he made few starts and spent a total of 37 matches on the bench without being used as a substitute. A major injury crisis of the team in 2003–04 season gave Bišćan a comeback chance, and by the start of the new Premier League season, he had returned into the starting 11, featuring regularly as a centre-back in the absences of Stéphane Henchoz and Jamie Carragher. By the end of the season, Bišćan featured in 39 matches, 30 of which he played the entire 90 minutes. He was sent-off in 36th minute of Liverpool&#x27;s UEFA Cup second leg match against Marseille, which turned things around for Liverpool as they were eliminated from the competition, after which he struggled to regain his place.

In the 2004–05 season, Bišćan returned to a central midfield role and played a vital part in Liverpool&#x27;s run to the finals of the UEFA Champions League and was notable particularly for his marauding runs from midfield during matches against Bayer Leverkusen, Juventus and Chelsea. He was an unused substitute against Milan in the final. His last official match for &quot;the Reds&quot; was on 15 May 2005 in a Premier League clash against Aston Villa. During his last season Bišćan scored two more goals (against Fulham and Bolton Wanderers) and made a total of 35 appearances. Although Bišćan failed to live up to expectations, he is fondly remembered by Liverpool fans after his impressive final year at the club.

As a Liverpool player, he also made a cameo appearance in the film &quot;Goal!&quot;, scoring a header in the final match of the film when Liverpool were playing Newcastle United.

===Panathinaikos===
Following the termination of his contract with &quot;the Reds&quot;, on 15 June 2005, Bišćan signed for major Greek club Panathinaikos. During his two years in Athens, he made 36 appearances and scored 3 goals. Bišćan had a major decline in his game, disappointing both fans and the club owners. On 1 June 2007, Bišćan&#x27;s contract expired and the club showed no interest in renewing his contract, making him a free agent again.

===Return to Dinamo Zagreb===

Bišćan spent the next six months resting from football and mostly avoiding the high public interest shown in him. During this time, he was regularly approached by Dinamo Zagreb director Zdravko Mamić, who was interested in bringing Bišćan back to his home club. After months of negotiations, Bišćan finally signed contract on 3 December 2007. Although he was criticized for his lacking performances by the fans, Bišćan rose to become the captain of the club after the departure of Luka Modrić to Tottenham Hotspur. Following his return, Dinamo played for two consecutive seasons in UEFA Cup group stages, also winning two domestic league titles and two Croatian Cup titles.

On 19 April 2011, it was announced by unconfirmed reports that Bišćan has been scheduled for an operation on a joint that could spell the end of his career. Luckily, Bišćan opted to continue playing football and end his career at Dinamo. In April 2012, he terminated his contract with the club.

==International career==
Bišćan&#x27;s debut appearance for the Croatia national team came on a UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying match against Macedonia in Skopje on 5 June 1999. He scored his first and only international goal against Mexico on 16 June 1999. He also collected yellow cards on three occasions. Eleven out of fifteen Croatia&#x27;s matches Bišćan featured in finished in a draw. His last official match was against Scotland on 1 September 2001.

After leaving the national team camp in 2003, Bišćan was suspended by Croatian Football Federation and refused to play for the national team ever since. He also represented Croatia at under-21 level and was capped in the Croatia B team on one occasion.

==Managerial career==
Bišćan started his managerial career as an assistant coach at second-tier Druga HNL club Rudeš in 2016. Soon he was named head coach of the club, winning the 2016–17 Druga HNL title.

One month later, Bišćan signed with Slovenian PrvaLiga club Olimpija Ljubljana to be their head coach. In his inaugural season at Olimpija, he won the Slovenian PrvaLiga title and the Slovenian Cup, but in June 2018 club president, Milan Mandarić, unexpectedly sacked him.

===Rijeka===
On 9 October 2018, Bišćan was named head coach of first-tier Prva HNL club Rijeka.

Immediately after coming to the club, Bišćan faced criticism by the club&#x27;s supporters, Armada, because of his former acts as a player of Dinamo Zagreb. He debuted at Rijeka bench in a 2–1 away win against Inter Zaprešić on 10 October. After a slew of good results, Bišćan ended the 2018–19 season in the second place in the championship, and won the Croatian Cup defeating Dinamo 3–1 in the final.

On 13 July 2019, he lost the Super Cup game 1–0 to Dinamo. In August the same year, Bišćan led the team to two victories in the third qualifying round of the UEFA Europa League over Scottish side Aberdeen. He later failed to take the club to the group stage, losing to Gent 3–2 on aggregate in the play-offs.

Bišćan resigned from his position as Rijeka head coach on 22 September 2019, after a 3–0 win against Istra 1961.

===Croatia U21===
After Croatia U21 lost a Euro 2021 qualifier 2–1 against Scotland, head coach Nenad Gračan resigned on 11 September 2019 and was succeeded by Bišćan on 1 October. Bišćan made his debut in a friendly 4–1 victory over Hungary on 11 October.

On 14 October, Croatia broke the record for their biggest victory in history, beating San Marino 7–0 in Serravalle. On 18 November, Croatia compromised their qualification for the Euro 2021 after losing another qualifier, this time 2–1 against the Czech Republic. In August 2020, Bišćan tested positive for COVID-19 and was forced to lead the team to a 5–0 victory over Greece from isolation. However, after drawing 0–0 with the Czech Republic four days later, on 7 September, Croatia were forced to win all their remaining games to have a chance to qualify directly. On 8 October, Croatia once again broke the record for their biggest victory in history, beating San Marino 10–0 in Zagreb. On 12 November, Croatia failed to win their crucial qualifier against Scotland away, drawing 2–2. However, thanks to a high 7–0 win over Lithuania and Scotland losing to Greece away on 17 November, Croatia secured the second place in their qualifying group. Subsequently, they qualified for the tournament as one of five best ranked second-placed teams. Upon qualification, Bišćan received widespread national praise for his approach and utilization of the qualities of the national team, which had turned into a synonym for failure in Croatian football throughout the years.

Bišćan named his 23-man squad for the group stage of the tournament on 9 March 2021. However, during the month, several important players were ruled out, mostly due to injuries, such as Josip Brekalo, Boško Šutalo, Joško Gvardiol, Luka Sučić and Borna Sosa. After the opening match, the 1–0 loss to Portugal on 25 March, Bišćan was criticized for his &quot;catenaccio&quot; tactics that were deemed uncharacteristic for Croatian football, which is best known for its midfielders. Three days later, Bišćan led Croatia to their first ever victory at the European Under-21 Championships, beating Switzerland 3–2. However, despite losing 2–1 to England in the final group game on 31 March, Croatia qualified for the quarter-finals for the first time in their history due to a better goal difference. In the quarter-final against reigning champions Spain on 31 May, Croatia lost 2–1 after extra time.

===Dinamo Zagreb===
On 6 April 2023, a day after Šibenik unexpectedly eliminated Dinamo Zagreb in the semi-finals of the national cup, Dinamo parted ways with head coach Ante Čačić and appointed Bišćan as the new head coach. He was sacked on 21 August of the same year after Dinamo were eliminated by AEK Athens in the third qualifying round of the 2023–24 UEFA Champions League season.

===Al-Shabab===
On 18 October 2023, Bišćan was appointed as manager of Saudi Pro League club Al-Shabab. He was sacked on 27 December 2023 after a 1–0 defeat to Al-Okhdood.

=== Al-Alhli ===
On 7 June 2024, Bišćan was appointed as manager of Qatar Stars League club Al-Ahli SC (Doha). He was named coach of the month twice in a row (August and September).

== Personal life ==
In 2007, Bišćan married his wife, Marija, whom he started dating three years earlier. The couple have four daughters: Nina Marija, Bruna, Lena, and Borna.

==Career statistics==

===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Croatia&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Bišćan goal.&quot;

==Managerial statistics==

==Honours==
===Player===

Samobor 
*Croatian Second League: 1995–96 (West)

Dinamo Zagreb
*Croatian First League: 1997–98, 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2007–08, 2008–09, 2008–09, 2010–11, 2011–12
*Croatian Cup: 1997–98, 2007–08, 2008–09, 2010–11
*Croatian Super Cup: 2010

Liverpool
*Football League Cup: 2000–01, 2002–03; runner-up 2004-05
*FA Community Shield: 2001
*UEFA Champions League: 2004–05
*UEFA Super Cup: 2001

===Manager===
Rudeš
*Croatian Second League: 2016–17

Olimpija Ljubljana 
*Slovenian PrvaLiga: 2017–18
*Slovenian Cup: 2017–18

Rijeka
*Croatian Cup: 2018–19

Dinamo Zagreb
*Croatian Football League: 2022–23
*Croatian Super Cup: 2023

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Igor Bišćan at LFCHistory.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434432" start="0" end="11" title="Igor Bišćan" label="Igor Bišćan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="59" end="67" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q628099" start="68" end="75" title="Manager (association football)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q117321337" start="87" end="93" title="Football player" label="player"/>
<link wikidata="Q60681" start="129" end="147" title="Qatar Stars League" label="Qatar Stars League"/>
<link wikidata="Q284452" start="153" end="160" title="Al Ahli SC (Doha)" label="Al-Ahli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="319" title="Midfielder#Central midfielder" label="central midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="329" end="345" title="Defender (association football)#Centre-back" label="central defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="404" end="417" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="432" end="441" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="462" end="478" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="505" end="518" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="540" end="561" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="591" end="605" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302979" start="606" end="616" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying Group 8" label="qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q188568" start="631" end="640" title="North Macedonia national football team" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="863" end="876" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="885" end="906" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="915" end="923" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q162604" start="1000" end="1008" title="Prva HNL" label="Prva HNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625555" start="1051" end="1055" title="1998–99 Prva HNL" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625522" start="1060" end="1064" title="1999–2000 Prva HNL" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1136" end="1152" title="1998–99 UEFA Champions League#Group stage" label="Group A, 1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1157" end="1175" title="1999–2000 UEFA Champions League#Group D" label="Group D, 1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="1417" end="1426" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q295615" start="1474" end="1489" title="Gérard Houllier" label="Gérard Houllier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="1513" end="1521" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="1523" end="1532" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="1534" end="1538" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1543" end="1548" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833562" start="1570" end="1584" title="2000–01 FA Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="1599" end="1611" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q155884" start="1683" end="1698" title="Christian Ziege" label="Christian Ziege"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="1765" end="1782" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="1786" end="1798" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q155903" start="1986" end="2000" title="Dietmar Hamann" label="Dietmar Hamann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930669" start="2092" end="2106" title="2000–01 in English football" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747833" start="2288" end="2306" title="2000–01 Football League Cup" label="2000–01 League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="2321" end="2335" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656410" start="2452" end="2460" title="2000–01 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2521" end="2539" title="Midfielder#Central midfielder" label="central midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="2669" end="2675" title="Winger (association football)" label="winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="2679" end="2688" title="Full-back (association football)" label="full back"/>
<link wikidata="Q313137" start="3149" end="3165" title="Stéphane Henchoz" label="Stéphane Henchoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q172211" start="3170" end="3185" title="Jamie Carragher" label="Jamie Carragher"/>
<link wikidata="Q239660" start="3340" end="3348" title="2003–04 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132885" start="3374" end="3383" title="Olympique de Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="3654" end="3675" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761" start="3765" end="3781" title="Bayer 04 Leverkusen" label="Bayer Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="3796" end="3803" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q757107" start="3850" end="3859" title="2005 UEFA Champions League Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="3934" end="3948" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="3963" end="3974" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="4037" end="4043" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="4048" end="4064" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q869862" start="4314" end="4319" title="Goal! (film)" label="Goal!"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="4403" end="4419" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122219" start="4563" end="4576" title="Panathinaikos F.C." label="Panathinaikos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="4602" end="4608" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444745" start="5092" end="5105" title="Zdravko Mamić" label="Zdravko Mamić"/>
<link wikidata="Q483837" start="5387" end="5398" title="Luka Modrić" label="Luka Modrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="5402" end="5419" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q958034" start="5559" end="5571" title="Croatian Football Cup" label="Croatian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="5941" end="5962" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia national team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5973" end="5987" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying#Group 8" label="UEFA Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q188568" start="6013" end="6022" title="Macedonia national football team" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="6026" end="6032" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="6105" end="6111" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="6300" end="6308" title="Scotland men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q328689" start="6401" end="6429" title="Croatian Football Federation" label="Croatian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331381" start="6515" end="6529" title="Croatia national under-21 football team" label="under-21 level"/>
<link wikidata="Q209967" start="6681" end="6690" title="First Football League (Croatia)" label="Druga HNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954589" start="6696" end="6701" title="NK Rudeš" label="Rudeš"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910523" start="6765" end="6782" title="2016–17 Croatian Second Football League" label="2016–17 Druga HNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q275005" start="6827" end="6845" title="Slovenian PrvaLiga" label="Slovenian PrvaLiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q31932" start="6851" end="6869" title="NK Olimpija Ljubljana (2005)" label="Olimpija Ljubljana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30317380" start="6942" end="6960" title="2017–18 Slovenian PrvaLiga" label="Slovenian PrvaLiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30312428" start="6975" end="6988" title="2017–18 Slovenian Football Cup" label="Slovenian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q741313" start="7023" end="7037" title="Milan Mandarić" label="Milan Mandarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q162604" start="7139" end="7147" title="Croatian Football League" label="Prva HNL"/>
<link wikidata="Q318969" start="7153" end="7159" title="HNK Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443453" start="7254" end="7260" title="Armada Rijeka" label="Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q172803" start="7304" end="7317" title="GNK Dinamo Zagreb" label="Dinamo Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q723644" start="7372" end="7386" title="NK Inter Zaprešić" label="Inter Zaprešić"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388385" start="7449" end="7463" title="2018–19 HNK Rijeka season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q53803144" start="7491" end="7503" title="2018–19 Croatian First Football League" label="championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q55131654" start="7517" end="7529" title="2018–19 Croatian Football Cup" label="Croatian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q63645042" start="7558" end="7563" title="2019 Croatian Football Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043846" start="7595" end="7604" title="2019 Croatian Football Super Cup" label="Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7694" end="7716" title="2018–19 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round#Third qualifying round" label="third qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q55696547" start="7724" end="7742" title="2018–19 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q187326" start="7762" end="7770" title="Aberdeen F.C." label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54152458" start="7812" end="7823" title="2018–19 UEFA Europa League group stage" label="group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18232" start="7835" end="7839" title="K.A.A. Gent" label="Gent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203506" start="7847" end="7856" title="Aggregate Score" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7864" end="7873" title="2018–19 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round#Play-off round" label="play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q725916" start="7977" end="7987" title="NK Istra 1961" label="Istra 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331381" start="8014" end="8025" title="Croatia national under-21 football team" label="Croatia U21"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117113" start="8033" end="8052" title="2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualification Group 4" label="Euro 2021 qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812121" start="8065" end="8073" title="Scotland national under-21 football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q669887" start="8086" end="8098" title="Nenad Gračan" label="Nenad Gračan"/>
<link wikidata="Q385222" start="8224" end="8231" title="Hungary national under-21 football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813168" start="8334" end="8344" title="San Marino national under-21 football team" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q185412" start="8352" end="8362" title="Serravalle (San Marino)" label="Serravalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59338085" start="8428" end="8437" title="2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="Euro 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464421" start="8496" end="8510" title="Czech Republic national under-21 football team" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="8555" end="8563" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q957565" start="8618" end="8624" title="Greece national under-21 football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674502" start="8630" end="8639" title="Isolation (health care)" label="isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="8931" end="8937" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628891" start="9076" end="9085" title="Lithuania national under-21 football team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9533" end="9545" title="2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship squads#Croatia" label="23-man squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q22342392" start="9702" end="9715" title="Josip Brekalo" label="Josip Brekalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61910598" start="9717" end="9729" title="Boško Šutalo" label="Boško Šutalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q73400656" start="9731" end="9745" title="Joško Gvardiol" label="Joško Gvardiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q67999144" start="9747" end="9757" title="Luka Sučić" label="Luka Sučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q20093885" start="9762" end="9772" title="Borna Sosa" label="Borna Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630430" start="9815" end="9823" title="Portugal national under-21 football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q861958" start="9873" end="9883" title="catenaccio" label="catenaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="9983" end="9993" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q478770" start="10068" end="10099" title="UEFA European Under-21 Championship" label="European Under-21 Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q678582" start="10109" end="10120" title="Switzerland national under-21 football team" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="10157" end="10164" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10178" end="10183" title="2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship#Group D" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10228" end="10242" title="2021 UEFA European Under-21 Championship#Quarter-finals" label="quarter-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q64891305" start="10341" end="10359" title="2019 UEFA European Under-21 Championship Final" label="reigning champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129595" start="10360" end="10365" title="Spain national under-21 football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="10400" end="10410" title="Extra time (association football)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q833050" start="10462" end="10469" title="HNK Šibenik" label="Šibenik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10515" end="10526" title="2022–23 Croatian Football Cup#Semi-finals" label="semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771101" start="10583" end="10593" title="Ante Čačić" label="Ante Čačić"/>
<link wikidata="Q201584" start="10714" end="10724" title="AEK Athens F.C." label="AEK Athens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10732" end="10754" title="2023–24 UEFA Champions League qualifying phase and play-off round#Third qualifying round" label="third qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q111309338" start="10762" end="10791" title="2023–24 UEFA Champions League" label="2023–24 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q255633" start="10872" end="10888" title="Saudi Pro League" label="Saudi Pro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636005" start="10894" end="10903" title="Al Shabab FC (Riyadh)" label="Al-Shabab"/>
<link wikidata="Q12247430" start="10961" end="10971" title="Al-Okhdood Club" label="Al-Okhdood"/>
<link wikidata="Q60681" start="11042" end="11060" title="Qatar Stars League" label="Qatar Stars League"/>
<link wikidata="Q284452" start="11066" end="11083" title="Al Ahli SC (Doha)" label="Al-Ahli SC (Doha)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511878" start="11574" end="11596" title="Croatian Second Football League" label="Croatian Second League"/>
<link wikidata="Q162604" start="11629" end="11650" title="Croatian First Football League" label="Croatian First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609901" start="11652" end="11659" title="1997–98 Prva HNL" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625555" start="11661" end="11668" title="1998–99 Prva HNL" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625522" start="11670" end="11679" title="1999–2000 Prva HNL" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574224" start="11681" end="11688" title="2007–08 Prva HNL" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493136" start="11690" end="11697" title="2008–09 Prva HNL" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493136" start="11699" end="11706" title="2008–09 Prva HNL" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q525726" start="11708" end="11715" title="2010–11 Prva HNL" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078385" start="11717" end="11724" title="2011–12 Prva HNL" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q958034" start="11726" end="11738" title="Croatian Football Cup" label="Croatian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593112" start="11740" end="11747" title="1997–98 Croatian Cup" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609960" start="11749" end="11756" title="2007–08 Croatian Cup" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347451" start="11758" end="11765" title="2008–09 Croatian Cup" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848707" start="11767" end="11774" title="2010–11 Croatian Cup" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q338901" start="11776" end="11794" title="Croatian Football Super Cup" label="Croatian Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q17637854" start="11796" end="11800" title="2010 Croatian Football Super Cup" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="11813" end="11832" title="EFL Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598717" start="11834" end="11841" title="2001 Football League Cup Final" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612536" start="11843" end="11850" title="2003 Football League Cup Final" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606640" start="11862" end="11869" title="2004-05 Football League Cup" label="2004-05"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="11871" end="11890" title="FA Charity Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053106" start="11892" end="11896" title="2001 FA Charity Shield" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="11898" end="11919" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q308996" start="11921" end="11928" title="2004–05 UEFA Champions League" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="11930" end="11944" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q597316" start="11946" end="11950" title="2001 UEFA Super Cup" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910523" start="11997" end="12004" title="2016–17 Croatian Second Football League" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q275005" start="12027" end="12045" title="Slovenian PrvaLiga" label="Slovenian PrvaLiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30317380" start="12047" end="12054" title="2017–18 Slovenian PrvaLiga" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q915956" start="12056" end="12069" title="Slovenian Football Cup" label="Slovenian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q30312428" start="12071" end="12078" title="2017–18 Slovenian Football Cup" label="2017–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q55131654" start="12102" end="12109" title="2018–19 Croatian Football Cup" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q162604" start="12126" end="12150" title="Croatian Football League" label="Croatian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q111593088" start="12152" end="12159" title="2022–23 Croatian Football League" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q120671626" start="12181" end="12185" title="2023 Croatian Football Super Cup" label="2023"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141587" wikidata="Q7535438" url="?curid=1141587" title="Skindiving">
<text>Skindiving may refer to:
* Freediving, or breath-hold underwater diving
* Scuba diving, as distinct from the use of standard diving dress (old usage dating from before drysuits and wetsuits were commonly available)
* &quot;Skindiving&quot;, a song by James, in the album &quot;Laid&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q392409" start="27" end="37" title="Freediving" label="Freediving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="74" end="86" title="Scuba diving" label="Scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473740" start="277" end="281" title="Laid (album)" label="Laid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141589" wikidata="Q314019" url="?curid=1141589" title="Ignaz Pleyel">
<text>Ignaz (Ignace) Joseph Pleyel (; ; 18 June 1757 – 14 November 1831) was an Austrian composer, music publisher and piano builder of the Classical period. He grew up in Austria (then part of the Holy Roman Empire), and was educated there; in his mid-twenties he moved to France, and was based in France for the rest of his life.

==Life==
===Early years===

He was born in in Lower Austria, the son of a schoolmaster named Martin Pleyl. Despite the fact that some sources claim that he had 37 siblings, he was the eighth and last child of his father&#x27;s first marriage to Anna Theresia née Forster and he had eight more half siblings from his father&#x27;s second marriage to Maria Anna née Placho. While still young, he probably studied with Johann Baptist Wanhal, and from 1772 he became the pupil of Joseph Haydn in Eisenstadt. As with Beethoven, born 13 years later, Pleyel benefited in his study from the sponsorship of aristocracy, in this case Count Ladislaus Erdődy (1746–1786). Pleyel evidently had a close relationship with Haydn, who considered him to be a superb student.

Among Pleyel&#x27;s apprentice work from this time was a puppet opera &quot;Die Fee Urgele&quot;, (1776) performed in the marionette theater at the palace of Eszterháza and in Vienna. Pleyel apparently also wrote at least part of the overture of Haydn&#x27;s opera &quot;Das abgebrannte Haus&quot;, from about the same time.

Pleyel&#x27;s first professional position may have been as Kapellmeister for Count Erdődy, although this is not known for certain. Among his early publications was a set of six string quartets, his Opus number 1.

In the early 1780s, Pleyel visited Italy, where he composed an opera (&quot;Ifigenia in Aulide&quot;) and works commissioned by the king of Naples, Ferdinand I.

===Strasbourg 1783–1795===
Attracted to the benefits associated with an organist position, Pleyel moved to Strasbourg, France, in 1783 to work alongside Franz Xaver Richter, the maître de chapelle at the Strasbourg Cathedral. The cathedral was extremely appealing to Pleyel as it possessed a full orchestra, a choir, and a large budget devoted to performances. After establishing himself in France, Pleyel voluntarily called himself by the French version of his name, Ignace. While he was the assistant &quot;maître de chapelle&quot; at Strasbourg Cathedral, he wrote more works than during any other period in his musical career (1783–1793). At the cathedral, he would organize concerts that featured his symphonies concertantes and liturgical music. After Richter&#x27;s death in 1789, Pleyel assumed the function of full &quot;maître de chapelle&quot;. In 1788, Pleyel married Françoise-Gabrielle Lefebvre, the daughter of a Strasbourg carpet weaver. The couple had four children, the eldest being their son Camille. Marie Pleyel, née Moke (1811–1875), the future wife of Camille, became one of the most accomplished pianists of her time.

==== French Revolution and The Reign of Terror ====
In 1791, the French Revolution abolished musical performances in church as well as public concerts. Seeking alternative employment, Pleyel traveled to London, where he led the &quot;Professional Concerts&quot; organized by Wilhelm Cramer. In this capacity Pleyel inadvertently played the role of his teacher&#x27;s rival, as Haydn was at the same time leading the concert series organized by Johann Peter Salomon. Although the two composers were rivals professionally, they remained on good terms personally.

Like Haydn, Pleyel made a fortune during his time in London. On his return to Strasbourg, he bought a large house, the moated , about 35 km south of the city, between nearby Saint-Pierre and Eichhoffen in the Bas-Rhin department.

With the onset of the Reign of Terror in 1793 and 1794, life in France became dangerous for many, including Pleyel. He was brought before the Committee of Public Safety a total of seven times, due to his foreign status, his recent purchase of a château, and his ties with the Strasbourg Cathedral. He was subsequently labeled a &quot;Royalist collaborator&quot;. The outcome of the committee&#x27;s attentions could easily have been imprisonment or even execution. With prudent opportunism, Pleyel preserved his future by composing several pieces in honor of the new republic, all of which were written in Strasbourg around the time of the Terror. Those pieces, with dates of publication and details:

#&quot;La Prise de Toulon&quot; (&quot;The capture of Toulon&quot;) for solo and three-voice choir with piano accompaniment. (19 February 1794)
#&quot;Hymne de Pleyel chanté au Temple de la Raison&quot; (&quot;Hymn sung in the Temple of Reason&quot;) for choir with piano accompaniment. (1793 or 1794; dates disputed)
#&quot;Hymne à l&#x27;Être Suprême&quot; (&quot;Hymn to the Supreme Being&quot;) two part cantata (performed 8 June 1794)
#&quot;La Révolution du 10 août&quot; (&quot;The Revolution of August 10&quot;) for soloists, choir, and orchestra (10 August 1794)

Most of these compositions debuted at the Strasbourg Cathedral, which was known at the time as the &quot;Temple de l&#x27;Être Suprême&quot; (Temple of the Supreme Being), as churches were outlawed during the Terror. Pleyel became a naturalized French citizen and thus came to be known as Citoyen (citizen) Pleyel. With his involvement in artistic propaganda and loyalism to the new regime, Pleyel can be seen as the ultimate musical champion of Strasbourg republicanism.

In addition to composing the above works for the Strasbourg public, Pleyel also contributed to the Parisian music scene during the Revolution. One example is &quot;Le Jugement de Pâris&quot;, a pantomime-ballet by Citoyen (Citizen) Gardel and performed with Pleyel&#x27;s music (along with that of Haydn and Étienne Méhul) on 5 March 1793.

===Pleyel as businessman===
Pleyel moved to Paris in 1795. In 1797, he set up a business as a music publisher (&quot;Maison Pleyel&quot;), which among other works produced a complete edition of Haydn&#x27;s string quartets (1801), as well as the first miniature scores for study (the &quot;Bibliothèque musicale&quot;, &quot;musical library&quot;). The publishing business lasted for 39 years and published about 4,000 works during this time, including compositions by Adolphe Adam, Luigi Boccherini, Ludwig van Beethoven, Muzio Clementi, Johann Baptist Cramer, Johann Ladislaus Dussek, Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Georges Onslow.

Pleyel visited Vienna on business in 1805, meeting his now elderly mentor Haydn for a final time and hearing Beethoven play.

In 1807, Pleyel became a manufacturer of pianos; for more on the Pleyel piano firm, see Pleyel et Cie.

===Old age===
Pleyel retired in 1824 and moved to the countryside about 50 km outside Paris. He died in 1831, apparently quite aware that his own musical style had been fully displaced by the new Romanticism in music. He was buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

==Pleyel&#x27;s music==
Pleyel was prolific, composing at least 42 symphonies, 70 string quartets, and several operas. Many of these works date from the Strasbourg period; Pleyel&#x27;s production tailed off after he had become a businessman.

Recent scholarship has suggested that the theme for the &quot;Variations on a Theme by Haydn&quot;, by Johannes Brahms, Op. 56a, was probably composed not by Haydn — but by Ignaz Pleyel.

Pleyel also wrote music for masonic rituals.

==Reputation and assessment==
Pleyel is one instance of the phenomenon of a composer (others include Cherubini, Meyerbeer, and Thalberg) who was very famous in his own time but currently is obscure. Keefe (2005) describes a &quot;craze for his music c. 1780–1800&quot;, and quotes a number of contemporary witnesses to this surge. For instance François-Joseph Fétis wrote, &quot;What composer ever created more of a craze than Pleyel? Who enjoyed a more universal reputation or a more absolute domination of the field of instrumental music? Over more than twenty years, there was no amateur or professional musician who did not delight in his genius.&quot;

Pleyel&#x27;s fame even reached the then-remote musical regions of America. There was a Pleyel Society on the island of Nantucket off the coast of Massachusetts, and tunes by Pleyel made their way into the then-popular shape note tunebooks. Pleyel&#x27;s work is twice represented in the principal modern descendant of these books, &quot;The Sacred Harp&quot;.

In his own time, Pleyel&#x27;s reputation rested at least in part on the undemanding character of his music. A reviewer writing in the &quot;Morning Herald&quot; of London (1791) said that Pleyel &quot;is becoming even more popular than his master [Haydn], as his works are characterized less by the intricacies of science than the charm of simplicity and feeling.&quot; In the mid twentieth century, the harpsichord builder Wolfgang Zuckermann reminisced about playing Pleyel in his childhood in the 1930s: &quot;When I was ten years old, my family string quartet played a lot of Pleyel since it was the only thing easy enough to keep us going. My cello part consisted of unending stretches of quarter notes played on open strings.&quot; Pleyel continues to be known today as a composer of didactic music. Generations of beginning violin and flute students, for example, learn to play the numerous duets he wrote for those instruments.

==Pleyel pianos and Salle Pleyel==
The piano firm &quot;Pleyel et Cie&quot; was founded by Ignace Pleyel and continued by Pleyel&#x27;s son Camille (1788–1855), a piano virtuoso who became his father&#x27;s business partner as of 1815. The firm provided pianos used by Frédéric Chopin, who considered Pleyel pianos to be . It also ran a concert hall, the Salle Pleyel, in which Chopin performed his first—and also his last—Paris concerts. In September 2009 a replica of the 1830 model of Pleyel&#x27;s piano was built by Paul McNulty which is now in the collection Fryderyk Chopin Institute in Warsaw and was used in the 1st International Chopin Competition on Period Instruments.

== Recordings ==
# Yuan Sheng. Frederic Chopin. Ballades Nos 1–4/Impromptus Nos 1–4. Played on the 1845 Pleyel piano. Label: Piano Classics
# . Beranger. Chansons. Pleyel 1845 piano. Early Piano series. CD 5. Label: Alpha Classics.
# Ronald Brautigam. Felix Mendelssohn. Piano Concertos. Played on a copy of the 1830 Pleyel piano made by Paul McNulty. Label: BIS Records
# Janusz Olejniczak . Label: Opus 111 
# Alexei Lubimov. Chopin, Bach, Mozart, Beethoven: at Chopin’s home piano. Played on the original 1843 upright Pleyel piano. Label: NIFCCD
# Dina Yoffe. Fryderyk Chopin. Piano Concertos No 1 &amp; 2. Version for one piano. Played on the 1848 Pleyel and the 1838 Erard pianos. Label: Fryderyk Chopin Institute
# Viviana Sofronitsky, Sergei Istomin. Frederyk Chopin. Complete works for cello and piano. Played on a copy of the 1830 Pleyel piano made in 2010 by Paul McNulty. Label: Passacaille
# Kevin Kenner. Fryderyk Chopin. 4 Impromptus. Played on the 1848 Pleyel piano. Label: Fryderyk Chopin Institute
# Patrick Schneyder. Franz Liszt. Mazeppa. Early piano series. CD 10. Played on Pleyel piano 1846. Label: Alpha Classics.
# Arthur Schoonderwoerd. Fryderyk Chopin. Mazurkas, Valses &amp; other dances. Early Piano series. CD 7. Played on Pleyel piano 1836. Label: Alpha Classics.
# Tomasz Ritter. Fryderyk Chopin. Sonata in B minor, Ballade in F minor, Polonaises, Mazurkas. Karol Kurpinski. Polonaise in D minor. Played on the 1842 Pleyel piano, the 1837 Erard piano and a copy of Buchholtz piano from ca 1825–1826 made by Paul McNulty. Label: Fryderyk Chopin Institute

==References==
Sources
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
*
*Pleyel pianos
*21st century update on pianos &amp; company
*Salle Pleyel, a Paris concert hall built in the late 1920s
*Sheet music editions from Artaria Editions
*Web site on Pleyel pianos by Stephen Birkett of the University of Waterloo; includes pictures of Pleyel and of historical Pleyel pianos
*Web site of the Ignaz Pleyel Museum (in German); includes biography
*Pleyel in the grand piano – photoarchive
*Salle Pleyel Renewed with biography
*Pleyel page at the Michael Haydn project
*Pianola Institute Factsheet – The Pleyela Piano
*annales.org/archives/x/lyon.html
*soudoplatoff.org/musique
*soudoplatoff.net/pianos/piano.php?cpno=278
*naxos.com/composerinfo/Ignaz_Joseph_Pleyel/22774.htm
*classical-composers.org/comp/pleyel
*Karadar Classical Music Dictionary article
*Collection of over 200 early printed and manuscript scores in the University of Iowa Digital Library 
*Pleyel Pianos – &quot;The Piano in Polish Collections&quot;
*Copy of a Pleyel piano from 1830 by Paul McNulty
* Ignaz Pleyel Early Editions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q314019" start="0" end="28" title="Ignaz Pleyel" label="Ignaz (Ignace) Joseph Pleyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="134" end="150" title="Classical period (music)" label="Classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="192" end="209" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q450670" start="743" end="764" title="Johann Baptist Wanhal" label="Johann Baptist Wanhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="803" end="815" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q126321" start="819" end="829" title="Eisenstadt" label="Eisenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="839" end="848" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q260672" start="967" end="973" title="Erdődy" label="Erdődy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="1142" end="1148" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q925864" start="1243" end="1253" title="Eszterháza" label="Eszterháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="1470" end="1483" title="Kapellmeister" label="Kapellmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="1588" end="1602" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q385271" start="1609" end="1620" title="Opus number" label="Opus number"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="1773" end="1784" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1894" end="1904" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q113911" start="1940" end="1959" title="Franz Xaver Richter" label="Franz Xaver Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="1965" end="1983" title="Kapellmeister" label="maître de chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q745460" start="1991" end="2011" title="Strasbourg Cathedral" label="Strasbourg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136846" start="2493" end="2516" title="symphonie concertante" label="symphonies concertantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630994" start="2798" end="2805" title="Camille Pleyel" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q437228" start="2807" end="2819" title="Marie Pleyel" label="Marie Pleyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2995" end="3012" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q56145919" start="3164" end="3185" title="Professional Concerts" label="Professional Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q78303" start="3205" end="3219" title="Wilhelm Cramer" label="Wilhelm Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63490" start="3374" end="3394" title="Johann Peter Salomon" label="Johann Peter Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="3611" end="3615" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22423" start="3666" end="3678" title="Saint-Pierre, Bas-Rhin" label="Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21429" start="3683" end="3693" title="Eichhoffen" label="Eichhoffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12717" start="3701" end="3709" title="Bas-Rhin" label="Bas-Rhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="3745" end="3760" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="3865" end="3891" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q815228" start="4468" end="4485" title="Siege of Toulon" label="capture of Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="4910" end="4937" title="10 August (French Revolution)" label="The Revolution of August 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q364020" start="5779" end="5792" title="Étienne Méhul" label="Étienne Méhul"/>
<link wikidata="Q189544" start="6281" end="6293" title="Adolphe Adam" label="Adolphe Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189766" start="6295" end="6311" title="Luigi Boccherini" label="Luigi Boccherini"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="6313" end="6333" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q193673" start="6335" end="6349" title="Muzio Clementi" label="Muzio Clementi"/>
<link wikidata="Q455212" start="6351" end="6372" title="Johann Baptist Cramer" label="Johann Baptist Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q357172" start="6374" end="6397" title="Johann Ladislaus Dussek" label="Johann Ladislaus Dussek"/>
<link wikidata="Q151953" start="6399" end="6420" title="Johann Nepomuk Hummel" label="Johann Nepomuk Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="6422" end="6445" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q380935" start="6451" end="6465" title="George Onslow (composer)" label="Georges Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="6542" end="6547" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="6577" end="6586" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474785" start="6682" end="6695" title="Pleyel et Cie" label="Pleyel et Cie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="6894" end="6905" title="Romantic music" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="6933" end="6955" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="7049" end="7063" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358378" start="7273" end="7303" title="Variations on a Theme by Haydn" label="Variations on a Theme by Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="7314" end="7329" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="7427" end="7434" title="Freemasonry" label="masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20721" start="7546" end="7555" title="Luigi Cherubini" label="Cherubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q105237" start="7557" end="7566" title="Giacomo Meyerbeer" label="Meyerbeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q347871" start="7572" end="7580" title="Sigismond Thalberg" label="Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004163" start="7644" end="7649" title="Simon P. Keefe" label="Keefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q523581" start="7789" end="7810" title="François-Joseph Fétis" label="François-Joseph Fétis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="8223" end="8232" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="8250" end="8263" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489233" start="8322" end="8332" title="shape note" label="shape note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397088" start="8441" end="8456" title="Sacred Harp" label="The Sacred Harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q91819" start="8890" end="8909" title="Wolfgang Zuckermann" label="Wolfgang Zuckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630994" start="9543" end="9550" title="Camille Pleyel" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="9672" end="9687" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649419" start="9758" end="9770" title="Salle Pleyel" label="Salle Pleyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061240" start="9924" end="9936" title="Paul McNulty (piano maker)" label="Paul McNulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789713" start="9968" end="9993" title="Fryderyk Chopin Institute" label="Fryderyk Chopin Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419479" start="10024" end="10082" title="The 1st International Chopin Competition on Period Instruments" label="1st International Chopin Competition on Period Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q746212" start="10319" end="10335" title="Ronald Brautigam" label="Ronald Brautigam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061240" start="10423" end="10435" title="Paul McNulty (piano maker)" label="Paul McNulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200426" start="10444" end="10455" title="BIS Records" label="BIS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q544491" start="10458" end="10475" title="Janusz Olejniczak" label="Janusz Olejniczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337027" start="10485" end="10493" title="Opus 111" label="Opus 111"/>
<link wikidata="Q664267" start="11872" end="11879" title="Artaria" label="Artaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061240" start="12705" end="12717" title="Paul McNulty (piano maker)" label="Paul McNulty"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141591" wikidata="Q725485" url="?curid=1141591" title="Rich Internet Application">
<text>A Rich Internet Application (also known as a rich web application, RIA or installable Internet application) is a web application that has many of the characteristics of desktop application software. The concept is closely related to a single-page application, and may allow the user interactive features such as drag and drop, background menu, WYSIWYG editing, etc. The concept was first introduced in 2002 by Macromedia to describe Macromedia Flash MX product (which later became Adobe Flash). Throughout the 2000s, the term was generalized to describe browser-based applications developed with other competing browser plugin technologies including Java applets, Microsoft Silverlight.

With the deprecation of browser plugin interfaces and transition to standard HTML5 technologies, Rich Internet Applications were replaced with JavaScript web applications, including single-page applications and progressive web applications.

==History==
The terms &quot;Rich Internet Application&quot; and &quot;rich client&quot; were introduced in a white paper of March 2002 by Macromedia (now Adobe), though the concept had existed for a number of years earlier under names including: &quot;Remote Scripting&quot; by Microsoft in April 1999 and the &quot;X Internet&quot; by Forrester Research in October 2000.

In November 2011, there were a number of announcements that demonstrated a decline in demand for Rich Internet Application architectures based on browser plug-ins in order to favor HTML5 alternatives. Adobe announced that Flash would no longer be produced for mobile or TV (refocusing its efforts on Adobe AIR). Pundits questioned its continued relevance even on the desktop and described it as &quot;the beginning of the end&quot;. Research In Motion (RIM) announced that it would continue to develop Flash for the PlayBook, a decision questioned by some commentators. Rumors stated that Microsoft was to abandon Silverlight after the upcoming release of version 5 -- this would later turn out to be the case. The combination of these announcements had some proclaiming it &quot;the end of the line for browser plug-ins&quot;.

=== Rich mobile applications ===
A rich mobile application (RMA) is a mobile application that inherits numerous properties from web applications and features several explicit properties, such as context awareness and ubiquity. RMAs are &quot;energy efficient, multi-tier, online mobile applications originated from the convergence of mobile cloud computing, future web, and imminent communication technologies envisioning to deliver rich user experience via high functionality, immersive interaction, and crisp response in a secure wireless environment while enabling context-awareness, offline usability, portability, and data ubiquity&quot;.

==== Origins of RMAs ====
After successful deployment of web applications to desktop computers and the increasing popularity of mobile devices, researchers brought these enhanced web application functionalities to the smartphone platform. NTT DoCoMo of Japan adopted Adobe Flash Lite in 2003 to enhance mobile applications&#x27; functionality. In 2008, Google brought Google Gears to Windows Mobile 5 and 6 devices to support platform-neutral mobile applications in offline mode. Google Gears for mobile devices is a mobile browser extension for developing web applications enriched by a separate, user-installable add-on. These applications can be executed inside the mobile device with a web browser regardless of the architecture, operating system and technology. In April 2008, Microsoft introduced Microsoft Silverlight mobile to develop engaging, interactive UIs for mobile devices. Silverlight is a .NET plug-in compatible with several mobile browsers that runs the Silverlight-enabled mobile apps. Android accommodated the Google Gear plug-in in the Google Chrome Lite browser to improve the interaction experience of Android end-users.

==Technologies==

===Adobe Flash===
Adobe Flash manipulated vector and raster graphics to provide animation of text, drawings, and still images. It supported bidirectional streaming of audio and video, and it could capture user input via mouse, keyboard, microphone, and camera. Flash contained an object-oriented language called ActionScript and supported automation via the JavaScript Flash language (JSFL). Flash content could be displayed on various computer systems and devices, using Adobe Flash Player, which was available free of charge for common web browsers, some mobile phones and a few other electronic devices (using Flash Lite).

Apache Flex, formerly Adobe Flex, is a software development kit (SDK) for the development and deployment of cross-platform RIAs based on the Adobe Flash platform. Initially developed by Macromedia and then acquired by Adobe Systems, Flex was donated by Adobe to the Apache Software Foundation in 2011.

Adobe deprecated Flash in 2017, and the Adobe Flash Player was discontinued in most markets by early 2021.

===Java applet===

Java applets were used to create interactive visualizations and to present video, three-dimensional objects and other media. Java applets were appropriate for complex visualizations that required significant programming effort in a high level language or communications between applet and originating server.

===JavaFX===

JavaFX is a software platform for creating and delivering RIAs that can run across a wide variety of connected devices. The current release (JavaFX 12, March 11, 2019) enables building applications for desktop, browser and mobile phones and comes with 3D support. TV set-top boxes, gaming consoles, Blu-ray players and other platforms are planned. Java FX runs as plug-in Java applet or via Webstart.

===Microsoft Silverlight===

Silverlight was proposed by Microsoft as another proprietary alternative. The technology has not been widely accepted and, for instance, lacks support on many mobile devices. Some examples of application were video streaming for events including the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, and the 2008 conventions for both major political parties in the United States. Silverlight was also used by Netflix for its instant video streaming service. Silverlight is no longer under active development and is not supported in Microsoft Edge Legacy or newer.

=== Gears ===

&quot;Gears&quot;, formerly known as &quot;Google Gears&quot;, is a discontinued utility software providing offline storage and other additional features to web browsers, including Google Chrome. Gears was discontinued in favor of the standardized HTML5 methods. Gears was removed from Google Chrome 12.

===Other techniques===
RIAs could use XForms to enhance their functionality. Using XML and XSLT along with some XHTML, CSS and JavaScript can also be used to generate richer client side UI components like data tables that can be resorted locally on the client without going back to the server. Mozilla and Internet Explorer browsers both support this.

==Security issues in older standards==
RIAs present indexing challenges to Web search engines, but Adobe Flash content is now at least partially indexable.

Security can improve over that of application software (for example through use of sandboxes and automatic updates), but the extensions themselves remain subject to vulnerabilities and access is often much greater than that of native Web applications. For security purposes, most RIAs run their client portions within a special isolated area of the client desktop called a sandbox. The sandbox limits visibility and access to the file-system and to the operating system on the client to the application server on the other side of the connection. This approach allows the client system to handle local activities, reformatting and so forth, thereby lowering the amount and frequency of client-server traffic, especially versus client-server implementations built around so-called thin clients.

==See also==
* HTML5
* List of rich web application frameworks
* PIGUI

==References==
==External links==
* Accessible rich Internet applications (WAI-ARIA) 1.0 – W3C Candidate Recommendation 18 January 2011</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q725485" start="2" end="27" title="Rich Internet Application" label="Rich Internet Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q725485" start="45" end="65" title="Rich Internet Application" label="rich web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q725485" start="67" end="70" title="Rich Internet Application" label="RIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q725485" start="74" end="106" title="Rich Internet Application" label="installable Internet application"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="113" end="128" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="177" end="197" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990286" start="235" end="258" title="single-page application" label="single-page application"/>
<link wikidata="Q558376" start="312" end="325" title="drag and drop" label="drag and drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170542" start="344" end="351" title="WYSIWYG" label="WYSIWYG"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="410" end="420" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="481" end="492" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q865817" start="650" end="662" title="Java applet" label="Java applets"/>
<link wikidata="Q489048" start="664" end="685" title="Microsoft Silverlight" label="Microsoft Silverlight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="708" title="Deprecation#Software" label="deprecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="720" end="726" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="765" end="770" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="842" end="858" title="Web application" label="web applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990286" start="870" end="894" title="Single-page application" label="single-page applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q23679990" start="899" end="927" title="Progressive web application" label="progressive web applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q223729" start="1039" end="1050" title="white paper" label="white paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="1068" end="1078" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="1084" end="1089" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5846483" start="1182" end="1198" title="remote scripting" label="Remote Scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1208" end="1217" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q829961" start="1266" end="1284" title="Forrester Research" label="Forrester Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="1484" end="1489" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q360310" start="1603" end="1612" title="Adobe AIR" label="Adobe AIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="1736" end="1754" title="BlackBerry (company)" label="Research In Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q880005" start="1819" end="1827" title="BlackBerry PlayBook" label="PlayBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="2202" end="2220" title="mobile application" label="mobile application"/>
<link wikidata="Q501688" start="2327" end="2344" title="context awareness" label="context awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887075" start="2466" end="2488" title="mobile cloud computing" label="mobile cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853958" start="3016" end="3026" title="NTT DoCoMo" label="NTT DoCoMo"/>
<link wikidata="Q384622" start="3044" end="3060" title="Adobe Flash Lite" label="Adobe Flash Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122325" start="3145" end="3157" title="Gears (software)" label="Google Gears"/>
<link wikidata="Q21207" start="3161" end="3175" title="Windows Mobile" label="Windows Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q489048" start="3580" end="3601" title="Microsoft Silverlight" label="Microsoft Silverlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="3783" end="3790" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="3983" end="3989" title="vector graphics" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="3994" end="4009" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="4095" end="4104" title="Streaming media" label="streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="4221" end="4245" title="object-oriented language" label="object-oriented language"/>
<link wikidata="Q234657" start="4253" end="4265" title="ActionScript" label="ActionScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="4398" end="4405" title="information appliance" label="devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q857177" start="4413" end="4431" title="Adobe Flash Player" label="Adobe Flash Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="4498" end="4510" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="4528" end="4545" title="electronic device" label="electronic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q384622" start="4554" end="4564" title="Flash Lite" label="Flash Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q616759" start="4568" end="4579" title="Apache Flex" label="Apache Flex"/>
<link wikidata="Q467707" start="4607" end="4631" title="software development kit" label="software development kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="4709" end="4720" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="4754" end="4764" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="4786" end="4799" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q489709" start="4834" end="4860" title="Apache Software Foundation" label="Apache Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q451553" start="5031" end="5057" title="Interactive visualization" label="interactive visualizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q33079" start="5713" end="5721" title="Webstart" label="Webstart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="6003" end="6023" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="6040" end="6060" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="6184" end="6191" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598139" start="6307" end="6328" title="Microsoft Edge Legacy" label="Microsoft Edge Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312466" start="6436" end="6452" title="utility software" label="utility software"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="6536" end="6549" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="6603" end="6608" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q757829" start="6698" end="6704" title="XForms" label="XForms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="6743" end="6746" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q32110" start="6751" end="6755" title="XSLT" label="XSLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q166074" start="6772" end="6777" title="XHTML" label="XHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="7088" end="7105" title="Web search engine" label="Web search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="7112" end="7123" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="7204" end="7224" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q842193" start="7253" end="7260" title="sandbox (computer security)" label="sandbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q631425" start="7335" end="7350" title="vulnerability (computing)" label="vulnerabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="7404" end="7419" title="Web application" label="Web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="7980" end="7985" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636577" start="7988" end="8027" title="List of rich web application frameworks" label="List of rich web application frameworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10614538" start="8030" end="8035" title="Platform-independent GUI library" label="PIGUI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141594" wikidata="Q243491" url="?curid=1141594" title="Maunder">
<text>Maunder may refer to:

* Maunder (lunar crater)
* Maunder (Martian crater)
* Maunder (surname)
* Maunder Minimum, a period in the 17th–18th centuries when sunspots became exceedingly rare</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1138481" start="25" end="47" title="Maunder (lunar crater)" label="Maunder (lunar crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614530" start="50" end="74" title="Maunder (Martian crater)" label="Maunder (Martian crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861885" start="77" end="94" title="Maunder (surname)" label="Maunder (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="97" end="112" title="Maunder Minimum" label="Maunder Minimum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141601" wikidata="Q269402" url="?curid=1141601" title="Lauri Ylönen">
<text>Lauri Johannes Ylönen (born 23 April 1979) is a Finnish singer-songwriter, best known as the co-founder and frontman of the Finnish alternative rock band The Rasmus.

==Biography==
===The Rasmus===

When he and Heinonen started at Suutarila high school in the early 1990s, they met Pauli Rantasalmi and later Janne Heiskanen. Ylönen initiated the project of The Rasmus (then called just &quot;Rasmus&quot;) in 1994, along with Eero Heinonen (bass) Pauli Rantasalmi (guitar), and Jarno Lahti (drums), with Lahti subsequently being replaced by Heiskanen. First, they called themselves Trashmosh, then Anttila, and at last Rasmus. They played their very first show before the winter break in school, 1994. They played songs with a style of rock and funk. Ylönen became the lead singer, composer and songwriter of the band. He quit school because the band took too much of his time.

In 1998, after having released three albums, Janne Heiskanen left and in 1999 Aki Hakala became The Rasmus&#x27; new drummer. In the same year, the band&#x27;s former manager Teja Kotilainen left their current record label, Warner Music Finland. The band signed to Playground Music Scandinavia soon afterwards.

===Dynasty===
In 1999, an association called Dynasty was founded. The association consists of the three Finnish bands The Rasmus, Killer, and Kwan. The purpose of Dynasty was to signify allegiance and friendship between the bands and their members. Many members have tattoos or wear the Dynasty logotype on guitar straps. The bands have often worked together musically. Lauri has the tattoo on his arm as well as Pauli, Pauli also got the dynasty logo on his guitar (ESP LTD).

===Side projects===
Lauri sang co-vocals with Siiri Nordin, the singer of Killer, on a b-side version of the group&#x27;s single, &quot;All I Want&quot;.

In 2004, Ylönen recorded a song together with Apocalyptica and HIM&#x27;s singer Ville Valo, named &quot;Bittersweet&quot;. The song is available on Apocalyptica&#x27;s self-titled album, &quot;Apocalyptica&quot;. It has also been released as a single and music video.

A year later, he released another song with Apocalyptica, named &quot;Life Burns!&quot;. This song was also released as a single and music video. The musical genre was much heavier than &quot;Bittersweet.&quot; &quot;Life Burns!&quot; is taken from the same album as &quot;Bittersweet&quot;
Ylönen also sang, with other members Kwan and Siiri Nordin of Killer, a song called &quot;Chillin&#x27; at the Grotto&quot; at a gala.

Ylönen&#x27;s most recent project was composing the soundtrack of the Finnish movie &quot;Blackout&quot;. The soundtrack was released in December 2008.

===Solo career===
Most recently, Ylönen announced a solo album scheduled for release in March 2011 with the first single Heavy being out in February. The material will have its premiere at Emma Gala on 26 February 2011. Ylönen stated that he wanted several songs, that did not fit The Rasmus, to be released as a major record rather than a demo or something like that. The album will be self-produced with his record label Dynasty Recordings. In February 2011 the title of the album was revealed, New World. It was later released on 30 March 2011 in Finland, with other European countries following. The first single was called Heavy, the video was shot by Owe Lingvall who had previously directed the singles Justify and October &amp; April for The Rasmus. In May 2011 Lauri stated that In The City&quot; would be the second single from his debut album. The video was shot in Las Vegas. Throughout the summer Lauri toured the Finnish summer festivals and even a few European countries, his next stop was Germany in September 2011. In late September it was revealed that a remixed version of What Are You Waiting For would be his next single. Ylönen announced via his official website that he would continue his European tour starting with two dates in Russia for 2012. Recently he was nominated for best Finnish Act for the MTV EMA&#x27;S 2011. He subsequently won this category and went on to be nominated in the Best Worldwide Act.

==Personal life==
He has a son named Julius, born in April 2008, with Finnish singer Paula Vesala whom he married on 8 November 2014 in Las Vegas. The couple filed a statement on 29 December 2014 and the marriage was registered in Helsinki on 5 January 2015. The family moved to Los Angeles in autumn 2014. In September 2016 it was reported that the couple had filed for divorce after being together for 12 years.

Ylönen is currently in a domestic partnership with Finnish model Katriina Mikkola. The couple have two children together, a son named Oliver (born 29 December 2017) and a daughter Ever Marlene (born 17 October 2021). The family resides in Miami.

==Discography==

===Studio albums===
With The Rasmus
*1996 – &quot;Peep&quot;
*1997 – &quot;Playboys&quot;
*1998 – &quot;Hell of a Tester&quot;
*2001 – &quot;Into&quot;
*2003 – &quot;Dead Letters&quot;
*2005 – &quot;Hide from the Sun&quot;
*2008 – &quot;Black Roses&quot;
*2012 – &quot;The Rasmus&quot;
*2017 – &quot;Dark Matters&quot;
*2022 – Rise

Solo-Discography

*2011 – New World

==References==

* The Rasmus.com - official band biography Retrieved on 2005-18-09

==External links==

* The official website of Lauri&#x27;s solo project
* The Rasmus&#x27; official website
* Lauri Ylönen at the Internet Movie Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269402" start="0" end="21" title="Lauri Ylönen" label="Lauri Johannes Ylönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="108" end="116" title="frontman" label="frontman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="124" end="131" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="132" end="148" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="149" end="153" title="musical ensemble" label="band"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="154" end="164" title="The Rasmus" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="358" end="368" title="The Rasmus" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="442" end="446" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="466" end="472" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="492" end="497" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="737" end="741" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="746" end="750" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="783" end="791" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="958" end="968" title="Aki Hakala" label="Aki Hakala"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="1055" end="1070" title="Teja Kotilainen" label="Teja Kotilainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="1104" end="1124" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660489" start="1145" end="1173" title="Playground Music Scandinavia" label="Playground Music Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213710" start="1237" end="1244" title="Dynasty (association)" label="Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319796" start="1322" end="1328" title="Killer (Finnish band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q593973" start="1334" end="1338" title="Kwan (band)" label="Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319796" start="1744" end="1750" title="Killer (Finnish band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484421" start="1871" end="1883" title="Apocalyptica" label="Apocalyptica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23479" start="1888" end="1891" title="HIM (Finnish band)" label="HIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q25378" start="1906" end="1916" title="Ville Valo" label="Ville Valo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752372" start="1930" end="1941" title="Bittersweet (Apocalyptica song)" label="Bittersweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292966" start="2019" end="2031" title="Apocalyptica (album)" label="Apocalyptica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292966" start="2165" end="2176" title="Life Burns!" label="Life Burns!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292966" start="2312" end="2323" title="Life Burns!" label="Life Burns!"/>
<link wikidata="Q593973" start="2423" end="2427" title="Kwan (band)" label="Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q444716" start="2432" end="2444" title="Siiri Nordin" label="Siiri Nordin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319796" start="2448" end="2454" title="Killer (Finnish band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949634" start="2796" end="2801" title="Heavy (Lauri Ylönen song)" label="Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337975" start="2864" end="2873" title="Emma-gaala" label="Emma Gala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213710" start="3098" end="3116" title="Dynasty Recordings" label="Dynasty Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937741" start="3172" end="3181" title="New World (Lauri Ylönen album)" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949634" start="3303" end="3308" title="Heavy (Lauri Ylönen song)" label="Heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931699" start="3385" end="3392" title="Justify (The Rasmus song)" label="Justify"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649566" start="3397" end="3416" title="October &amp;amp; April" label="October &amp;amp; April"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937741" start="3463" end="3474" title="In The City (Lauri Ylönen song)" label="In The City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050947" start="4196" end="4208" title="Paula Vesala" label="Paula Vesala"/>
<link wikidata="Q841793" start="4815" end="4825" title="The Rasmus discography" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748996" start="4840" end="4844" title="Peep (album)" label="Peep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228612" start="4865" end="4873" title="Playboys (1997 album)" label="Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q546167" start="4894" end="4910" title="Hell of a Tester" label="Hell of a Tester"/>
<link wikidata="Q975490" start="4931" end="4935" title="Into (album)" label="Into"/>
<link wikidata="Q902931" start="4956" end="4968" title="Dead Letters" label="Dead Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q611731" start="4989" end="5006" title="Hide from the Sun" label="Hide from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q804250" start="5027" end="5038" title="Black Roses (The Rasmus album)" label="Black Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931793" start="5059" end="5069" title="The Rasmus (album)" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069838" start="5090" end="5102" title="Dark Matters (The Rasmus album)" label="Dark Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q112828920" start="5117" end="5121" title="Rise (The Rasmus album)" label="Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937741" start="5149" end="5158" title="New World (Lauri Ylönen album)" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="5374" end="5397" title="Internet Movie Database" label="Internet Movie Database"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141602" wikidata="Q5272695" url="?curid=1141602" title="Dick Bosman">
<text>Richard Allen Bosman (born February 17, 1944) is an American former professional baseball pitcher. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Washington Senators / Texas Rangers (1966–73), Cleveland Indians (1973–75), and Oakland Athletics (1975–76). Bosman started the final game for the expansion Senators and the first game for the Texas Rangers. He is the only pitcher in Major League history to miss a perfect game due to his own fielding error.

==Baseball career==
Bosman was signed as an amateur free agent by the Pittsburgh Pirates in . Following that season, he was drafted from the Pirates by the San Francisco Giants, and then a year later was drafted again by the Senators. After another season in the minors, Bosman made his major league debut on June 1, .

Bosman pitched for the Senators, and later the Rangers, for eight seasons. In 1969, he compiled a 14–5 mark and led the league in earned run average (2.19). He reached a career-high 16 victories in 1970, one of which was a one-hit, 1-0 shutout against Minnesota on August 14. César Tovar gave him the Twins&#x27; only hit, a single.

Bosman was traded, along with Ted Ford, from the Rangers to the Indians for Steve Dunning on May 10, 1973. On July 19, 1974, Bosman no-hit the defending World Series Champion Oakland Athletics, a team that would go on to win the 1974 World Series to three-peat after winning the World Series in 1972 and 1973. He missed a rare perfect game due only to his own throwing error in the fourth inning, which gave the A&#x27;s their lone baserunner in a 4-0 Indians victory.

The following season, Bosman would be traded to the very team he no-hit, as he was traded by the Indians, along with Jim Perry, to the A&#x27;s in exchange for Blue Moon Odom. During the season, Bosman won 11 games to help Oakland to a division title. He remained with Oakland in , but was released by the A&#x27;s in spring training of , bringing his baseball career to an end.

Bosman compiled 82 wins, 757 strikeouts, and a 3.67 earned run average. After retiring, he served as a pitching coach for the Chicago White Sox (1986–87), Rochester Red Wings (1988–91), Baltimore Orioles (1992–94), Texas Rangers (1995–2000), and was a coach in the Tampa Bay Rays&#x27; system from 2001. Known for teaching pitchers how to control the running game, Bosman had a hand in developing James Shields, Wade Davis, Jake McGee, Jeremy Hellickson and Alex Cobb. Bosman retired after the conclusion of the 2018 season.

==References==
==Sources==
*Robbins, Mike (2004). &quot;Ninety Feet from Fame: Close Calls with Baseball Immortality&quot; (New York: Carroll &amp; Graf). 
*Schneider, Russell (2005). &quot;The Cleveland Indians Encyclopedia&quot;, 3d ed. (Champaign, Ill.: Sports Publishing LLC). 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5272695" start="0" end="20" title="Dick Bosman" label="Richard Allen Bosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="81" end="89" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="90" end="97" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="112" end="133" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q111678972" start="148" end="167" title="Washington Senators (1961–71)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="170" end="183" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="195" end="212" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="228" end="245" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="413" end="425" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="528" end="546" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="614" end="634" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="721" end="727" title="minor league baseball" label="minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573707" start="856" end="860" title="1969 Washington Senators season" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="908" end="926" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574205" start="976" end="980" title="1970 Washington Senators season" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505648" start="1014" end="1021" title="shutouts in baseball" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="1030" end="1039" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202642" start="1054" end="1065" title="César Tovar" label="César Tovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693199" start="1142" end="1150" title="Ted Ford" label="Ted Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575742" start="1161" end="1168" title="1973 Texas Rangers season" label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575519" start="1176" end="1183" title="1973 Cleveland Indians season" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612442" start="1188" end="1201" title="Steve Dunning" label="Steve Dunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="1244" end="1250" title="no-hitter" label="no-hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983703" start="1255" end="1286" title="1973 World Series" label="defending World Series Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="1287" end="1304" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q892516" start="1341" end="1358" title="1974 World Series" label="1974 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990858" start="1362" end="1372" title="three-peat" label="three-peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984700" start="1407" end="1411" title="1972 World Series" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q606639" start="1439" end="1451" title="Perfect game (baseball)" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202128" start="1481" end="1486" title="error (baseball)" label="error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403258" start="1533" end="1554" title="Sal Bando" label="their lone baserunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197472" start="1699" end="1708" title="Jim Perry (baseball)" label="Jim Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929463" start="1742" end="1756" title="Blue Moon Odom" label="Blue Moon Odom"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="1900" end="1915" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="1981" end="1985" title="Win (baseball)" label="wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="1991" end="2000" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="2014" end="2032" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="2065" end="2079" title="Coach (baseball)" label="pitching coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="2088" end="2105" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966948" start="2117" end="2136" title="Rochester Red Wings" label="Rochester Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="2148" end="2165" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="2177" end="2190" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="2227" end="2241" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150839" start="2359" end="2372" title="James Shields (baseball)" label="James Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564978" start="2374" end="2384" title="Wade Davis (baseball)" label="Wade Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160628" start="2386" end="2396" title="Jake McGee" label="Jake McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754648" start="2398" end="2415" title="Jeremy Hellickson" label="Jeremy Hellickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832919" start="2420" end="2429" title="Alex Cobb" label="Alex Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082385" start="2474" end="2485" title="2018 Tampa Bay Rays season" label="2018 season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141605" wikidata="Q323368" url="?curid=1141605" title="Henry Vars">
<text>Henry Vars (born Henryk Warszawski; December 29, 1902 September 1, 1977) was a Polish-American composer, arranger and conductor whose compositions spanned popular, jazz and classical genres. He is regarded as the most important musical theatre, pop and film music composer of the interwar Poland.

Known in Poland as Henryk Wars, he is widely considered a pioneer of Polish jazz with his first composition &quot;New York Times&quot; (1927) being regarded as the very first jazz song in the history of Polish music. His other jazz and pop songs from the period include &quot;Miłość ci wszystko wybaczy&quot; (1933), &quot;Umówiłem się z nią na dziewiątą&quot;, &quot;Sex appeal&quot; (both from 1937), &quot;Ach, jak przyjemnie&quot; and &quot;Już nie zapomnisz mnie&quot; (both from 1939).

In the United States, Henry Vars is best remembered for scoring westerns &quot;Seven Men From Now&quot; (1956) and &quot;Escort West&quot; (1959), with an adventure film &quot;Flipper&quot; (1963) being his most famous work. His other American works include a Margaret Whiting song &quot;Over and Over and Over&quot;, Mel Tormé&#x27;s &quot;I Owe A Kiss To A Girl In Iowa&quot; (both from 1950), Brenda Lee&#x27;s &quot;Speak to Me Pretty&quot; (1961) and Doris Day&#x27;s Walk With Him (1962).

== Biography ==
Henryk Warszawski was born to a Jewish musical family in the Russian partition of Poland. He began studies at the Academy of Fine Arts, but soon obtained a scholarship to the Music Conservatory in Warsaw, from which he graduated in 1925, having studied composition with Professor Roman Statkowski and Emil Młynarski. In 1927 he composed a song called &quot;New York Times&quot; that was sung in the &quot;Karuzela&quot; Theatre by Tadeusz Olsza and recorded by Henryk Gold&#x27;s Orchestra for Syrena-Rekord. His first big hit, though, was &quot;Zatańczmy tango&quot;, composed in 1928 for Stanisława Nowicka and Eugeniusz Bodo. He was hired as a pianist for the &quot;Morskie Oko&quot; theater and joined Henryk Gold&#x27;s band.
During the 1930s, he composed songs for a string of musical comedies in Poland, and his importance there is comparable to that of Irving Berlin in America. His melodies from this period (along with those of Jerzy Petersburski and Zygmunt Wiehler) are still popular in Poland to this day, with his most popular songs often associated with pre-war Lwów. He was a long-time music director for Syrena-Rekord. He composed his first film score for &quot;Na Sybir&quot; in 1930, after gaining fame as a conductor and performer at various Warsaw cabarets and theaters including Morskie Oko, Hollywood, and Wielka Rewia. He composed scores for such films as &quot;Paweł i Gaweł&quot;, &quot;Szpieg w masce&quot;, &quot;Piętro wyżej&quot; (&quot;Neighbors&quot;), and &quot;Zapomniana melodia&quot;. He was the pioneer of jazz and swing music in Poland.&quot;

Shortly before the outbreak of World War II, he was drafted into the Polish Army and served in the defense of Poland in 1939. He was taken prisoner of war by the German army but managed to escape from a stopped train. He organized a big band Tea-Jazz Orchestra in Soviet-occupied Lwów in 1940. He composed his first symphony at this time. In late 1941, he and his musicians joined the Polish II Corps of General Anders as part of the &quot;Polska Parada&quot; cabaret. After being demobilized from the army in 1947, he emigrated to the United States.

In the U.S., he changed his name to Henry Vars and after a period of struggling and poverty, managed to resume his musical career. He was John Wayne&#x27;s friend. His new songs were sung by such well-known stars as Margaret Whiting, Mel Tormé, Doris Day and Brenda Lee. He composed the score and the title song for the &quot;Flipper&quot; (1963–1967) film and television franchise, as well as &quot;Daktari&quot;. He also composed scores for numerous western films such as &quot;Seven Men From Now&quot;, &quot;Gun the Man Down&quot; (both from 1956) and &quot;Escort West&quot; (1959).

== Concert Music ==
* &quot;Symphony No. 1&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Concerto for Piano and Orchestra&quot; (1950)
* &quot;City Sketches&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Maalot. Elegy for Orchestra in Memory of Murdered Children&quot; (1974)

== Selected filmography ==
* &quot;Na Sybir&quot; (1930)
* &quot;Jego ekscelencja subiekt&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Pieśniarz Warszawy&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Neighbors&quot; (&quot;Piętro wyżej&quot;, 1937)
* &quot;Zapomniana melodia&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Chained for Life&quot; (1951)
* &quot;The Big Heat&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Seven Men From Now&quot; (1956)
* &quot;Gun the Man Down&quot; (1956)
* &quot;The Unearthly&quot; (1957)
* &quot;China Doll&quot; (1958)
* &quot;The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Battle at Bloody Beach&quot; (1961)
* &quot;House of the Damned&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Flipper&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Flipper&#x27;s New Adventure&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Fools&#x27; Parade&quot; (1971)

==References==
== External links ==
* lyrics by Emanuel Schlechter, sung by Tadeusz Olsza
* &quot;Lwowskie Piosenki,&quot; Lyrics in Polish with Lwów accent for &quot;Dobranoc, oczka zmruż&quot;, &quot;Serce batiara&quot;, &quot;My dwaj, obacwaj&quot;, and &quot;Tylko we Lwowie&quot;. Any actual performance may vary significantly from these words.
* &quot;Piosenki z plecaka Helenki,&quot; book by Feliks Konarski (alias REF-REN), Rome, 1946; in Polish.
* &quot;Film Scores of Henry Vars in the United States: An Overview&quot; by Linda Schubert in &quot;Polish Music Journal&quot;, Vol. 4, No. 1.
* &quot;Szwajcarski paszport na Sybir,&quot; &quot;Swiss passport to Siberia&quot; by Diana Poskuta-Włodek in Nowy Dziennik, New York, 23 July 2004; in Polish.
* Polish Tangos: The Unique Inter-War Soundtrack to Poland’s Independence
* When Henryk Wars took on Hollywood</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323368" start="0" end="10" title="Henry Vars" label="Henry Vars"/>
<link wikidata="Q323368" start="17" end="34" title="Henry Vars" label="Henryk Warszawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="228" end="243" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="280" end="295" title="Second Polish Republic" label="interwar Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q323368" start="317" end="328" title="Henry Vars" label="Henryk Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210038" start="367" end="378" title="Polish jazz" label="Polish jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q473602" start="490" end="513" title="Music of Poland" label="history of Polish music"/>
<link wikidata="Q677782" start="870" end="888" title="Seven Men From Now" label="Seven Men From Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954957" start="912" end="923" title="Escort West" label="Escort West"/>
<link wikidata="Q378773" start="967" end="974" title="Flipper (1963 film)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q289108" start="1051" end="1067" title="Margaret Whiting" label="Margaret Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q470848" start="1109" end="1118" title="Mel Tormé" label="Mel Tormé"/>
<link wikidata="Q230925" start="1187" end="1197" title="Brenda Lee" label="Brenda Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048757" start="1211" end="1229" title="Speak to Me Pretty" label="Speak to Me Pretty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="1247" end="1256" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056467" start="1264" end="1277" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone (Doris Day album)" label="Walk With Him"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="1372" end="1391" title="Partitions of Poland" label="partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q464528" start="1583" end="1599" title="Roman Statkowski" label="Roman Statkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589146" start="1604" end="1618" title="Emil Młynarski" label="Emil Młynarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674506" start="1734" end="1747" title="Tadeusz Olsza" label="Tadeusz Olsza"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288148" start="1764" end="1775" title="Henryk Gold" label="Henryk Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050519" start="1797" end="1810" title="Syrena Rekord" label="Syrena-Rekord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599267" start="1893" end="1911" title="Stanisława Nowicka" label="Stanisława Nowicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q117444" start="1916" end="1930" title="Eugeniusz Bodo" label="Eugeniusz Bodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288148" start="2009" end="2020" title="Henryk Gold" label="Henryk Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="2086" end="2102" title="musical film" label="musical comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="2164" end="2177" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368401" start="2241" end="2259" title="Jerzy Petersburski" label="Jerzy Petersburski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075821" start="2264" end="2279" title="Zygmunt Wiehler" label="Zygmunt Wiehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="2380" end="2384" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050519" start="2424" end="2437" title="Syrena Rekord" label="Syrena-Rekord"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="2565" end="2571" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532933" start="2744" end="2756" title="Neighbors (1937 film)" label="Piętro wyżej"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182799" start="2798" end="2816" title="Zapomniana melodia" label="Zapomniana melodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2916" end="2928" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2954" end="2965" title="History of the Polish Military#Second Polish Republic" label="Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2984" end="3009" title="Invasion of Poland" label="defense of Poland in 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3024" end="3039" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="3047" end="3058" title="Wehrmacht" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3149" end="3155" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="3165" end="3169" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923598" start="3270" end="3285" title="Polish II Corps" label="Polish II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165544" start="3289" end="3303" title="Władysław Anders" label="General Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="3575" end="3585" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q289108" start="3653" end="3669" title="Margaret Whiting" label="Margaret Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q470848" start="3671" end="3680" title="Mel Tormé" label="Mel Tormé"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="3682" end="3691" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q230925" start="3696" end="3706" title="Brenda Lee" label="Brenda Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376828" start="3763" end="3770" title="Flipper (franchise)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157768" start="3837" end="3844" title="Daktari" label="Daktari"/>
<link wikidata="Q677782" start="3917" end="3935" title="Seven Men From Now" label="Seven Men From Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270280" start="3949" end="3965" title="Gun the Man Down" label="Gun the Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954957" start="3999" end="4010" title="Escort West" label="Escort West"/>
<link wikidata="Q121536560" start="4090" end="4122" title="Concerto for Piano and Orchestra (Wars)" label="Concerto for Piano and Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101668" start="4287" end="4295" title="Na Sybir" label="Na Sybir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723941" start="4317" end="4341" title="Jego ekscelencja subiekt" label="Jego ekscelencja subiekt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4347735" start="4363" end="4381" title="Pieśniarz Warszawy" label="Pieśniarz Warszawy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532933" start="4403" end="4412" title="Neighbors (1937 film)" label="Neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182799" start="4460" end="4478" title="Zapomniana melodia" label="Zapomniana melodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201908" start="4500" end="4516" title="Chained for Life (1952 film)" label="Chained for Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093085" start="4538" end="4550" title="The Big Heat" label="The Big Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q677782" start="4572" end="4590" title="Seven Men From Now" label="Seven Men From Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270280" start="4612" end="4628" title="Gun the Man Down" label="Gun the Man Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546069" start="4650" end="4663" title="The Unearthly" label="The Unearthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963702" start="4685" end="4695" title="China Doll (film)" label="China Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988048" start="4717" end="4752" title="The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come (1961 film)" label="The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236738" start="4774" end="4796" title="Battle at Bloody Beach" label="Battle at Bloody Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880523" start="4818" end="4837" title="House of the Damned (1963 film)" label="House of the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q378773" start="4859" end="4866" title="Flipper (1963 film)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q945906" start="4888" end="4916" title="Flipper&amp;#x27;s New Adventure" label="Flipper&amp;#x27;s New Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990947" start="4938" end="4956" title="Fools&amp;#x27; Parade" label="Fools&amp;#x27; Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369137" start="5019" end="5037" title="Emanuel Schlechter" label="Emanuel Schlechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674506" start="5047" end="5060" title="Tadeusz Olsza" label="Tadeusz Olsza"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="5104" end="5110" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="5116" end="5120" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q597100" start="5371" end="5386" title="Feliks Konarski" label="Feliks Konarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="5419" end="5425" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="5723" end="5729" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141606" wikidata="Q436682" url="?curid=1141606" title="Valérie Kaprisky">
<text>Valérie Kaprisky ( Chérès; born 19 August 1962) is a French actress.

== Life and career ==
She was born Valerie Chérès on 19 August 1962 in Neuilly-sur-Seine. Kaprisky is her Polish mother&#x27;s maiden name. She is of Greek-Ottoman and Argentine descent on her father&#x27;s side. When she was eight years old, her family moved to Cannes, where she discovered the Cannes film festival and decided to become an actress. At 17, she moved to Paris, attending high school during the day and the Cours Florent acting school at night.

She appeared in a French erotic movie (&quot;Aphrodite&quot;), then made her American debut in the &quot;À bout de souffle&quot; remake &quot;Breathless&quot; (1983) starring alongside Richard Gere.

She also appeared in &quot;La femme publique&quot; (1984) by Andrzej Żuławski, for which she was a nominee for the 1985 César Award for Best Actress.

== Filmography ==

* 1981: &quot;Le Jour se lève et les conneries commencent&quot;
* 1981: &quot;Les Hommes préfèrent les grosses&quot; (&quot;Men Prefer Fat Girls&quot;): &quot;A friend of Éva&quot;
* 1982: &quot;Une glace avec deux boules ou je le dis à maman&quot;
* 1982: &quot;Aphrodite&quot; : &quot;Pauline&quot;
* 1982: &quot;Légitime violence&quot; : &quot;Nadine&quot;
* 1983: &quot;Breathless&quot; : &quot;Monica Poiccard&quot;
* 1984: &quot;La femme publique&quot; (&quot;The Public Woman&quot;): &quot;Ethel&quot;
* 1984: &quot;L&#x27;Année des méduses&quot; (&quot;Year of the Jellyfish&quot;): &quot;Chris&quot;
* 1986: &quot;La Gitane&quot; : &quot;Mona&quot;
* 1988: &quot;Mon ami le traître&quot; : &quot;Louise&quot;
* 1989: &quot;Stradivari&quot; : &quot;Francesca&quot;
* 1991: &quot;Milena&quot; : &quot;Milena Jesenska&quot;
* 1991: &quot;L&#x27;Amérique en otage&quot; (TV) : &quot;Zaleh&quot;
* 1993: &quot;La Fine è nota&quot; : &quot;Maria Manni&quot;
* 1994: &quot;Desire in Motion (Mouvements du désir)&quot; : &quot;Catherine&quot;
* 1995: &quot;Noël et après&quot; (TV) : &quot;Nicole&quot;
* 1995: &quot;Dis-moi oui...&quot; : &quot;Nathalie&quot;
* 1997: &quot;L&#x27;Enfant du bout du monde&quot; (TV) : &quot;Alice Valère&quot;
* 1998: &quot;La Dernière des romantiques&quot; (TV) : &quot;Lise Marie&quot;
* 1998: &quot;Il Tesoro di Damasco&quot; (feuilleton TV) : &quot;Marie&quot;
* 1999: &quot;Brigade des mineurs&quot; (TV) : &quot;Laurence Dorlaville&quot;
* 2000: &quot;Toute la ville en parle&quot; (TV) : &quot;Fabienne Serrant&quot;
* 2001: &quot;Glam&quot; : &quot;Treasure&quot;
* 2002: &quot;Sentiments partagés&quot; (TV) : &quot;Lisa&quot;
* 2003: &quot;Fenêtre sur couple&quot; : &quot;Fany&quot;
* 2003: &quot;Une place parmi les vivants&quot; : &quot;Maryse&quot;
* 2003: &quot;L&#x27;Acqua... il fuoco&quot; : &quot;Iris&quot;
* 2004: &quot;L&#x27;Homme de mon choix&quot; (TV) : &quot;Camille Rozières&quot;
* 2004: &quot;Moitié-moitié&quot; (TV) : &quot;Elizabeth Da Silva&quot;
* 2005: &quot;Mon petit doigt m&#x27;a dit...&quot; : &quot;Françoise Blayes&quot;
* 2005: &quot;Jaurès, naissance d&#x27;un géant&quot; (TV) : &quot;Louise&quot;
* 2005: &quot;Galilée&quot; (TV) : &quot;Marina&quot;
* 2007: &quot;Le Cœur des hommes 2&quot; : &quot;Jeanne&quot;
* 2007: &quot;Le Clan Pasquier&quot; (TV) : &quot;Lucie&quot;
* 2010: &quot;Any Human Heart&quot; (miniseries)
* 2012: &quot;Joséphine, ange gardien&quot; TV Series (1 Episode : &quot;Yasmina&quot;)
* 2014: &quot;Salaud, on t&#x27;aime&quot; : &quot;Francia&quot;
* 2021: &quot;The Last Mercenary&quot; : Ministre Sivardière

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q436682" start="0" end="16" title="Valérie Kaprisky" label="Valérie Kaprisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q436682" start="19" end="25" title="Valérie Kaprisky" label="Chérès"/>
<link wikidata="Q48958" start="141" end="158" title="Neuilly-sur-Seine" label="Neuilly-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="333" end="339" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="366" end="386" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes film festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q916444" start="493" end="506" title="Cours Florent" label="Cours Florent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858260" start="577" end="586" title="Aphrodite (film)" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q86427" start="637" end="654" title="À bout de souffle" label="À bout de souffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q754304" start="674" end="684" title="Breathless (1983 film)" label="Breathless"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="717" end="729" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220035" start="759" end="776" title="La femme publique" label="La femme publique"/>
<link wikidata="Q515904" start="793" end="809" title="Andrzej Żuławski" label="Andrzej Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q24241" start="852" end="880" title="César Award for Best Actress" label="César Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236372" start="980" end="1012" title="Les Hommes préfèrent les grosses" label="Les Hommes préfèrent les grosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858260" start="1165" end="1174" title="Aphrodite (film)" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q754304" start="1276" end="1286" title="Breathless (1983 film)" label="Breathless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220035" start="1337" end="1354" title="La femme publique" label="La femme publique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322361" start="1425" end="1449" title="L&amp;#x27;Année des méduses" label="L&amp;#x27;Année des méduses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346404" start="1634" end="1644" title="Stradivari (film)" label="Stradivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499700" start="1689" end="1695" title="Milena (film)" label="Milena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326864" start="1877" end="1893" title="Desire in Motion" label="Desire in Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428372" start="2020" end="2034" title="Dis-moi oui..." label="Dis-moi oui..."/>
<link wikidata="Q2760961" start="2932" end="2963" title="Mon petit doigt m&amp;#x27;a dit..." label="Mon petit doigt m&amp;#x27;a dit..."/>
<link wikidata="Q3620496" start="3273" end="3288" title="Any Human Heart (TV series)" label="Any Human Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q787711" start="3322" end="3345" title="Joséphine, ange gardien" label="Joséphine, ange gardien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16028904" start="3410" end="3432" title="Salaud, on t&amp;#x27;aime" label="Salaud, on t&amp;#x27;aime"/>
<link wikidata="Q99903009" start="3475" end="3493" title="The Last Mercenary (2021 film)" label="The Last Mercenary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141612" wikidata="Q101190" url="?curid=1141612" title="Leffe, Lombardy">
<text>Leffe (Bergamasque: ) is a town and &quot;comune&quot; near the Alps in Lombardy, Italy. It is located in the Val Gandino, nearly from Milan, and administratively part of the province of Bergamo. The town is a center of textile industry.

== History==

Fossils have been founded during the 20th century in the lignite mines, now preserved at the Museums of Natural Science in Milan and Bergamo. It is mentioned for the first time in a document of 903 with the name of &quot;Leufo&quot;.

==Main sights==
* &quot;Palazzo Comunale&quot;. It has a portico and open gallery, together with an internal courtyard and well. 
* &quot;The Parish House&quot;. It has an open gallery and music room, frescoed by Evaristo Baschenis, a painter from Bergamo of the 17th century. 
* &quot;The Parish Church of San Michele&quot; (16th century), conserving a wooden sculptural group by Andrea Fantoni, dating from 1694, called &quot;la Madonnina&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101190" start="0" end="5" title="Leffe, Lombardy" label="Leffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669891" start="7" end="18" title="Bergamasque" label="Bergamasque"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="42" end="48" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="64" end="68" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="72" end="80" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="82" end="87" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="135" end="140" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137" start="175" end="194" title="province of Bergamo" label="province of Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="220" end="227" title="textiles" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="310" end="317" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="318" end="323" title="mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="376" end="381" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="386" end="393" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351753" start="701" end="719" title="Evaristo Baschenis" label="Evaristo Baschenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="736" end="743" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615706" start="869" end="883" title="Andrea Fantoni" label="Andrea Fantoni"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141622" wikidata="Q726980" url="?curid=1141622" title="Guillaume de Nogaret">
<text>Guillaume de Nogaret (c. 1260 April 1313) was a French , councilor and keeper of the seal to Philip IV of France.

== Early life ==
Nogaret was born in Saint-Félix-Lauragais, Haute-Garonne. The family held a small ancestral property of servile origin at Nogaret, near Saint-Félix-de-Caraman (today&#x27;s Saint-Félix-Lauragais), from which it took its name. In 1291 Guillaume was professor of jurisprudence at the university of Montpellier, and in 1296 he became a member of the Curia Regis at Paris. From 1306, he was a seigneur of Marsillargues, Calvisson, Aujargues and Congénies in Languedoc.

== Councilor to Philip IV ==
His name is mainly connected with the quarrel between Philip IV and Pope Boniface VIII. In 1300 he was sent with an embassy to Boniface, of which he left a picturesque and highly coloured account. His influence over the king dates from February 1303, when he persuaded Philip to consent to the bold plan of seizing Boniface and bringing him forcibly from Italy to a council in France meant to depose him. On 7 March he received, with three others, a secret commission from the royal chancery to &quot;go to certain places ... and make such treaties with such persons as seemed good to them.&quot; On 12 March a solemn royal assembly was held in the Louvre, at which Guillaume de Nogaret read a long series of accusations against Boniface and demanded the calling of a general council to try him.

==Attack on the Pope==

Soon afterwards he went to Italy. By the aid of a Florentine spy, Nogaret gathered a band of adventurers and of enemies of the Caetani (Boniface&#x27;s family) in the Apennines. The great Colonna house, in a bitter feud with the Caetani, was his strongest ally, and Sciarra Colonna accompanied Nogaret to Anagni, Boniface&#x27;s birthplace. On 7 September, with their band of some sixteen hundred men, Nogaret and Colonna surprised the little town. The army attacked Boniface at his Palace in Anagni next to the cathedral. The Pope responded with a bull dated 8 September 1303, in which Philip and Nogaret were excommunicated. Boniface was taken prisoner. Sciarra wished to kill him, but Nogaret&#x27;s policy was to take him to France and compel him to summon a general council. The French Chancellor and the Colonnas demanded the Pope&#x27;s resignation; Boniface VIII responded that he would &quot;sooner die&quot;. In response, Colonna allegedly slapped Boniface, a &quot;slap&quot; historically remembered as the &quot;schiaffo di Anagni&quot; (&quot;Anagni slap&quot;).

The tide soon turned, however. On the 9th a concerted rising of the townsmen in support of Boniface put Nogaret and his allies to flight, and the pope was free. His death at Rome on 11 October saved Nogaret. The election of the timid Benedict XI was the beginning of the triumph of France that lasted through the Avignon captivity. Early in 1304 Nogaret went to Languedoc to report to Philip IV, and was rewarded by gifts of land and money. Then he was sent back with an embassy to Benedict XI to demand absolution for all concerned in the struggle with Boniface VIII. Benedict refused to meet Nogaret, excepted him from the general absolution he granted on 12 May 1304, and on 7 June issued against him and his associates at Anagni the bull &quot;Flagitiosum scelus&quot;. Nogaret replied with apologies for his conduct, and when Benedict died on 7 July 1304 Nogaret pointed to his death as a witness to the justice of his cause.

French influence led to a Frenchman, Bertrand de Got (Clement V), being elected as Benedict&#x27;s successor. The threat of proceedings against the memory of Boniface was renewed to force Clement to absolve Nogaret, and Clement had given way on this point when the further question of an inquiry into the condition of the Knights Templar was brought forward by Philip as a preliminary to their arrest and the seizure of their property in October 1307. Nogaret was active in getting the renegade members of the order to give evidence against their fellows, and the proceedings against them bear traces of his unscrupulous and merciless pen. Clement&#x27;s weak and ineffective resistance to this still further delayed the agreement between him and Philip. Nogaret had become keeper of the seal that year in succession to Pierre de Belleperche.

His talents as an &quot;advocatus diaboli&quot; were given still further employment in the trial of Guichard, bishop of Troyes, charged with various crimes, including witchcraft and unchastity. The trial, which began in 1308 and lasted until 1313, was a hint to Clement as to what might happen if the oft-repeated threat of a trial of Boniface were carried out. Absolution was obtained from Clement on 27 April 1311. Guillaume de Nogaret was to go on the next crusade and visit certain places of pilgrimage in France and Spain as a penance, but never did so. He died in April 1313. He retained the seals until his death and was occupied with the king&#x27;s affairs concerning Flanders as late as the end of March 1313.

==Literature==
Nogaret is a major character in &quot;Les Rois maudits&quot; (&quot;The Accursed Kings&quot;), a series of historical novels by Maurice Druon, as one of the three characters (alongside King Philip IV and Pope Clement V) denounced by Jacques de Molay and called to &quot;the tribunal of heaven&quot; before the end of the year at the latter&#x27;s execution, in March 1314. In reality, Nogaret died the preceding year, before de Molay and any such possible condemnation. The novels were adapted into a television miniseries in 1972 and again in 2005, in which Nogaret was played by actors Jacques Goasguen and , respectively.

==Notes==
==References==
== Sources ==
* Elizabeth A. R. Brown, &quot;Philip the Fair and His Ministers: Guillaume de Nogaret and Enguerran de Marigny&quot;, in &quot;The Capetian Century, 1214–1314&quot;, ed. by William Chester Jordan, Jenna Rebecca Phillips, Turnhout, Brepols, 2017, pp. 185–218.
* Elizabeth A. R. Brown, &quot;&quot;Veritas&quot; à la cour de Philippe le Bel de France: Pierre Dubois, Guillaume de Nogaret et Marguerite Porete&#x27;, in &quot;La vérité. Vérité et crédibilité: construire la vérité dans le système de communication de l&#x27;Occident (XIIIe-XVIIe siècle)&quot;, ed. by J.-P. Genet, Paris, Publications de la Sorbonne, 2016, pp. 425–445, online.
* Elizabeth A. R. Brown, &quot; The Faith of Guillaume de Nogaret, His Excommunication, and the Fall of the Knights Templar &quot;, dans &quot;Cristo e il potere. Teologia, antropologia e politica&quot;, dir. Laura Andreani, Agostino Paravicini Bagliani, Florence, Sismel-Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2017, pp. 157–181.
* Robert Holtzmann, &quot;Wilhelm von Nogaret. Rat und Grosssiegelbewahrer Philipps des Schönen von Frankreich&quot;, Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 189, Online.
* Sébastien Nadiras, &quot;Guillaume de Nogaret et la pratique du pouvoir&quot;, thesis of the École des chartes, 2003.
* Franklin J. Pegues, &quot;The Lawyers of the Last Capetians&quot;, Princeton, 1962.
* Ernest Renan, &quot;Guillaume de Nogaret&quot;, dans &quot;Histoire littéraire de la France&quot;, t. XXVII, .
* Bernard Moreau, dir., &quot;Guillaume de Nogaret, un languedocien au service de la monarchie capétienne. Actes du colloque de Nîmes, 20 janvier 2012&quot;, Nîmes, Lucie Éditions, 2012 .
* Bernard Moreau, Julien Théry-Astruc, ed., &quot;La royauté capétienne et le Midi au temps de Guillaume de Nogaret. Actes du colloque des 29 et 30 novembre 2013&quot;, Nîmes, Éditions de la Fenestrelle, 2015 .
*Julien Théry, &quot;Philip the Fair, the Trial of the &#x27;Perfidious Templars&#x27; and the Pontificalization of the French Monarchy&quot;, in &quot;Journal of Medieval Religious Culture&quot;, 39/2 (2013), pp. 117–148, online
* J.Théry-Astruc, &quot;The Pioneer of Royal Theocracy. Guillaume de Nogaret and the conflicts between Philip the Fair and the Papacy&quot;, in &quot;The Capetian Century, 1214–1314&quot;, ed. by William Chester Jordan, Jenna Rebecca Phillips, Turnhout, Brepols, 2017, pp. 219–259.
* J.Théry-Astruc, &quot; &quot;Negocium Christi&quot;. Guillaume de Nogaret et le christocentrisme capétien, de l&#x27;affaire Boniface VIII à l&#x27;affaire du Temple &quot;, dans &quot;Cristo e il potere. Teologia, antropologia e politica&quot;, dir. Laura Andreani, Agostino Paravicini Bagliani, Florence, Sismel-Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2017, pp. 183–209, online.
* For the sources consult Martin Bouquet, &quot;Recueil des historiens des Gaules et de la France&quot;, vols xx.-xxiii.; &quot;Annales regis Edwardi primi in Rishanger&quot; (Rolls series), pp. 483–491, which gives the fullest account of the affair at Anagni.

== External links ==
* http://congenies.canalblog.com; specially for the &quot;Nogaret bell&quot; of the church.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q726980" start="0" end="20" title="Guillaume de Nogaret" label="Guillaume de Nogaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410563" start="71" end="89" title="keeper of the seal" label="keeper of the seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130969" start="93" end="112" title="Philip IV of France" label="Philip IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q835564" start="152" end="173" title="Saint-Félix-Lauragais" label="Saint-Félix-Lauragais"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538" start="175" end="188" title="Haute-Garonne" label="Haute-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q643943" start="254" end="261" title="Nogaret" label="Nogaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q835564" start="305" end="326" title="Saint-Félix-Lauragais" label="Saint-Félix-Lauragais"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="393" end="406" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q776223" start="414" end="439" title="university of Montpellier" label="university of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="479" end="490" title="Curia Regis" label="Curia Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="494" end="499" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408439" start="533" end="546" title="Marsillargues" label="Marsillargues"/>
<link wikidata="Q29769" start="548" end="557" title="Calvisson" label="Calvisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q747101" start="559" end="568" title="Aujargues" label="Aujargues"/>
<link wikidata="Q274330" start="573" end="582" title="Congénies" label="Congénies"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="586" end="595" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="695" end="713" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="982" end="987" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="1276" end="1282" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q940238" start="1575" end="1582" title="Caetani" label="Caetani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="1615" end="1624" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q629336" start="1714" end="1729" title="Sciarra Colonna" label="Sciarra Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q116404" start="1753" end="1759" title="Anagni" label="Anagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q169301" start="2759" end="2770" title="Benedict XI" label="Benedict XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="2838" end="2855" title="Avignon captivity" label="Avignon captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q206221" start="2887" end="2896" title="Languedoc" label="Languedoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="3262" end="3266" title="papal bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="3511" end="3520" title="Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="3779" end="3794" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q278773" start="4325" end="4342" title="advocatus diaboli" label="advocatus diaboli"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="4468" end="4478" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="4761" end="4768" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="4978" end="4986" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q684593" start="5075" end="5091" title="Les Rois maudits" label="Les Rois maudits"/>
<link wikidata="Q223949" start="5165" end="5178" title="Maurice Druon" label="Maurice Druon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208215" start="5270" end="5286" title="Jacques de Molay" label="Jacques de Molay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="5549" end="5559" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319740" start="5876" end="5898" title="William Chester Jordan" label="William Chester Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="6415" end="6430" title="Excommunication" label="Excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606806" start="6569" end="6597" title="Agostino Paravicini Bagliani" label="Agostino Paravicini Bagliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q273570" start="6906" end="6923" title="École des chartes" label="École des chartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="7019" end="7031" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319740" start="7955" end="7977" title="William Chester Jordan" label="William Chester Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606806" start="8310" end="8338" title="Agostino Paravicini Bagliani" label="Agostino Paravicini Bagliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q268093" start="8433" end="8447" title="Martin Bouquet" label="Martin Bouquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q535793" start="8583" end="8595" title="Rolls series" label="Rolls series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141633" wikidata="Q2268483" url="?curid=1141633" title="Punk Rock Songs">
<text>Punk Rock Songs (The Epic Years) is a compilation album by Bad Religion, released in 2002. All songs on this compilation are from their tenure on Atlantic and Epic Records from 1994 to 2000, in addition to four live tracks and both the English and German versions of &quot;Punk Rock Song&quot;. &quot;Punk Rock Songs&quot; was released by Epic without any input from the band members, as Bad Religion had already returned to Epitaph Records, and as of 2017, it has not been released in the United States.

==Background==
While the first Bad Religion compilation album &quot;All Ages&quot; contains material from their 1982 debut &quot;How Could Hell Be Any Worse?&quot; to 1992&#x27;s &quot;Generator&quot;, &quot;Punk Rock Songs&quot; almost takes off from that point, including material from &quot;Stranger than Fiction&quot; (1994) up through &quot;The New America&quot; (2000). It was during this period of their career that Bad Religion had risen in popularity. Like &quot;All Ages&quot;, &quot;Punk Rock Songs&quot; contains live tracks and omits anything from &quot;Recipe for Hate&quot;, which was released between &quot;Generator&quot; and &quot;Stranger than Fiction&quot;.

Although this compilation album was released after &quot;The Process of Belief&quot;, it contains no songs from that album as Bad Religion had switched record labels by that time.

==Critical reception==
Writing for AllMusic, Gregory Heaney felt that &quot;Punk Rock Songs&quot; contains some of Bad Religion&#x27;s most instantly recognizable songs. He wrote that the compilation &quot;is a great introduction to the band&#x27;s work, and makes for an incredibly solid compilation of essential punk listening.&quot;

==Track listing==
All tracks are written by Greg Graffin, except where noted.
# &quot;Punk Rock Song&quot; – 2:27 
# &quot;The Gray Race&quot; (Graffin, Brian Baker) – 2:06 
# &quot;The Streets of America&quot; (Graffin, Baker) – 3:50 
# &quot;A Walk&quot; – 2:09
# &quot;Ten in 2010&quot; – 2:23
# &quot;New America&quot; – 3:24
# &quot;I Love My Computer&quot; – 3:05
# &quot;It&#x27;s A Long Way to the Promise Land&quot; – 2:28
# &quot;Hear It&quot; – 1:49
# &quot;Raise Your Voice&quot; (with Campino) – 2:55
# &quot;No Substance&quot; – 3:04
# &quot;Infected&quot; (Brett Gurewitz) – 4:08
# &quot;21st Century (Digital Boy)&quot; (Gurewitz) – 2:47
# &quot;Stranger Than Fiction&quot; (Gurewitz) – 2:20
# &quot;Dream of Unity&quot; – 2:59
# &quot;Punk Rock Song&quot; (German language version) – 2:27
# &quot;Leave Mine to Me&quot; (live) – 2:16
# &quot;Change of Ideas&quot; (live) – 0:54
# &quot;Slumber&quot; (live) – 2:37
# &quot;Cease&quot; (live) – 2:55
;Japanese and German bonus tracks
#&lt;li value=&quot;21&quot;&gt; &quot;We&#x27;re Only Gonna Die&quot; (with Biohazard) (live) – 5:24
# &quot;The Henchman &#x27;98&quot; (live) – 1:12
# &quot;The Answer&quot; (live) – 3:19
# &quot;The Universal Cynic&quot; (Ithaca session) – 2:16
# &quot;The Dodo&quot; (Ithaca session) (Graffin, Baker) – 2:11
;Notes
* Tracks 1–5 from &quot;The Gray Race&quot;, 1996
* Tracks 6–8 from &quot;The New America&quot;, 2000
* Tracks 9–11 from &quot;No Substance&quot;, 1998
* Tracks 12–14 from &quot;Stranger Than Fiction&quot;, 1994
* Tracks 15, 19 and 20 from &quot;Dream of Unity&quot; single, 1997
* Tracks 16, 24 and 25 from &quot;Punk Rock Song&quot; single, 1996; tracks 24 and 25 recorded at Polypterus Studios, Ithaca, New York, February 1995 
* Tracks 17 and 18 from &quot;A Walk&quot; single, 1996; recorded live in Germany in 1995
* Track 21 from &quot;The Streets of America&quot; single, 1996; recorded live in Bremen, Germany, July 6, 1996
* Tracks 22 and 23 from &quot;Raise Your Voice&quot; single, 1998

==Personnel==
Adapted from the album liner notes.

===Bad Religion===
* Greg Graffin – lead vocals, backing vocals
* Greg Hetson – guitar
* Brett Gurewitz – guitar, backing vocals (12–14)
* Brian Baker – guitar, backing vocals (1–11, 15–25)
* Jay Bentley – bass guitar, backing vocals
* Bobby Schayer – drums

===Technical===
* Bad Religion – producer (1–5, 9–16, 19, 20, 24, 25)
* Ric Ocasek – producer (1–5, 16)
* Todd Rundgren – producer (6–8)
* Alex Perialas – producer (9–11)
* Ronnie Kimball – producer (9–11)
* Andy Wallace – producer (12–14)
* Greg Graffin – producer (17, 18)
* Emek – front cover
* Thom Piston – design


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="50" end="55" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="59" end="71" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="146" end="154" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="159" end="171" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829129" start="273" end="287" title="Punk Rock Song" label="Punk Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="425" end="440" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="490" end="503" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213196" start="574" end="582" title="All Ages" label="All Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049214" start="635" end="663" title="How Could Hell Be Any Worse?" label="How Could Hell Be Any Worse?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878349" start="691" end="700" title="Generator (Bad Religion album)" label="Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q166511" start="800" end="821" title="Stranger than Fiction (Bad Religion album)" label="Stranger than Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895716" start="852" end="867" title="The New America" label="The New America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447954" start="1073" end="1088" title="Recipe for Hate" label="Recipe for Hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q962092" start="1242" end="1263" title="The Process of Belief" label="The Process of Belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1401" end="1409" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q437255" start="1747" end="1759" title="Greg Graffin" label="Greg Graffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829129" start="1789" end="1803" title="Punk Rock Song" label="Punk Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="1856" end="1867" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321327" start="1947" end="1953" title="A Walk" label="A Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q506601" start="2201" end="2208" title="Andreas Frege" label="Campino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049913" start="2259" end="2267" title="Infected (song)" label="Infected"/>
<link wikidata="Q506558" start="2275" end="2289" title="Brett Gurewitz" label="Brett Gurewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631055" start="2306" end="2332" title="21st Century (Digital Boy)" label="21st Century (Digital Boy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352551" start="2365" end="2386" title="Stranger than Fiction (Bad Religion song)" label="Stranger Than Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2669" end="2674" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2682" end="2688" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977140" start="2741" end="2766" title="We&amp;#x27;re Only Gonna Die" label="We&amp;#x27;re Only Gonna Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q803876" start="2779" end="2788" title="Biohazard (band)" label="Biohazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="2928" end="2934" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783248" start="3046" end="3059" title="The Gray Race" label="The Gray Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895716" start="3096" end="3111" title="The New America" label="The New America"/>
<link wikidata="Q648309" start="3149" end="3161" title="No Substance" label="No Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q166511" start="3200" end="3221" title="Stranger Than Fiction (Bad Religion album)" label="Stranger Than Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829129" start="3336" end="3350" title="Punk Rock Song" label="Punk Rock Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="3420" end="3436" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321327" start="3483" end="3489" title="A Walk" label="A Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="3625" end="3631" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q437255" start="3794" end="3806" title="Greg Graffin" label="Greg Graffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q712187" start="3839" end="3850" title="Greg Hetson" label="Greg Hetson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506558" start="3862" end="3876" title="Brett Gurewitz" label="Brett Gurewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q911812" start="3912" end="3923" title="Brian Baker (musician)" label="Brian Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266243" start="3965" end="3976" title="Jay Bentley" label="Jay Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531603" start="4009" end="4022" title="Bobby Schayer" label="Bobby Schayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q526406" start="4104" end="4114" title="Ric Ocasek" label="Ric Ocasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="4138" end="4151" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783048" start="4171" end="4184" title="Alex Perialas" label="Alex Perialas"/>
<link wikidata="Q527921" start="4240" end="4252" title="Andy Wallace (producer)" label="Andy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370321" start="4309" end="4313" title="Emek (designer)" label="Emek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141646" wikidata="Q121405" url="?curid=1141646" title="Giovanni Paolo Colonna">
<text>Giovanni Paolo Colonna (16 June 1637 – 28 November 1695) was an Italian composer, teacher, organist and organ builder. In addition to being chapel-master and organist of San Petronio Basilica in Bologna, he served prominent members of the courts of Ferrara, Parma, Modena and Florence. He was a founder-member and president of the Accademia Filarmonica di Bologna. Emperor Leopold I collected manuscripts of his sacred music, which reflects the Roman church cantata style of Giacomo Carissimi and looks forward to the manner of George Frideric Handel.

==Biography==
Colonna was born on 16 June 1637 in Bologna (at the time, the second largest city of the Papal States after Rome), the third of four brothers in a family of five children, son of Antonio Colonna (c. 1600–1666), a well-known organ builder, and his wife, Francesca Dinarelli. Colonna&#x27;s father, nicknamed Dal Corno, was the adopted son of Stefano Colonna, a member of a large and successful family of organ-builders which had been active in central-northern Italy since the previous century. Born in Salò, near Brescia around the turn of the century, Antonio may have moved with his stepfather Stefano to Bologna by 1615.

Colonna received full training both in the family profession of organ building and in musicianship. He was a pupil of Agostino Filippuzzi in Bologna, and of Antonio Maria Abbatini and Orazio Benevoli in Rome, where for a time he held the post of organist at S. Apollinare. A poem in praise of his music shows that he began to distinguish himself as a composer in 1659. In that year he was appointed organist at S. Petronio in Bologna, where on 1 November 1674 he was made chapel-master.

From 1680 until 1694 he was in regular correspondence with Francesco II d&#x27;Este, Duke of Modena, for whom he wrote oratorios and helped construct organs. Other prominent patrons included the Marquis of Ferrara, Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma, and the Medici family in Florence, for whom he composed secular cantatas. In 1666 he was one of the founder-members of the Accademia Filarmonica of Bologna, of which was president from 1672 to 1691. In 1694 he travelled to Rome to try to mend bridges following a dispute regarding Arcangelo Corelli&#x27;s use of parallel fifths in which he had been involved; while there, he turned down an offer from Pope Innocent XII to become chapel-master of St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica, perhaps because of ill health. He died in Bologna in 1695.

Colonna&#x27;s pupils included the cellist-composers Giovanni Bononcini and Antonio Maria Bononcini.

==Music==
Most of Colonna&#x27;s works are for the church, including settings of the psalms for three, four, five and eight voices, and various masses and motets. He also composed an opera, &quot;Amilcare&quot;. He was an important composer of oratorios, eight of which have survived, including &quot;La Profezia d&#x27;Eliseo&quot;.

Emperor Leopold I received a copy of every sacred composition of Colonna, and the Austrian National Library now possesses 83 such works. His writing takes into account the resonant acoustics of S. Petronio, and many of his pieces for double choir incorporate two separate continuo parts to be played on the church&#x27;s two organs.

Colonna&#x27;s style is for the most part dignified, with transitions in style and taste characteristic of a period when church music was in a state of transition, and was still learning to combine the gravity of the old style with the brilliance of the new.

The strings in his &quot;Messe e salmi concertati op.10&quot; have independent parts with semiquaver runs in full concerto style. Some of his motets (e.g., the solo motets, op.2, and the two- and three-part motets, op.3), are written in the lively melodic contrapuntal style of the Roman church cantatas of Giacomo Carissimi, and look forward to the chamber cantatas of Handel. In some of his late works he was able to create elaborate effects through his command of melodic line and harmony.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q121405" start="0" end="22" title="Giovanni Paolo Colonna" label="Giovanni Paolo Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937431" start="104" end="117" title="Organ building" label="organ builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="140" end="153" title="Kapellmeister" label="chapel-master"/>
<link wikidata="Q810103" start="170" end="191" title="San Petronio Basilica" label="San Petronio Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="195" end="202" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="249" end="256" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="258" end="263" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="265" end="271" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="276" end="284" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q338339" start="331" end="363" title="Accademia Filarmonica di Bologna" label="Accademia Filarmonica di Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="365" end="382" title="Emperor Leopold I" label="Emperor Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q312686" start="475" end="492" title="Giacomo Carissimi" label="Giacomo Carissimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="528" end="550" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="603" end="610" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="656" end="668" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q111705" start="1069" end="1073" title="Salò" label="Salò"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221" start="1080" end="1087" title="Brescia" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q550788" start="1349" end="1371" title="Antonio Maria Abbatini" label="Antonio Maria Abbatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228351" start="1376" end="1391" title="Orazio Benevoli" label="Orazio Benevoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1395" end="1399" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301521" start="1450" end="1463" title="S. Apollinare alle Terme Neroniane-Alessandrine" label="S. Apollinare"/>
<link wikidata="Q810103" start="1603" end="1614" title="San Petronio Basilica" label="S. Petronio"/>
<link wikidata="Q215793" start="1664" end="1677" title="Kapellmeister" label="chapel-master"/>
<link wikidata="Q715243" start="1739" end="1779" title="Francesco II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Modena" label="Francesco II d&amp;#x27;Este, Duke of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="1799" end="1807" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="1830" end="1835" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="1875" end="1882" title="Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="1886" end="1893" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q555008" start="1895" end="1929" title="Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="Ranuccio II Farnese, Duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="1939" end="1945" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="1995" end="2002" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q338339" start="2054" end="2075" title="Philharmonic Academy of Bologna" label="Accademia Filarmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q164475" start="2212" end="2229" title="Arcangelo Corelli" label="Arcangelo Corelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q495018" start="2244" end="2258" title="parallel fifth" label="parallel fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q132708" start="2333" end="2350" title="Pope Innocent XII" label="Pope Innocent XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="2378" end="2403" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q315241" start="2518" end="2536" title="Giovanni Bononcini" label="Giovanni Bononcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359145" start="2541" end="2564" title="Antonio Maria Bononcini" label="Antonio Maria Bononcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2618" end="2624" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="2652" end="2658" title="psalms" label="psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="2711" end="2715" title="mass (music)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q188285" start="2722" end="2727" title="motet" label="motet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="2750" end="2755" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="2902" end="2919" title="Emperor Leopold I" label="Emperor Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q304037" start="2984" end="3009" title="Austrian National Library" label="Austrian National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="3174" end="3182" title="Basso continuo" label="continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380091" start="3586" end="3596" title="semiquaver" label="semiquaver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3610" end="3624" title="Concerto#Early Baroque concerto" label="concerto style"/>
<link wikidata="Q312686" start="3803" end="3820" title="Giacomo Carissimi" label="Giacomo Carissimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="3866" end="3872" title="Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3980" end="3987" title="Harmony#Chords and tension" label="harmony"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141649" wikidata="Q16727548" url="?curid=1141649" title="John Blincoe">
<text>John Gary Blincoe (born 1952) is a former New Zealand politician. He was an MP from 1990 to 1996, representing the Labour Party.

==Early life and family==

Blincoe was born on 14 March 1952 in Nelson, New Zealand. His parents were Victor and May Blincoe (according to his eldest daughter). He attended Hampden Street School, Nelson College Preparatory School and Nelson College, the latter two from 1963 to 1969. Later, he was educated at Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand where he gained two degrees: one in law and the other in political science.

Prior to becoming a member of New Zealand&#x27;s Parliament, he had been employed by the Wellington City Council as well as by the Accident Compensation Corporation. Blincoe currently lives in Wellington and has two children.

Blincoe served as the President of NZUSA during 1976. He rose to prominence when he became convener of the Wellington Clean Water Campaign which opposed the council on the Moa Point sewerage treatment plan.

==Early political career==
In 1983 Blincoe unsuccessfully sought the Labour Party nomination for the seat of Tasman following the retirement of Bill Rowling, but lost to Ken Shirley.

Later that same year, he stood unsuccessfully for the Wellington City Council on a Labour Party ticket. In 1986 he contested the Labour nomination for Mayor of Wellington, but lost to local businessman Jim Belich. He was then elected to the City Council in the Brooklyn Ward in 1986 and then in the Southern Ward in 1989, before resigning from the Council in 1991 when he was elected to Parliament.

==Member of Parliament==

Blincoe was first elected to Parliament in the 1990 election as MP for Nelson, replacing the outgoing Philip Woollaston. In November 1990 he was appointed as Labour&#x27;s spokesperson for Conservation by Labour leader Mike Moore. He was re-elected in the 1993 election, but in the 1996 election, the seat of Nelson was expanded into rural areas formerly part of the Tasman electorate. Blincoe was defeated by the incumbent Tasman MP, Nick Smith of the National Party.

===1999 election===
In the 1999 election, Blincoe missed out on returning to Parliament as a list candidate under mixed-member proportional (MMP) representation by a narrow margin once special votes had been counted. Initially it appeared that Blincoe would have a seat in Parliament, as well as a party member directly following him on the Labour list. With the counting of special votes, however, the Green Party entered Parliament after winning an electorate seat and crossed the minimum 5% threshold of votes. In addition, Winston Peters won the constituency seat of Tauranga by a narrow margin of sixty-two votes over a National Party candidate, enabling his New Zealand First party to acquire extra list seats in Parliament.

Once seats had been proportionally re-allocated with both the Green Party and New Zealand First in mind, fewer list seats were available for other parties, and consequently John Blincoe was not allocated a seat.

==Post Parliament==
Blincoe worked as an environmental adviser to Prime Minister Helen Clark during the 2000s and has worked on environmental matters since then. He, along with Ray Ahipene-Mercer, led the Wellington Clean Water Campaign, which successfully sought to have Wellington to treat its sewage, and stop dumping it, raw, in the sea.

==Further reading==

*&quot;This pamphlet was written by Blincoe and Julian Ludbrook.&quot;

*&quot;This pamphlet was written by Blincoe and Julian Ludbrook.&quot;


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16727548" start="0" end="17" title="John Blincoe" label="John Gary Blincoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="42" end="53" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="84" end="88" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="92" end="96" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="115" end="127" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q206687" start="194" end="213" title="Nelson, New Zealand" label="Nelson, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976962" start="364" end="378" title="Nelson College" label="Nelson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150437" start="440" end="473" title="Victoria University of Wellington" label="Victoria University of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="523" end="526" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="544" end="561" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="613" end="623" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672556" start="695" end="728" title="Accident Compensation Corporation" label="Accident Compensation Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015816" start="826" end="831" title="NZUSA" label="NZUSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q110640375" start="963" end="972" title="Moa Point" label="Moa Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687386" start="1108" end="1114" title="Tasman (New Zealand electorate)" label="Tasman"/>
<link wikidata="Q862430" start="1143" end="1155" title="Bill Rowling" label="Bill Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388479" start="1169" end="1180" title="Ken Shirley" label="Ken Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q601800" start="1237" end="1260" title="Wellington City Council" label="Wellington City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q52988199" start="1334" end="1353" title="Mayor of Wellington" label="Mayor of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129606" start="1385" end="1395" title="Jim Belich" label="Jim Belich"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989732" start="1461" end="1465" title="1986 Wellington local elections" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508421" start="1499" end="1503" title="1989 Wellington local elections" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="1656" end="1669" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184579" start="1711" end="1728" title="Philip Woollaston" label="Philip Woollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q558647" start="1828" end="1838" title="Mike Moore (New Zealand politician)" label="Mike Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016162" start="1865" end="1878" title="1993 New Zealand general election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="1891" end="1904" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q976339" start="2044" end="2054" title="Nick Smith (New Zealand politician)" label="Nick Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="2062" end="2076" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="2106" end="2119" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q133" start="2193" end="2218" title="Mixed-member proportional representation" label="mixed-member proportional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2264" end="2277" title="New Zealand elections#Voting" label="special votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327761" start="2482" end="2493" title="Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396178" start="2606" end="2620" title="Winston Peters" label="Winston Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934070" start="2650" end="2658" title="Tauranga (New Zealand electorate)" label="Tauranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="2704" end="2718" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="2743" end="2760" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="3105" end="3116" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297125" start="3201" end="3219" title="Ray Ahipene-Mercer" label="Ray Ahipene-Mercer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141659" wikidata="Q239614" url="?curid=1141659" title="Bonhomme">
<text>Bonhomme, Bon Homme or Bonhommes may refer to:

==Places==
* Le Bonhomme, a village and commune in the Haut-Rhin département of north-eastern France
* Col du Bonhomme, Vosges Mountains, France, a mountain pass
* Bonhomme, a community in the city of Chesterfield, Missouri, United States
* Bonhomme Township, St. Louis County, Missouri
* Bonhomme Creek, Missouri
* Bon Homme County, South Dakota, United States

==Other uses==
* Bonhomme (surname)
* Brothers of Penitence, a religious order also known as the Bonhommes
* Bonhomme, a name used for the heretical Albigensian sect&#x27;s Elect Parfait
* Bonhomme, the ambassador of the Quebec City Winter Carnival
* &quot;Bonhomme&quot;, a song by Georges Brassens, French singer-songwriter and poet

==See also==
* Grand Bonhomme, a mountain on the island of Saint Vincent
* &quot;Petit bonhomme&quot;, the Luxembourgish entry in the Eurovision Song Contest 1962
* Bonhomme Richard (disambiguation), several meanings
* &quot;Jacques Bonhomme&quot;, a nickname for Guillaume Cale (died 1358), leader of the Jacquerie
* Jacques Bonhomme, a derisive name given to French peasants by the nobility - see Jacquerie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239614" start="0" end="8" title="Bonhomme" label="Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q239614" start="10" end="19" title="Bonhomme" label="Bon Homme"/>
<link wikidata="Q239614" start="23" end="32" title="Bonhomme" label="Bonhommes"/>
<link wikidata="Q500405" start="61" end="72" title="Le Bonhomme" label="Le Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107476" start="151" end="166" title="Col du Bonhomme" label="Col du Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q959443" start="249" end="271" title="Chesterfield, Missouri" label="Chesterfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q892459" start="289" end="334" title="Bonhomme Township, St. Louis County, Missouri" label="Bonhomme Township, St. Louis County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054366" start="337" end="351" title="Bonhomme Creek" label="Bonhomme Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q484234" start="364" end="394" title="Bon Homme County, South Dakota" label="Bon Homme County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860221" start="428" end="446" title="Bonhomme (surname)" label="Bonhomme (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975709" start="449" end="470" title="Brothers of Penitence" label="Brothers of Penitence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="560" end="571" title="Albigensian" label="Albigensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35301" start="632" end="659" title="Quebec City Winter Carnival" label="Quebec City Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q449" start="694" end="710" title="Georges Brassens" label="Georges Brassens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594324" start="762" end="776" title="Grand Bonhomme" label="Grand Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q203254" start="828" end="842" title="Petit bonhomme" label="Petit bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q534084" start="912" end="945" title="Bonhomme Richard (disambiguation)" label="Bonhomme Richard (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q596460" start="972" end="988" title="Jacques Bonhomme" label="Jacques Bonhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126013" start="1146" end="1155" title="Jacquerie" label="Jacquerie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141664" wikidata="Q673527" url="?curid=1141664" title="1990 Polish presidential election">
<text>Presidential elections were held in Poland on 25 November 1990, with a second round on 9 December. They were the first direct presidential elections in the history of Poland, and the first free presidential elections since the May Coup of 1926. Before World War II, presidents were elected by the Sejm. From 1952 to 1989—the bulk of the Communist era—the presidency did not exist as a separate institution, and most of its functions were fulfilled by the State Council of Poland, whose chairman was considered the equivalent of a president.

There were six candidates who successfully managed to register - Solidarity chairman Lech Wałęsa, Canadian entrepreneur Stanisław Tymiński, Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, Members of the Sejm Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz and Roman Bartoszcze, and anti-communist oppositionist Leszek Moczulski. Despite for a long time coming first in opinion polls, Tadeusz Mazowiecki&#x27;s campaign failed to convince voters to his side, and he did not enter the runoff, coming third in the first round. Stanisław Tymiński came second in a large upset unforeseen by every political force in the country, and, being seen by other candidates as a liar and opportunist, managed to unite both the postcommunist and Solidarity establishments against him. In the second round, Wałęsa won almost 75% of voters, being the largest landslide electoral victory in Polish political history.

==Background==
===Fall of Communism===

Following the Polish Round Table Agreement, universal parliamentary elections were held in Poland. They were the first free elections since 1928, and began the era of democratic and free market reforms in Poland, as the power of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party (PZPR) began quickly disintegrating - early next year, the party would dissolve, succeeded by the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland (SdRP), where most of the communist party&#x27;s wealth was controversially transferred, and the short-lived Polish Social Democratic Union.

The last attempts at salvaging power by the PZPR was the appointment of Czesław Kiszczak as prime minister, who was first assigned the mission of forming a new government with 237 votes (and 173 against), but later, after a defection from ZSL and SD, his proposed government failed to receive the Sejm&#x27;s confidence. Instead, Solidarity compromised with the communists in a historic compromise, wherein PZPR Chairman Wojciech Jaruzelski would be elected to the newly created position of president, while a Solidarity-aligned candidate - Tadeusz Mazowiecki - would become prime minister.

===Split within &quot;Solidarity&quot;===

The concept of the execution of such compromise was controversial within Solidarity. Liberal and left-leaning members like Bronisław Geremek, Jacek Kuroń, Władysław Frasyniuk or Adam Michnik wanted to create a grand coalition with reformist wing of PZPR. However, the right-leaning faction, led by Lech Wałęsa, and the Kaczyńscy brothers - Lech and Jarosław Kaczyński wanted to instead create coalition with PZPR&#x27;s satellite parties - the ZSL and SD. The former group formed the Citizens&#x27; Movement for Democratic Action faction, and the latter, the Centre Agreement group.

On 7 August, Wałęsa denounced Kiszczak&#x27;s mission, and declared that the (OKP), Solidarity&#x27;s parliamentary club, will be working with ZSL and SD to form a new government. On the 8th and 9th, Geremek and his allies denounced Wałęsa&#x27;s decision during meetings of Solidarity&#x27;s leadership and the OKP respectively. However, Wałęsa did not change his decision, and on 24 August, ZSL and SD rejected Kiszczak, instead throwing their support behind Tadeusz Mazowiecki, who formed a Solidarity-ZSL-SD coalition.

In his pursuit of becoming Poland&#x27;s strongman president during the transition to democracy, Wałesa set several requirements - most importantly that the Prime Minister be younger and less politically experienced than him. Despite meeting both, Mazowiecki quickly turned out to be the polar opposite of what PC desired. Setting aside anti-communism and embracing reformism, he quickly distanced himself from the Centre Agreement and sought to collaborate with ROAD and the Forum of the Democratic Right (FPD).

===Planning the election===
On 27 July 1990, the leaders of PC began collecting signatures for a petition aimed at President Jaruzelski, appealing for him to resign and for new indirect presidential elections to be held, with the intention of electing Lech Wałęsa. The petition was opposed by ROAD and FPD, who instead aimed at holding direct presidential elections later in the year. Jaruzelski, knowing the end of his term was near, asked Sejm Marshal Mikołaj Kozakiewicz to call a direct presidential election whenever the concrete date of the election was established.

The Sejm voted to shorten the term of Jaruzelski&#x27;s Presidency on 21 September. On 27 September, the Parliament passed a constitutional amendment, which defined the criteria for a presidential candidate (and president) and defined the elections by the five-point electoral law () - the elections must be secret, direct, equal, universal and proportional, and on 2 October, the precise dates of the electoral process were defined, as the election was called by Sejm Marshal Kozakiewicz.

It was required to get 100,000 signatures to run in the election. Only six managed to get past the threshold of signatures - Lech Wałęsa, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz, Roman Bartoszcze, Leszek Moczulski and an unknown Canadian entrepreneur, Stanisław Tymiński.

==Candidate selection==
===Solidarity===


The conflict between Wałęsa and Mazowiecki grew irrenconcilable by late 1990. After several failed attempts at reconciliation and political clashes over positions in the Solidarity movement and trade union, the final attempts at finding a compromise for the presidential election were organized by clergy of the Catholic Church. One was held on 7 July, another on 31 August, where Mazowiecki tried and failed to convince Wałęsa to abandon his presidential ambitions, even promising to field a compromise candidate (presumably Senate Marshal Andrzej Stelmachowski). A last chance at conciliation took place on 18 September, during a meeting with Primate Józef Glemp. Ultimately, the two adversaries from Solidarity ran opposing campaigns - Wałęsa was endorsed by the Centre Agreement, and Mazowiecki by the Citizens&#x27; Movement for Democratic Action and Forum of the Democratic Right. The Solidarity movement mostly sided with Wałesa during the election.

===Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland===


The incumbent president of Poland, Wojciech Jaruzelski, polled to receive 18.5% and 16.6% of the vote if he had run again in May 1989 and May 1990 respectively. Others from the old communist party, like Władysław Baka or were also polled to win 2.7% and 1.9% (Baka), and 1.7% in 1990 (Fiszbach) respectively. However, SdRP sought to modernize its image away from the nomenklatura, and the speculated candidates were reaching the end points of their careers regardless. The General Secretary of SdRP, Leszek Miller, at first endorsed the nonpartisan Ombudsman Ewa Łętowska to be the party&#x27;s candidate. However, she rejected the offer. As such, Miller endorsed SdRP chairman and future president Aleksander Kwaśniewski, who also rejected, knowing he would lose in a landslide and likely undermine his position in the party by doing so. Kwaśniewski controversially chose to endorse Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz instead, who was the leader of SdRP&#x27;s parliamentary club. The Supreme Council of the party held a vote which confirmed Cimoszewicz&#x27;s nomination, and he became the official candidate of the party in the presidential election.

===Polish People&#x27;s Party===


On 10 October, the Supreme Executive Committee of PSL declared the candidacy of party chairman Roman Bartoszcze. However, Bartoszcze, as an anti-communist oppositionist, was disliked by the postcommunist ex-ZSL wing of the party. As such, the parliamentary club of PSL, which was seated mostly by members from the ZSL wing, declared ZSL activist Józef Zych&#x27;s candidacy on 11 October. The next day, the crisis was resolved, as the Supreme Council of PSL confirmed Bartoszcze&#x27;s candidacy, which believed that voters would be much more likely to support a candidate which did not derive from the communist establishment.

===Confederation of Independent Poland===


In August 1990, the KPN was split, with ~300 of its ~1500 members seceding, forming the Confederation of Independent Poland – Democratic Faction (, KPN-FD), accusing KPN&#x27;s leader Leszek Moczulski of authoritarian rule over the party. When elections were called, whereas KPN-FD endorsed Wałęsa outright, KPN offered to endorse Wałęsa, on several conditions: for Wałesa to support an instant resignation of President Jaruzelski, immediate withdrawal of the Soviet Army from Poland and condemn the Balcerowicz Plan. Ultimately, with Wałęsa not fitting the conditions, Leszek Moczulski decided to himself run in the election. With 111 thousand out of 100 thousand required signatures, he managed to pass the threshold to run.

===Independents===
Stanisław Tymiński was a Canadian-Peruvian entrepreneur born in Poland, who returned to Poland to contest the presidential elections. He was the only candidate without any political party&#x27;s backing who managed to cross the threshold of 100,000 signatures needed to contest the elections, in the meanwhile mass-distributing his political manifesto, &quot;&quot;.

===Rejected candidates===
The following candidates registered to run, but failed to cross the threshold of 100,000 signatures required to run in the election:
* Jan Bratoszewski (Lawyer from Radom)
* (Chairman of the )
* Gabriel Janowski (Senator)
* Janusz Korwin-Mikke (Chairman of the Real Politics Union)
* (Machinist from Warsaw)
* Kornel Morawiecki (Chairman of the )
* Józef Onyszko (Chairman of the Association for the Development of Higher Consciousness &quot;Refugium&quot;)
* (Chairman of the Christian-Democratic Labour Party)
* Bolesław Tejkowski (Chairman of the )
* Waldemar Trajdos (Insurance worker from Łódź)

==Campaign==

===First round===
While most voters generally believed the candidates they backed would do best to solve most of the country&#x27;s issues, there were two major outliers - ~40% of voters believed Bartoszcze would best fix the country&#x27;s agricultural problems, compared to his 7.15% general vote share, and ~20% of voters believed Moczulski would best deal with the communist nomenklatura and withdrawal from the Eastern bloc, compared to his 2.50% vote share.

Mazowiecki&#x27;s starting situation was rather unfavorable. Despite holding control over TVP, the Polish national television, his team were inept and at utilizing such a vital campaign organ (which would provide tremendous help to every consecutive presidential candidate which controlled it). It was also indecisive, and the decision of experienced campaign staff was often overriden or contested by proper politicians with a higher authority serving in the team. Though well-respected, the public perceived Mazowiecki as uncharismatic, and his lack of oratory skills, combined with his preoccupation serving as prime minister, led to him massively limiting his public appearances. In light of these obstacles, Mazowiecki tried to deemphasize the importance of his own persona, instead elevating his electoral platform, a strategy that found little appeal outside of intelligentsia circles (which already overwhelmingly supported him). A defining symbol of Mazowiecki&#x27;s personal isolation was an advertisement his team aired at the beginning of the campaign, presenting him walking around a park, surrounded by bodyguards. In contrast, Wałesa&#x27;s image was quite overt - Solidarity&#x27;s chairman held dozens of rallies, meetings and other public events, his persona was charming, characterized as a &quot;plebeian tribune&quot;, a &quot;sheriff&quot; bringing communists to justice, promising to directly overlook everything that needed resolution - such a persona enjoyed much public popularity. Tymiński&#x27;s campaign, that completely faltered at the start, blossomed after TVP began the period of airing campaign ads. His advertisements, which in a simple fashion criticized the government and proposed a &quot;real alternative&quot;. The advertisements were so effective that even in an entire voivodeship where Tymiński&#x27;s campaign had no presence, he had received the largest number of votes of any candidate in the first round. However, that did not mean Tymiński did not campaign in other ways - he held several rallies where he tried to expand his appeal to certain groups.

The Prime Minister&#x27;s presidential campaign oriented around defending and lauding his accomplishments - notably beginning the economic transformation, signing a treaty with Germany that put an end to fears of Germany pursuing reclamation of its pre-war borders - and convincing undecideds to see the reforms positively. However, his campaign had very little in terms of actual election promises. Meanwhile, Wałesa promised to soften the mass privatization schemes of Finance Minister Leszek Balcerowicz which was largely responsible for perpetually increasing poverty and unemployment and give every Pole a &quot;hundred million (old) złotys&quot; to let citizens better participate in the economic restructuring. Despite his campaign team writing a formal electoral program titled &quot;New beginning&quot;, Wałęsa did not stick to it, and later admitted he did not even read it. Wałesa did not, however, promise to solve every problem, unlike Tymiński, whose extreme promises became a major point of success among the increasing crowds of citizens dissatisfied with the new rule of Solidarity.

At later points of the campaign, Mazowiecki&#x27;s campaign turned rather negative, disorienting his own voterbase and hurting his image, and began airing advertisements showing Wałesa amputating Poland from western Europe with an axe, or with said axe destroying an alarm clock which had previously been repaired by presumably Mazowiecki. Wałęsa&#x27;s response to such advertisements was to air his own, notably a cartoon in which, wielding the same axe, he destroyed the &quot;thick stroke&quot; and chased away red spiders, signifying communists. Mazowiecki&#x27;s ally, Gazeta Wyborcza editor-in-chief Adam Michnik, presented Wałesa as a dangerous strongman who would introduce a &quot;catastrophic, Peronist-esque regime&quot;. In some circles, Mazowiecki was accused of secretly having Jewish ancestry, a notion which he rejected and condemned. Meanwhile, Wałęsa insinuated Mazowiecki led an inactive, elite government that prided itself in the prestige of governance alone, contrasting it with proposed his model of real societal intervention.

Mazowiecki, with his fatally operated campaign, quickly declined in opinion polls. Despite them showing Mazowiecki continuously declining, Mazowiecki&#x27;s team was in denial that they had fallen behind Wałęsa (who by November polled 10 points ahead of the Prime Minister). His fall was so severe that he had fallen even behind Tymiński - who was considered such a nonfactor that Mazowiecki&#x27;s team only took him into account after Tymiński accused him of treason during a rally a mere week before election day.

On 25 November, the first round of voting took place. In an upset victory, Mazowiecki failed to enter the second round, falling five percentage points behind Tymiński. The results were as follows: Wałęsa - 39.96%, Tymiński - 23.10%, Mazowiecki - 18.08%, Cimoszewicz - 9.21%, Bartoszcze - 7.15%, Moczulski - 2.50%. The day after the election, Mazowiecki, humiliated, announced that he would soon be resigning from the office of prime minister, which he did on 12 January next year.

===Second round===
After the announcement of the results, Wałęsa received a large array of endorsements from the majority of his former opponents - on 28 November, OKP formally endorsed Wałęsa&#x27;s candidacy. On November 30, the Catholic Church in Poland, which did not directly endorse any candidate beforehand, finally chose to endorse Wałęsa. On 1 and 2 December, ROAD and then Mazowiecki begrudgingly endorsed him as well. PSL and KPN also endorsed him - only Cimoszewicz, who represented the postcommunist camp, did not support either candidate.

Tymiński attempted to extend his appeal towards Mazowiecki&#x27;s and Cimoszewicz&#x27;s liberal and leftist voters. His attempts at broadening his voterbase, like opposing anti-abortion laws, or praising President Jaruzelski and the period of martial law, contradicted his previous statements about his deep belief in Catholic social teaching, and targeted the intelligentsia environment which were not receptive to his overall populist image in general. Tymiński&#x27;s momentum, which rose extremely quickly, also seemed to reach its peak at the beginning of the second round.

On 1 December, a pseudo-debate, which took form of a joint press conference where the candidates were free to talk with each other, took place. Tymiński appeared with a black briefcase, claiming it contained incriminating evidence against Wałesa, who replied by ordering Tymiński to show the evidence, assuming Tymiński was bluffing. Tymiński, who did not open the briefcase, proved the clear loser of the debate. A legitimate debate planned for the next day was cancelled when Tymiński refused to take part, his image being damaged enough in the previous debate.

TVP released material in a smear campaign against Tymiński on 4 December, pinning several allegations against him, among which, that he abused his wife and children. Several years after the campaign, Tymiński won a lawsuit against TVP for defamation, but at that point the election had already been long over.

On 9 December, the second round of the presidential election took place, in which Wałesa won in a landslide victory of 74.25%, compared to Tymiński&#x27;s 25.75%, which was the largest landslide in the history of Polish elections.

===Campaign spending===
===Second round candidate endorsements===
==Opinion polls==
==Results==
===Results by voivodeship===
====First round====

====Second round====

==Aftermath==

Prime Minister Mazowiecki, utterly humiliated, resigned from his office soon after the election. His successor, Jan Krzysztof Bielecki, was another liberal, who was again selected by the criteria Wałęsa set out for any possible prime ministers - to be younger and less experienced politically. Bielecki, though not significantly changing the course of the country, was more subservient to the now-president and his vision.

ROAD and FPD were devastated by Mazowiecki&#x27;s loss. In May 1991, they united into the Democratic Union (UD) (with a small social-democratic splinter forming the Democratic-Social Movement). UD contested the 1991 parliamentary election, becoming the biggest party in the Sejm with 62 seats until a splinter led by former FPD members.

President-elect Wałęsa resigned from his role as Chairman of the Solidarity trade union shortly after becoming president, endorsing Lech Kaczyński to become the new chairman of the trade union. He faced the liberal-aligned Bogdan Borusewicz and relatively nonpartisan Marian Krzaklewski. On the 3rd Congress of Solidarity on 22-25 February, despite Wałesa&#x27;s endorsement, Kaczyński lost the vote for union leadership to Krzaklewski, who would become an important politician for the duration of the next decade.

Starting in January 1991, Roman Bartoszcze&#x27;s position within PSL began dissipating. His period as chairman concluded when after controversially signing a cooperation agreement with Rural Solidarity and PSL &quot;Solidarity&quot;, party leadership decided to oust him and replace him with Waldemar Pawlak, who would become a future prime minister. Bartoszcze&#x27;s ousting led to him creating a new party, the , which had significantly less success than PSL and never won any seats in any election.

Leszek Moczulski, who used the presidential election to spread his agenda and promulgate his party, succeeded in his goals, as KPN won 7.5% of the vote in the following 1991 parliamentary election, three times as much as he had personally amassed in the presidential election. However, the low result itself was a point of disappointment for Moczulski and his party.

Tymiński became largely irrelevant following the election, sometimes appearing in elections as a perennial candidate. He founded a political party, which was vehemently opposed by a large sector of society - 38% supported its delegalization. In 1991, its candidates were disqualified in 90% of districts, and would only secure 52,735 votes, winning 3 seats. The party would not win any seats in any following elections. After running for president again in 2005, he only won 23,545 votes. He contested another election in 2023, running for Senate, winning only 18,052 votes. Though his political career was barely relevant following the first direct presidential election in Poland, his name became famous worldwide, and many would try to draw lines between Tymiński and other &quot;populists&quot;, such as American presidential candidate Donald Trump or Law and Justice chairman Jarosław Kaczyński.

==Notes==
==References==

*&quot;Obwieszczenie PKW z dn. 26 XI 1990 r.&quot;, Dziennik Ustaw. Nr 83, poz. 483 (Polish)
*&quot;Obwieszczenie PKW z dn. 10 XII 1990 r.&quot;, Dz.U. Nr 85, poz. 499 (Polish)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="36" end="42" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851730" start="227" end="235" title="May Coup (Poland)" label="May Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="252" end="264" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q55830" start="266" end="275" title="List of Presidents of Poland" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="297" end="301" title="Sejm of the Republic of Poland" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="337" end="350" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="Communist era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687343" start="455" end="478" title="State Council of Poland" label="State Council of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="607" end="617" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="627" end="638" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q705544" start="662" end="680" title="Stanisław Tymiński" label="Stanisław Tymiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="682" end="696" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q55922" start="697" end="715" title="Tadeusz Mazowiecki" label="Tadeusz Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="732" end="736" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55915" start="737" end="760" title="Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz" label="Włodzimierz Cimoszewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994450" start="765" end="781" title="Roman Bartoszcze" label="Roman Bartoszcze"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="787" end="801" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532165" start="816" end="832" title="Leszek Moczulski" label="Leszek Moczulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="874" end="887" title="opinion polling" label="opinion polls"/>
<link wikidata="Q927194" start="1459" end="1487" title="Polish Round Table Agreement" label="Polish Round Table Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355470" start="1489" end="1542" title="1989 Polish parliamentary election" label="universal parliamentary elections were held in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129411" start="1585" end="1589" title="1928 Polish parliamentary election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="1612" end="1622" title="liberal democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="1627" end="1638" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="1678" end="1711" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628291" start="1810" end="1852" title="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland" label="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209983" start="1962" end="1992" title="Polish Social Democratic Union" label="Polish Social Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q455656" start="2067" end="2083" title="Czesław Kiszczak" label="Czesław Kiszczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="2087" end="2101" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="2280" end="2314" title="vote of confidence" label="receive the Sejm&amp;#x27;s confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="2416" end="2435" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157282" start="2753" end="2770" title="Bronisław Geremek" label="Bronisław Geremek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55743" start="2772" end="2783" title="Jacek Kuroń" label="Jacek Kuroń"/>
<link wikidata="Q733556" start="2785" end="2804" title="Władysław Frasyniuk" label="Władysław Frasyniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q163714" start="2808" end="2820" title="Adam Michnik" label="Adam Michnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="2840" end="2855" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="2928" end="2939" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="2970" end="2974" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech"/>
<link wikidata="Q55917" start="2979" end="2997" title="Jarosław Kaczyński" label="Jarosław Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q49759" start="3050" end="3067" title="bloc party" label="satellite parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537981" start="3074" end="3077" title="United People&amp;#x27;s Party (Poland)" label="ZSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351138" start="3082" end="3084" title="Alliance of Democrats (Poland)" label="SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q639754" start="3114" end="3159" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Movement for Democratic Action" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Movement for Democratic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q125564232" start="3189" end="3205" title="Centre Agreement" label="Centre Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="3489" end="3499" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015567" start="3708" end="3735" title="Cabinet of Tadeusz Mazowiecki" label="Solidarity-ZSL-SD coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9261875" start="4214" end="4243" title="Forum of the Democratic Right" label="Forum of the Democratic Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q100172" start="4693" end="4705" title="Marshal of the Sejm" label="Sejm Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q245778" start="4706" end="4725" title="Mikołaj Kozakiewicz" label="Mikołaj Kozakiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455805" start="5082" end="5106" title="five-point electoral law" label="five-point electoral law"/>
<link wikidata="Q337987" start="5134" end="5140" title="secret ballot" label="secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196727" start="5142" end="5148" title="direct election" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="5157" end="5166" title="universal suffrage" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="5171" end="5183" title="proportional voting" label="proportional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="5949" end="5964" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846811" start="6163" end="6177" title="Marshal of the Senate of Poland" label="Senate Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q208868" start="6178" end="6199" title="Andrzej Stelmachowski" label="Andrzej Stelmachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839419" start="6282" end="6289" title="Primate of Poland" label="Primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q365238" start="6290" end="6301" title="Józef Glemp" label="Józef Glemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381683" start="6849" end="6863" title="Władysław Baka" label="Władysław Baka"/>
<link wikidata="Q156728" start="7013" end="7025" title="nomenklatura" label="nomenklatura"/>
<link wikidata="Q55782" start="7146" end="7159" title="Leszek Miller" label="Leszek Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882136" start="7195" end="7204" title="Polish Ombudsman" label="Ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9256911" start="7205" end="7217" title="Ewa Łętowska" label="Ewa Łętowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="7345" end="7367" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Aleksander Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="8958" end="8969" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q104740" start="9804" end="9809" title="Radom" label="Radom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515698" start="9834" end="9850" title="Gabriel Janowski" label="Gabriel Janowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683061" start="9863" end="9882" title="Janusz Korwin-Mikke" label="Janusz Korwin-Mikke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270771" start="9900" end="9919" title="Real Politics Union" label="Real Politics Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="9939" end="9945" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q548306" start="9949" end="9966" title="Kornel Morawiecki" label="Kornel Morawiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346770" start="10116" end="10149" title="Labour Party (Poland)" label="Christian-Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641717" start="10153" end="10171" title="Bolesław Tejkowski" label="Bolesław Tejkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="10233" end="10237" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="10670" end="10682" title="Eastern bloc" label="Eastern bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q129110" start="10809" end="10812" title="Telewizja Polska" label="TVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704729" start="12036" end="12052" title="tribune of the plebs" label="plebeian tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q634249" start="12524" end="12542" title="Leszno Voivodeship" label="entire voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q650979" start="12984" end="13005" title="German–Polish Border Treaty" label="a treaty with Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13070" end="13085" title="Territorial_evolution_of_Germany#Interbellum" label="pre-war borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084839" start="13202" end="13219" title="election promises" label="election promises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294791" start="13292" end="13308" title="Minister of Finance (Poland)" label="Finance Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q55932" start="13309" end="13327" title="Leszek Balcerowicz" label="Leszek Balcerowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="14130" end="14144" title="western Europe" label="western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783933" start="14402" end="14414" title="thick line" label="thick stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q464555" start="14627" end="14635" title="Peronism" label="Peronist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="14688" end="14730" title="anti-semitism" label="accused of secretly having Jewish ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="15436" end="15443" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119225" start="16702" end="16720" title="abortion law" label="anti-abortion laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="16759" end="16784" title="martial law in Poland" label="the period of martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="16848" end="16872" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q693026" start="17702" end="17716" title="smear campaign" label="smear campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q55909" start="18513" end="18535" title="Jan Krzysztof Bielecki" label="Jan Krzysztof Bielecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476149" start="18915" end="18931" title="Democratic Union (Poland)" label="Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9323568" start="18990" end="19016" title="Democratic-Social Movement (Poland)" label="Democratic-Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608105" start="19036" end="19063" title="1991 Polish parliamentary election" label="1991 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q890410" start="19386" end="19403" title="Bogdan Borusewicz" label="Bogdan Borusewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q445761" start="19431" end="19449" title="Marian Krzaklewski" label="Marian Krzaklewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646070" start="19865" end="19881" title="Rural Solidarity" label="Rural Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346762" start="19886" end="19912" title="Christian-Peasant Party" label="PSL &amp;quot;Solidarity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55928" start="19972" end="19987" title="Waldemar Pawlak" label="Waldemar Pawlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978560" start="20649" end="20668" title="perennial candidate" label="perennial candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813084" start="20681" end="20698" title="Party X" label="a political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586050" start="21009" end="21013" title="2005 Polish presidential election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="21392" end="21404" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="21408" end="21423" title="Law and Justice" label="Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319801" start="21532" end="21546" title="Dziennik Ustaw" label="Dziennik Ustaw"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141670" wikidata="Q7183294" url="?curid=1141670" title="Philip Burdon">
<text>Philip Ralph Burdon (born 25 March 1939) is a former New Zealand politician and lawyer by profession. He was the co-founder of Meadow Mushrooms.

==Early life and family==
Burdon was born in Geraldine on 25 March 1939, the son of Cotsford Carlton Burdon and Ruth Mildred Burdon (née Barker). He was educated at Christ&#x27;s College in Christchurch from 1953 to 1956, and studied law at the University of Canterbury, graduating LLB.

On 8 December 1966 in London, Burdon married Rosalind Alice Waley-Cohen, the daughter of the late Sir Bernard Waley-Cohen, former Lord Mayor of London, and the couple went on to have three children. In the 2002 Queen&#x27;s Birthday and Golden Jubilee Honours, Rosalind Burdon was appointed a Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit, for services to the arts and the community.

Philip Burdon worked as a legal advisor for Mobil Oil in Wellington in 1967. In 1969, he and Roger Giles began a company growing mushrooms in caves on the Mediterranean island of Cyprus, but following the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, they concentrated all their efforts on their New Zealand company, Meadow Mushrooms, established at Prebbleton in 1970. From 1977 to 1978, Burdon was a visiting lecturer in law at Lincoln College.

==Member of Parliament==



Burdon was an MP from 1981 to 1996, representing the National Party. He was first elected to Parliament in the 1981 elections as MP for the Christchurch electorate of Fendalton, and was re-elected for that electorate until leaving Parliament at the 1996 elections.

While in Opposition, Burdon was the National Party spokesman for health from 1985 to 1986, and trade and industry between 1986 and 1990.

Burdon was the New Zealand Minister of State Owned Enterprises from 1993 to 1996. Other ministerial positions that he held were Minister for Trade Negotiations, Minister of Commerce, Minister for Industry, and Associate Minister of External Relations and Trade.

In 1990, Burdon was awarded the New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal.

==Post-political career==
, Philip Burdon is chairman of the Asia New Zealand Foundation and patron of the New Zealand China Friendship Society.

Burdon and fellow former MP Jim Anderton were prominent campaigners for the restoration of ChristChurch Cathedral, which had been severely damaged in the February and June 2011 Christchurch earthquakes. They were ultimately successful in September 2017 when the Anglican synod made a binding decision to restore the church.

In 2016, Burdon was inducted into the New Zealand Business Hall of Fame.

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7183294" start="0" end="19" title="Philip Burdon" label="Philip Ralph Burdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002934" start="191" end="200" title="Geraldine, New Zealand" label="Geraldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108634" start="311" end="332" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Christchurch" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="336" end="348" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="391" end="415" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q798137" start="428" end="431" title="LLB" label="LLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="456" end="462" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q822764" start="536" end="555" title="Bernard Waley-Cohen" label="Bernard Waley-Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="564" end="584" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q96626904" start="640" end="693" title="2002 Birthday Honours (New Zealand)" label="2002 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday and Golden Jubilee Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q94162" start="727" end="770" title="Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit" label="Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="874" end="884" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="1022" end="1048" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="Turkish invasion of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176330" start="1157" end="1167" title="Prebbleton" label="Prebbleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048626" start="1237" end="1252" title="Lincoln University (New Zealand)" label="Lincoln College"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="1336" end="1350" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016154" start="1394" end="1408" title="1981 New Zealand general election" label="1981 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="1423" end="1435" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443218" start="1450" end="1459" title="Fendalton (New Zealand electorate)" label="Fendalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="1532" end="1546" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189763" start="1714" end="1749" title="Minister of State Owned Enterprises" label="Minister of State Owned Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785663" start="1848" end="1868" title="Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs" label="Minister of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933211" start="1982" end="2018" title="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal" label="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036723" start="2195" end="2207" title="Jim Anderton" label="Jim Anderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077977" start="2258" end="2280" title="ChristChurch Cathedral, Christchurch" label="ChristChurch Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="2321" end="2329" title="2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="February"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801192" start="2334" end="2367" title="June 2011 Christchurch earthquake" label="June 2011 Christchurch earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q110808615" start="2530" end="2563" title="New Zealand Business Hall of Fame" label="New Zealand Business Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141675" wikidata="Q5420058" url="?curid=1141675" title="Exercise intensity">
<text>Exercise intensity refers to how much energy is expended when exercising. Perceived intensity varies with each person. It has been found that intensity has an effect on what fuel the body uses and what kind of adaptations the body makes after exercise. Intensity is the amount of physical power (expressed as a percentage of the maximal oxygen consumption) that the body uses when performing an activity. For example, exercise intensity defines how hard the body has to work to walk a mile in 20 minutes.

==Measures of Intensity==
Heart Rate is typically used as a measure of exercise intensity. Heart rate can be an indicator of the challenge to the cardiovascular system that the exercise represents.

The most precise measure of intensity is oxygen consumption (VO2). VO2 represents the overall metabolic challenge that an exercise imposes. There is a direct linear relationship between intensity of aerobic exercise and VO2. Our maximum intensity is a reflection of our maximal oxygen consumption (VO2 max). Such a measurement represents a cardiovascular fitness level.

VO2 is measured in METs (mL/kg/min). One MET, which is equal to 3.5 mL/kg per minute, is considered to be the average resting energy expenditure of a typical human being. Intensity of exercise can be expressed as multiples of resting energy expenditure. An intensity of exercise equivalent to 6 METs means that the energy expenditure of the exercise is six times the resting energy expenditure. 
Intensity of exercise can be expressed in absolute or relative terms. For example, two individuals with different measures of VO2 max, running at 7 mph are running at the same absolute intensity (miles/hour) but a different relative intensity (% of VO2 max expended). The individual with the higher VO2 max is running at a lower intensity at this pace than the individual with the lower VO2 max is.

Some studies measure exercise intensity by having subjects perform exercise trials to determine peak power output, which may be measured in watts, heart rate, or average cadence (cycling). This approach attempts to gauge overall workload.

An informal method to determine optimal exercise intensity is the talk test. It states that exercise intensity is “just about right”, when the subject can “just respond to conversation.” The talk test results in similar exercise intensity as the ventilatory threshold and is suitable for exercise prescription.

==Intensity Levels==
Exercise is categorized into three different intensity levels. These levels include low, moderate, and vigorous and are measured by the metabolic equivalent of task (aka metabolic equivalent or METs).
The effects of exercise are different at each intensity level (i.e. training effect). Recommendations to lead a healthy lifestyle vary for individuals based on age, weight, and existing activity levels. “Published guidelines for healthy adults state that 20-60 minutes of medium intensity continuous or intermittent aerobic activity 3-5 times per week is needed for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness, body composition, and muscular strength.”

==Fuel Used==
The body uses different amounts of energy substrates (carbohydrates or fats) depending on the intensity of the exercise and the VO2 Max of the exerciser. Protein is a third energy substrate, but it contributes minimally and is therefore discounted in the percent contribution graphs reflecting different intensities of exercise. The fuel provided by the body dictates an individual&#x27;s capacity to increase the intensity level of a given activity. In other words, the intensity level of an activity determines the order of fuel recruitment. Specifically, exercise physiology dictates that low intensity, long duration exercise provides a larger percentage of fat contribution in the calories burned because the body does not need to quickly and efficiently produce energy (i.e., adenosine triphosphate) to maintain the activity. On the other hand, high intensity activity utilizes a larger percentage of carbohydrates in the calories expended because its quick production of energy makes it the preferred energy substrate for high intensity exercise. High intensity activity also yields a higher total caloric expenditure.

VO2 max acts as a key determinant of fuel usage during exercise. Higher VO2 Max individuals can sustain higher intensities in the &quot;fat-burning zone&quot; before shifting to carbohydrates, enhancing their endurance and efficiency.

This table outlines the estimated distribution of energy consumption at different percentages of VO2 Max.

These estimates are valid only when glycogen reserves are able to cover the energy needs. If a person depletes their glycogen reserves after a long workout (a phenomenon known as &quot;hitting the wall&quot;), the body will use mostly fat for energy (known as &quot;second wind&quot;). Ketones, produced by the liver, will slowly buildup in concentration in the blood, the longer that the person&#x27;s glycogen reserves have been depleted, typically due to starvation or a low carb diet (βHB 3 - 5 mM). Prolonged aerobic exercise, where individuals &quot;hit the wall&quot; can create post-exercise ketosis; however, the level of ketones produced are smaller (βHB 0.3 - 2 mM).
== High Intensity Exercise in Pregnancy ==
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that pregnant women engage in at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise weekly to promote maternal and fetal health. Different parameters for high-intensity exercise have been researched to educate and determine their safety for the mother and fetus.

Studies support that an acute bout of high-intensity exercise in active pregnant women does not lead to fetal distress or adverse effects. Results were also similar in maternal and fetal responses to moderate-intensity and high-intensity training. Both intensity exercises were associated with normal maternal and fetal cerebral blood flow responses. It also showed healthy circulation in the fetus and mother, demonstrating vasodilation and improved placental perfusion.

Current evidence suggests that high-intensity exercises may be well-tolerated by healthy, active pregnant women in their late second and third trimesters. The frequency, type, time, and volume of these exercises should be individually tailored to the patient, prescribed, and conducted by medical professionals and exercise specialists. Pregnant women are also advised not to participate in activities that will increase their heart rate to above 90% of their known maximum heart rate.

==See also==
*Exercise physiology
*Human power
*Bioenergetic systems

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5420058" start="0" end="18" title="Exercise intensity" label="Exercise intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="62" end="72" title="exercise" label="exercising"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="174" end="178" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60354" start="329" end="355" title="maximal oxygen consumption" label="maximal oxygen consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="532" end="542" title="Heart Rate" label="Heart Rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="652" end="673" title="cardiovascular system" label="cardiovascular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q60354" start="1003" end="1010" title="VO2 max" label="VO2 max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924756" start="1095" end="1099" title="Metabolic equivalent of task" label="METs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907680" start="1968" end="1985" title="peak power output" label="peak power output"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="2012" end="2016" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q742924" start="2042" end="2059" title="cadence (cycling)" label="cadence (cycling)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807967" start="2358" end="2379" title="ventilatory threshold" label="ventilatory threshold"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="2445" end="2453" title="Exercise" label="Exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924756" start="2581" end="2601" title="metabolic equivalent" label="metabolic equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q472094" start="2714" end="2729" title="training effect" label="training effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="3177" end="3190" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="3194" end="3197" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60354" start="3251" end="3258" title="VO2 max" label="VO2 Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="3277" end="3284" title="Protein" label="Protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="3905" end="3927" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60354" start="4322" end="4329" title="VO2 max" label="VO2 Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q60354" start="4583" end="4590" title="VO2 max" label="VO2 Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567709" start="4778" end="4794" title="hitting the wall" label="hitting the wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476344" start="4859" end="4870" title="second wind" label="second wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q746183" start="4879" end="4886" title="Ketone bodies" label="Ketones"/>
<link wikidata="Q472094" start="6614" end="6633" title="Exercise physiology" label="Exercise physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014191" start="6635" end="6646" title="Human power" label="Human power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962291" start="6648" end="6668" title="Bioenergetic systems" label="Bioenergetic systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141676" wikidata="Q724169" url="?curid=1141676" title="John Berchmans">
<text>John Berchmans, SJ ( ; 13 March 1599 – 13 August 1621) was a Belgian Jesuit scholastic and is revered as a saint in the Catholic Church. 

In 1615, the Jesuits opened a college at Mechelen, Belgium and Berchmans was one of the first to enroll. His spiritual model was his fellow Jesuit Aloysius Gonzaga, and he was influenced by the example of the English Jesuit martyrs. Berchmans is the patron saint of altar servers, Jesuit scholastics, and students.

==Early life==
John Berchmans was born on 13 March 1599, in the city of Diest situated in what is now the Belgian province of Flemish Brabant, the son of a shoemaker. His parents were John Charles and Elizabeth Berchmans. He was the oldest of five children and at baptism was named John in honor of John the Baptist. He grew up in an atmosphere of political turmoil caused by a religious war between the Catholic and Protestant parts of the Low Countries. When he was age nine, his mother was stricken with a very long and a very serious illness. John would pass several hours each day by her bedside. He studied at the Gymnasium (grammar school) at Diest and worked as a servant in the household of Canon John Froymont at Mechelen in order to continue his studies. John also made pilgrimages to the Marian shrine of Scherpenheuvel, some 30 miles east of Brussels, but only few miles from Diest.

==Call to the Society of Jesus==
In 1615, the Jesuits opened a college at Mechelen and Berchmans was one of the first to enroll. Immediately upon entering, he enrolled in the Sodality of the Blessed Virgin. When Berchmans wrote his parents that he wished to join the Society of Jesus, his father hurried to Mechelen to dissuade him and sent him to the Franciscan convent in Mechelen. At the convent, a friar who was related to Berchmans also attempted to change his mind. Finally as a last resort, Berchmans&#x27;s father told him that he would end all financial support if he continued with his plan.

Nevertheless, on 24 September 1616, Berchmans entered the Jesuit novitiate. He was affable, kind, and endowed with an outgoing personality that endeared him to others. He requested that after ordination as a priest he could become a chaplain in the army, hoping to be martyred on the battlefield.

On 24 January 1618, he made his first vows and went to Antwerp to begin studying philosophy. After only a few weeks he was sent to Rome, where he was to continue the same study. He set out on foot, with his belongings on his back, and on arrival was admitted to the Roman College to begin two years of study. He entered his third-year class in philosophy in the year 1621. 

Later, in August 1621, the prefect of studies selected Berchmans to participate in a discussion of philosophy at the Greek College, which at the time was administered by the Dominicans. Berchmans opened the discussion with great clarity and profoundness, but after returning to his own quarters, was seized with the Roman fever. His lungs became inflamed and his strength diminished rapidly. He succumbed to dysentery and fever on 13 August 1621, at the age of twenty-two years and five months. When he died, a large crowd gathered for several days to view his remains and to invoke his intercession. That same year, Phillip-Charles, Duke of Aarschot, sent a petition to Pope Gregory XV with a view to beginning the process leading to Berchman&#x27;s beatification. His remains were eventually entombed in Rome&#x27;s Sant&#x27;Ignazio Church.

==Spirituality==
Berchmans took as his spiritual model his fellow Jesuit Aloysius Gonzaga and was also influenced by the example of the English Jesuit martyrs. It was his realistic appreciation for the value of ordinary things, a characteristic of the Flemish mystical tradition, that constituted his holiness. He had a special devotion to Mary, mother of Jesus, and to him is owed the Little Rosary of the Immaculate Conception.

==Veneration==
At the time of Berchmans&#x27;s death, his heart was returned to his homeland in Belgium where it is kept in a silver reliquary on a side altar in the church at Leuven (Louvain).
Berchmans was declared Blessed in 1865, and canonized in 1888. Statues frequently depict him with hands clasped, holding his crucifix, his book of rules, and his rosary.

The miracle that led to his canonization occurred at the Academy of the Sacred Heart in Grand Coteau, Louisiana. In 1866, one year after the Civil War, he appeared to novice Mary Wilson. Mary&#x27;s health was poor, and her parents thought that the gentler climate of south Louisiana could be a remedy. However, her health continued to decline, to the point where for about 40 days she had only been able to take liquids. &quot;Being unable to speak, I said in my heart: &#x27;Lord, Thou Who seest how I suffer, if it be for your honor and glory and the salvation of my soul, I ask through the intercession of Blessed Berchmans a little relief and health. Otherwise give me patience to the end.&#x27;&quot; She went on to describe how John Berchmans then appeared to her, and she was immediately healed. When the Academy opened a boys school in 2006, the trustees named it St. John Berchmans School. It is the only shrine at the exact location of a confirmed miracle in the United States.

The feast day of John Berchmans has never been inscribed in the General Roman Calendar, but prior to the liturgical reforms of Pope John XXIII there was a Mass set for him among the section of Masses for Various Places (&quot;Missae pro aliquibus locis&quot;) of the Roman Missal which foresaw that it would be celebrated in different places on either 13 August or 26 November. Berchmans is currently inscribed in the 2004 official edition of the Catholic Church&#x27;s &quot;Martyrologium Romanum&quot; (p. 451) on 13 August, the date of his death. He is celebrated by the Society of Jesus on 26 November.

==Recognition==
The Belgium Post Authority issued a philatelic stamp in 1965 featuring John Berchmans pictured alongside his parental home in Diest.

The St. John Berchmans Sanctuary Society is an organization for altar servers that continues to have chapters at many parishes.

San Antonio, Texas, became home to several Belgian farmers who arrived in the late 1800s and established truck farms on the southwest edge of the city and brought their crops to the city markets for sale. Other Belgians followed in the 1890s and also established farms in the area. The community founded a school in a one-room structure that also served as a chapel when the priest from Sacred Heart Parish visited. The chapel became known as St. John Berchmans and was the Belgian national parish until 1947, and was Flemish-speaking. The parish moved in 1948, and the former structure became home to the Belgian-American Club of Texas.

In 1902, Bishop Anthony Durier requested that the Jesuits establish a second parish in Shreveport. They named the parish in honor of the saint because of the miracle experienced by Mary Wilson in nearby Grand Coteau, Louisiana. On 16 June 1986, Pope John Paul II established the Diocese of Shreveport and St. John Berchmans Church became the Cathedral.
One of the famous catholic instituitions in the name of the saint is SB College Changanassery, Kerala in India founded by Venerable Mar Thomas Kurialacherry in 1922 on the cornerstone laid by the French Jesuit priest, Mar Charles Lavigne who had the wish to provide higher education for the commoners in Travancore region of Kerala. Mar Charles Lavigne, with the help of clergies and Holy See of Catholic Church, started reforming the primary education by building one of its first English High School, in the early 1890s in Kerala, dedicating it to the saint of students, youths and altar boys, St. John Berchmans, SB English High School Changanasserry, Kerala in India. Even though started for seminarians, very soon it opened its gates to commoners Today the college is a premier and is one of the few reputed Catholic Institutions in the country. The college is the only college in India that has produced three alumni who are Cardinals in the Catholic Church, the senior most church official below the rank of Pope.
The following is partial list of schools and churches named in honor of the saint:

* St. John Berchmans College (Brussels, Belgium)
* St. Berchmans College (Changanacherry, Kottayam)
* St. John Berchmans College (Antwerp, Belgium) (page on the Dutch Wikipedia)
* St. John Berchmans College (Diest, Belgium)
* St. John Berchmans Institute(Puurs-Sint-Amands, Belgium)
* St. John Berchmans College (Westmalle, Belgium) (page on the Dutch Wikipedia)
* St. John Berchmans College (Genk, Belgium) (page on the Dutch Wikipedia)
* St. John Berchmans College (Avelgem, Belgium) (page on the Dutch Wikipedia)
* St. John Berchmans College (Mol, Belgium)
* St. John Berchmans Institute (Zonhoven, Belgium) (page on the Dutch Wikipedia)
* St John&#x27;s Beaumont School (Old Windsor, Berkshire, England)
* St. John&#x27;s High School (Purulia Road, Ranchi, Jharkhand, India)
* St. John Berchmans High School (Tinpahar, Jharkhand, India)
* St. John Berchmans High School (Cordon, Isabela, Philippines)
* Cathedral of St. John Berchmans (Shreveport, Louisiana, USA)

* St. John Berchmans Catholic Church (Cankton, Louisiana, USA)
* St. John&#x27;s Jesuit High School and Academy (Toledo, Ohio)
* St. John Berchmans School (Colegio San Juan Berchmans) (Cali, Colombia)
* St. John&#x27;s College (Belize City, Belize)
* St. Berchmans Higher Secondary School (Changanacherry, Kottayam)
* St. John Berchmans Church, attached to the Collège St Michel (Brussels, Belgium)
* St. John Berchmans Parish and School (Logan Square, Chicago, Illinois)
* St. John Berchmans Church (Holland, Manitoba, Canada)
* Église Saint-Jean-Berchmans (Montreal, Quebec, Canada)
* Berchmans Illam, Jesuit Scholasticate (Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India)
* Sint Joan Berchmans mavo (Roosendaal, The Netherlands)
* Saint John Berchmans Academy of the Sacred Heart (Grand Coteau, Louisiana, USA)
* St. John Berchman Church, (Kurseong, West Bengal, India)
* Church of Saint Mary Immaculate and Saint John Berchmans &#x27;al Tiburtino&#x27;, (Roma, Italy) Via dei Sabelli, 00185 Roma RM, Italy
* St. Johannes Berchmans School, (PIK 2, Tangerang, Indonesia)

==See also==

==References==
==Sources==
*Holweck, F. G.: &quot;A Biographical Dictionary of the Saints&quot;. St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co., 1924.
*Hippolyte Delehaye: &quot;St John Berchmans&quot;, New-York, Benzinger Brothers, 1921, 189pp.

==External links==

* Saint John Berchmans – Saints.SQPN.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724169" start="0" end="14" title="John Berchmans" label="John Berchmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="61" end="68" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="69" end="75" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="107" end="112" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="120" end="135" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="180" end="197" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q310307" start="286" end="302" title="Aloysius Gonzaga" label="Aloysius Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542263" start="348" end="370" title="Forty Martyrs of England and Wales" label="English Jesuit martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q139627" start="405" end="417" title="altar server" label="altar server"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="427" end="438" title="Jesuit formation#Jesuit scholastics" label="scholastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="527" end="532" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="561" end="568" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118" start="581" end="596" title="Flemish Brabant" label="Flemish Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="754" end="770" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057311" start="1255" end="1286" title="Basilica of Our Lady of Scherpenheuvel" label="Marian shrine of Scherpenheuvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="1310" end="1318" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="1344" end="1349" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="1426" end="1434" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q521962" start="1527" end="1557" title="Sodality of the Blessed Virgin" label="Sodality of the Blessed Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="1619" end="1635" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="1704" end="1714" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="2308" end="2315" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="2384" end="2388" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157592" start="2519" end="2532" title="Roman College" label="Roman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="2802" end="2812" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279688" start="2944" end="2955" title="Roman fever (disease)" label="Roman fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="3036" end="3045" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q557419" start="3245" end="3260" title="Philippe-Charles, 3rd Count of Arenberg" label="Phillip-Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q110460870" start="3262" end="3278" title="Duke of Aarschot" label="Duke of Aarschot"/>
<link wikidata="Q132692" start="3299" end="3314" title="Pope Gregory XV" label="Pope Gregory XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465674" start="3446" end="3470" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Ignazio Church, Rome" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Ignazio Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q310307" start="3546" end="3562" title="Aloysius Gonzaga" label="Aloysius Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="3813" end="3834" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="4080" end="4086" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="4121" end="4128" title="Beatification" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="4260" end="4266" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671559" start="4326" end="4353" title="Academy of the Sacred Heart (Grand Coteau, Louisiana)" label="Academy of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q598410" start="4357" end="4380" title="Grand Coteau, Louisiana" label="Grand Coteau, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4410" end="4419" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="5323" end="5345" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="5386" end="5401" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q740553" start="5887" end="5909" title="Bpost" label="Belgium Post Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="6009" end="6014" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="6146" end="6157" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="6159" end="6164" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="6251" end="6262" title="Market garden" label="truck farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="6794" end="6800" title="Bishop (Catholicism)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772432" start="6801" end="6815" title="Anthony Durier" label="Anthony Durier"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="7030" end="7047" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q876471" start="7064" end="7085" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Shreveport" label="Diocese of Shreveport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587279" start="7207" end="7231" title="St. Berchmans College" label="SB College Changanassery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="7233" end="7239" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7243" end="7248" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q522125" start="7260" end="7294" title="Thomas Kurialacherry" label="Venerable Mar Thomas Kurialacherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065295" start="7356" end="7375" title="Charles Lavigne" label="Mar Charles Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538311" start="7442" end="7469" title="Travancore–Cochin" label="Travancore region of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="7522" end="7549" title="Holy See" label="Holy See of Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844988" start="7754" end="7799" title="St. Berchmans Higher Secondary School" label="SB English High School Changanasserry, Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="7834" end="7845" title="Seminary" label="seminarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="7880" end="7889" title="Commoner" label="commoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q557206" start="7951" end="7972" title="Catholic higher education" label="Catholic Institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="8069" end="8101" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinals in the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016624" start="8245" end="8271" title="St John Berchmans College, Brussels" label="St. John Berchmans College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587279" start="8294" end="8315" title="St. Berchmans College" label="St. Berchmans College"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="8317" end="8331" title="Changanacherry" label="Changanacherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="8333" end="8341" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="8373" end="8380" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8392" end="8419" title=":nl:Sint-Jan Berchmanscollege (Antwerpen)" label="page on the Dutch Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743236" start="8451" end="8456" title="Diest" label="Diest"/>
<link wikidata="Q45202943" start="8498" end="8515" title="Puurs-Sint-Amands" label="Puurs-Sint-Amands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8517" end="8524" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179602" start="8556" end="8565" title="Westmalle" label="Westmalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8567" end="8574" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8577" end="8604" title=":nl:Sint-Jan Berchmanscollege (Malle)" label="page on the Dutch Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189692" start="8636" end="8640" title="Genk" label="Genk"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8652" end="8679" title=":nl:Sint-Jan Berchmanscollege (Genk)" label="page on the Dutch Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177133" start="8711" end="8718" title="Avelgem" label="Avelgem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8730" end="8757" title=":nl:Sint-Jan Berchmanscollege (Avelgem)" label="page on the Dutch Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465710" start="8789" end="8801" title="Mol, Belgium" label="Mol, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133769" start="8835" end="8843" title="Zonhoven" label="Zonhoven"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8855" end="8882" title=":nl:Sint-Jan Berchmansinstituut (Zonhoven)" label="page on the Dutch Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251201" start="8886" end="8916" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Beaumont School" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Beaumont School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529554" start="8918" end="8929" title="Old Windsor" label="Old Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="8931" end="8940" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="8942" end="8949" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588744" start="8953" end="8980" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s High School, Ranchi" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q174461" start="8996" end="9002" title="Ranchi" label="Ranchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="9004" end="9013" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9015" end="9020" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q49363" start="9118" end="9133" title="Cordon, Isabela" label="Cordon, Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052393" start="9150" end="9181" title="Cathedral of St. John Berchmans" label="Cathedral of St. John Berchmans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9214" end="9248" title="St. John Berchmans Catholic Church" label="St. John Berchmans Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716817" start="9277" end="9323" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Jesuit High School and Academy" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Jesuit High School and Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="9325" end="9337" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="9397" end="9401" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="9403" end="9411" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588645" start="9415" end="9438" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s College, Belize" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q108223" start="9440" end="9451" title="Belize City" label="Belize City"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="9453" end="9459" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844988" start="9463" end="9500" title="St. Berchmans Higher Secondary School" label="St. Berchmans Higher Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q889300" start="9502" end="9516" title="Changanacherry" label="Changanacherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q659887" start="9518" end="9526" title="Kottayam" label="Kottayam"/>
<link wikidata="Q928431" start="9530" end="9555" title="St. Jan Berchmans Church, Brussels" label="St. John Berchmans Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257855" start="9651" end="9663" title="Logan Square, Chicago" label="Logan Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="9665" end="9672" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="9674" end="9682" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="9771" end="9779" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9781" end="9787" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="9816" end="9822" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="9838" end="9845" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="9847" end="9857" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9859" end="9864" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903267" start="9894" end="9904" title="Roosendaal" label="Roosendaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="9910" end="9921" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497842" start="10307" end="10321" title="Frederick George Holweck" label="Holweck, F. G."/>
<link wikidata="Q1620026" start="10418" end="10436" title="Hippolyte Delehaye" label="Hippolyte Delehaye"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141680" wikidata="Q7595061" url="?curid=1141680" title="St Patrick's College">
<text>Saint Patrick&#x27;s College may refer to:
== Australia ==
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Ballarat, Victoria
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Campbelltown, New South Wales
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, East Melbourne, Victoria
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Goulburn, New South Wales (closed 2000)
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Gympie, Queensland
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Mackay, Queensland
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Manly, a seminary in New South Wales
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Shorncliffe, Brisbane, Queensland
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Strathfield, New South Wales
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Sutherland, New South Wales
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Townsville, Queensland
* St Patrick&#x27;s Technical College, Edinburgh North, South Australia

== Ireland ==
* St. Patrick&#x27;s, Carlow College, a third level college
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Cavan, an all-male secondary school
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Dublin, a former teacher training college affiliated to Dublin City University
* Coláiste Phádraig (Lucan), a secondary school for boys in County Dublin
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Maynooth, a pontifical university and national seminary
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Thurles, a teacher training college affiliated to University of Limerick
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Tuam, a former secondary school for boys in County Galway

== United Kingdom ==
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Armagh, now part of St Patrick&#x27;s Grammar School
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Ballymena, County Antrim
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Banbridge, County Down
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Belfast, a former secondary school
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Dungannon, a voluntary grammar school in County Tyrone
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Knock, a Roman Catholic diocesan grammar school in Belfast
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, Maghera, County Londonderry
* St Patrick&#x27;s College, London, a private higher education college at Tower Hill
* St Patrick&#x27;s Catholic College, Thornaby-on-Tees, North Yorkshire
* St Patrick&#x27;s and St Brigid&#x27;s College, Claudy, County Londonderry

== Other countries ==

* St. Patrick&#x27;s College (Ottawa), a former part of Carleton University, Canada
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Silverstream, Upper Hutt, New Zealand
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Wellington, New Zealand
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College (Karachi), affiliated with the University of Karachi, Pakistan
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, South Africa, a co-educational boarding school in Kokstad, KwaZulu Natal
* St. Patrick&#x27;s College, Jaffna, a private school in Gurunagar, Sri Lanka

==See also==
* St. Patrick&#x27;s High School (disambiguation)
* St. Patrick&#x27;s School (disambiguation)
* St. Patrick&#x27;s (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7595061" start="0" end="28" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College" label="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595062" start="61" end="96" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Ballarat" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595064" start="109" end="148" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Campbelltown" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Campbelltown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020889" start="168" end="209" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, East Melbourne" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, East Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595065" start="222" end="257" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Goulburn" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Goulburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595067" start="291" end="324" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Gympie" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Gympie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595069" start="339" end="372" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Mackay" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595092" start="387" end="419" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Manly" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595071" start="453" end="491" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Shorncliffe" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Shorncliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595070" start="516" end="554" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Strathfield" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Strathfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595072" start="574" end="611" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Sutherland" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595073" start="631" end="668" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Townsville" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595093" start="683" end="718" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Technical College" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590902" start="770" end="804" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s, Carlow College" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s, Carlow College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974516" start="830" end="862" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Cavan" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595066" start="895" end="928" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Dublin" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150378" start="1003" end="1028" title="Coláiste Phádraig (Lucan)" label="Coláiste Phádraig (Lucan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556206" start="1077" end="1112" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maynooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590941" start="1162" end="1197" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Thurles" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Thurles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590942" start="1265" end="1297" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Tuam" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Tuam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590952" start="1375" end="1408" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Armagh" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105416549" start="1457" end="1493" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Ballymena" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Ballymena"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920312" start="1511" end="1547" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Banbridge" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Banbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595063" start="1563" end="1597" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595049" start="1627" end="1664" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Dungannon" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110745" start="1712" end="1745" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Knock" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590938" start="1801" end="1835" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maghera" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Maghera"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900520" start="1858" end="1891" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, London" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q20128051" start="1944" end="1978" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Catholic College" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595095" start="2016" end="2062" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s and St Brigid&amp;#x27;s College" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s and St Brigid&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041737" start="2117" end="2152" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College (Ottawa)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College (Ottawa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590939" start="2201" end="2241" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Silverstream" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Silverstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590943" start="2269" end="2307" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Wellington" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590944" start="2323" end="2359" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College (Karachi)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College (Karachi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17929254" start="2415" end="2455" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, South Africa" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590937" start="2518" end="2552" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Jaffna" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s College, Jaffna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590953" start="2611" end="2658" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s High School (disambiguation)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590985" start="2661" end="2703" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590901" start="2706" end="2741" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s (disambiguation)" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141682" wikidata="Q7860427" url="?curid=1141682" title="Tymshare">
<text>Tymshare, Inc was a time-sharing service and third-party hardware maintenance company. Competing with companies such as CompuServe, Service Bureau Corporation and National CSS. Tymshare developed and acquired various technologies, such as data networking, electronic data interchange (EDI), credit card and payment processing, and database technology. It was headquartered in Cupertino in California, from 1964 to 1984.

In 1984, Tymshare was acquired by McDonnell Douglas, to which Tymshare had sold its hospital accounting service in 1982. Tymshare was restructured, split up and portions were resold, spun off, and merged with other companies from 1984 through 2004 when most of its legacy network was eventually shut down. Islands of its network technology continued as part of EDI, into 2008.

McDonnell Douglas was acquired by Boeing. Consequently, rights to use technology developed by Tymshare are currently held by Boeing, British Telecom (BT), Verizon Communications, and AT&amp;T Inc. due to the acquisitions and mergers from 1984 through 2005.

==History==
===Beginnings===
Tymshare was founded in 1964 by Thomas O’Rourke and David Schmidt, two former employees of General Electric&#x27;s Computer Department. The company was entering the new market of time-sharing, which at that time was expected to grow rapidly. GE would itself soon enter this market as well, after collaborating with Dartmouth College.

Tymshare initially focussed on the SDS 940 platform, initially running at University of California Berkeley. They received their own leased 940 in mid-1966, running the Berkeley Timesharing System, which had limited time-sharing capability. IBM Stretch programmer Ann Hardy rewrote the time-sharing system to service 32 simultaneous users. By 1969 the company had three locations, 100 staff, and five SDS 940s.

In 1968, LaRoy Tymes and Norm Hardy developed the idea of creating a network with minicomputers to communicate with the mainframes. The minicomputers started off as an inexpensive 12-bit computer from General Automation and soon became a more capable 16-bit Varian 620i—would serve as the network&#x27;s nodes, running a program called a &quot;supervisor&quot; which routed data, performed diagnostics, and kept network statistics; a local program at each node, dubbed a &quot;leprechaun,&quot; handled log-in, security, and diagnostics. The supervisor was written in assembly code by Tymes for the SDS 940, with architectural design contributions from Hardy in late 1969. The network became fully operational in 1970, and by 1972 the resulting Tymnet system connected 40 cities in the United States. Tymnet was a centralized network, unlike ARPANET; it featured centralized password storage, statistical multiplexing, flow management, and great attention to security issues.

Tymshare acquired a variety of companies during its 20 years of operation. One of the first, in 1968, was Dial Data, a time-sharing service bureau in Newton, Massachusetts, that had an additional five SDS 940 computers. Additional acquisitions included United Data Centers, Alan-Babcock Computing, Bancard of Rhode Island, and TeleCheck.

It soon became apparent that the SDS 940 could not keep up with the rapid growth of the network. In 1972, Joseph Rinde joined the Tymnet group and began porting the Supervisor code to the 32-bit Interdata 7/32, as the 8/32 was not yet ready. In 1973, the 8/32 became available, but the performance was disappointing, and a crash-effort was made to develop a machine that could run Rinde&#x27;s Supervisor.

In the beginning of the 1970s Tymshare became available in Europe through CEGOS-Tymshare, a joint venture with Credit Lyonnais. It extended to Brussels in 1973. An operation in the United Kingdom started in 1974. In 1976, a joint venture with Taylorix Organisation, called Taylorix-Tymshare GmbH, was founded in Stuttgart, Germany. Taylorix-Tymshare offered applications, e.g., the eMail system &quot;OnTyme&quot; based on Tymnet, the multi-dimensional database system &quot;Express&quot; [now owned by Oracle, but no longer promoted ]. Marketing departments of some large companies (like Johnson&amp;Johnson or BAT) used Express (available via type-writer in time-sharing mode, later on also available on PC) for the analysis of Nielsen or GfK sales data. Taylorix-Tymshare ceased operation in 1986.

In 1974, a second version of the Supervisor software became operational. The new Tymnet &quot;Engine&quot; software was used on both the Supervisor machines and on the nodes.

After the migration to Interdata, they started developing Tymnet on the PDP-10. Tymshare sold a copy of the Tymnet network software to TRW, which created its own private network, TRWNET.

In the 1970s, Tymshare, which had used Digital Equipment&#x27;s operating system TOPS-10 for its PDP-10s, began independent work on the OS for their systems, called it TYMCOM-X, and implemented a file system that supported random access, paging with working sets, and spawnable processes. The OS work was done by a group of eleven people: Bill Weiher, Vance Socci, Allen Ginzburg, Karen Kolling, Art Atkinson, Gary Morgenthaler (founder of the company that produced INGRES), Todd Corenson, Murray Bowles, Randy Gobbel, Bill Soley, and Darren Price. Most Tymnet development was then done on TYMCOM-X. Also in the 1970s, Tymshare acquired the Augmentation Research Center from SRI International.

Tymes and Rinde then developed &quot;Tymnet II&quot;. Tymnet II ran in parallel with the original network, which continued to run on the Varian machines until it was phased out over a period of several years. Tymnet II&#x27;s different method of constructing virtual circuits allowed for much better scalability.

===Tymnet, Inc. spun off===
In 1976, Tymnet Inc. was spun off from Tymshare Inc. and became an FCC &quot;common carrier&quot; which allowed it greater latitude as a communications service but placed its rate-setting under regulatory review. In this model, Tymnet allowed users to connect their host computers and terminals to the network, and use the computers from remote sites or sell time on their computers to other users of the network, with Tymnet charging them for the use of the network.

===Tymshare sold to McDonnell Douglas===
;McDonnell Douglas Tymshare
In 1984 Tymnet was bought by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation as part of the acquisition of Tymshare. The company was renamed McDonnell Douglas Tymshare, and began a major reorganization. A year later, McDonnell Douglas (MD) split Tymshare into several separate operating companies: MD Network Systems Company, MD Field Service Company, MD RCS, MD &quot;xxx&quot; and many more. (This is sometimes referred to the Alphabet Soup phase of the company). By then, Tymnet had outlived its parent company, Tymshare.

McDonnell Douglas acquired Microdata and created McDonnell Douglas Information Systems Group (MDISC), expecting to turn Microdata&#x27;s desktop and server systems along with Tymshare&#x27;s servers and Tymnet data network into a major player in the Information Services market. Microdata&#x27;s systems were integrated into many parts of McDonnell Douglas, but Tymnet never was. MDC really did not seem to understand the telecommunications market. After five years, peace was breaking out in many places in the world and McDonnell Douglas sold off MDNSC and MDFSC at a profit for much needed cash.

===MDC Network Systems Company sold to British Telecom===
;BT Tymnet, BT North America, BTNA
On July 30, 1989, it was announced that British Telecom was purchasing McDonnell Douglas Network Systems Company, and McDonnell Douglas Field Service Company was being spun off as a start-up called NovaDyne. McDonnell Douglas was later acquired by Boeing. British Telecom (BT) wanted to expand and the acquisition of Tymnet which was already a worldwide data network helped to achieve that goal. On November 17, 1989 MDNSC officially became BT Tymnet with its headquarters in San Jose, California. BT brought with it the idea of continuous development with teams in America, Europe, and Asia-pacific all working together on the same projects. BT renamed the Tymnet services, Global Network Services (GNS).

British Telecom brought new life to the company with development of hardware and software for the Tymnet data network using contacts BT already had with telecommunication hardware vendors. There was also a trial of &quot;next-generation&quot; nodes scattered throughout the network, called &quot;TURBO engine nodes&quot; based on the Motorola 68000 family. In the mid to late 1980s, serious node-code development was migrated from the PDP-10s to UNIX. Sun-3 (based on the Motorola 68000) and later Sun-4 (SPARC based) workstations and servers were purchased from Sun Microsystems, though the majority of PDP-10s were still around in the early 1990s for legacy code, as well as documentation storage. Eventually, all of the code development sources were on the Sun-4s, and the development tools (NAD, etc.) had been ported to SunOS.

Another project begun a few months before the BT purchase was to migrate the Tymnet code repository from the PDP-10s to Sun systems. The new servers were dubbed the Code Generation Systems or CGS. They were initially six Sun-3/280 servers upgraded eventually to two Sun-4/690 servers for redundancy. A second pair of servers for catastrophic failover was also installed in Malvern, Pennsylvania and later moved to Norristown, Pennsylvania as part of later site consolidation efforts. After the migration, these servers managed source code and binary images for more than 6600 nodes and 38,000 customer interfaces worldwide.

Tymnet was still growing, and at several times reached its peak capacity when some of its customers held network intensive events. One of these of note was a live, on-line presentation and chat on America On-Line (AOL) with pop singer Michael Jackson. Tymnet usage statistics showed AOL&#x27;s call capacity was greater than its maximum volume for the duration of the event.

===BTNA sold/split into MCI, Concert, and BT===
====MCI, NewCo, Concert====
In 1993 BT and MCI Communications (MCI) negotiated what they called the &quot;Deal of the Century&quot;, where MCI would take ownership of the U.S.-based portions of Tymnet and they would create a joint venture called &quot;Concert&quot;. (The joint venture was called &quot;NewCo&quot; for more than a year while they decided on a name). Concert was also aligned with another acquisition of BT, called Synchordia which was headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia. Tymnet was then referred to as The Packet network, the BT/MCI network and Concert Packet-switching Services (CPS). At first, MCI only wanted to use the points of presence (POPs) that Tymnet had, because there were locations in over 150 cities in the United States, giving MCI more locations from which to provide local service. As MCI cut away at Tymnet, expecting it to die, it became a cash cow that just wouldn&#x27;t go away.

In May 1994, there were still three DEC KL-10s under TYMCOM-X. At this time, the network had approximately 5000 nodes in 30 foreign countries. A variety of protocols can be run over a single packet-switching-network, and Tymnet&#x27;s most-used protocols were X.25, asynchronous terminal and host (ATI/AHI), and SNA.

BT and Concert also continued to develop the network, and after the failure of the &quot;Turbo nodes&quot; to take off, decided to have an outside company add Tymnet protocols to existing hardware used in their Frame Relay network. Telematics International developed a subset of the Tymnet protocols to run on their ACP/PCP nodes. The Telematics nodes were connected in a mesh network (every node logically connected to every other node) via frame-relay and appeared to Tymnet as super-nodes that were directly connected to as many as 44 other super-nodes interconnecting most of Europe, Asia and the Americas as a high speed data network.

MCI took a different direction and sought to migrate the network protocols to run over TCP/IP and use SPARC technology. The supervisor technology was rewritten in C to run as standard UNIX applications under Solaris. Funding for this project was at a minimum but the Tymnet engineers believed it was a superior method and proceeded anyway.

Times were changing and the Internet and World Wide Web were becoming a practical and even important part of corporate and personal life. Tymnet technology needed improvements to keep pace with TCP/IP and other Internet protocols. Both BT and MCI decided not to compete with the Internet, but to convert their customer base to IP-based networks and technologies. However, the Tymnet network was still bringing in considerable cash — in some cases more than current IP based services—so both BT and MCI needed to keep their customers happy.

====MCI, MCI WorldCom, WorldCom vs. BT, Concert====
In 1997 talks were underway for BT to acquire MCI. The deal fell through, and in September, 1998 MCI was acquired by WorldCom after they made a better offer for the company. Actually, the WorldCom offer was nearly identical to the BT offer, but where BT planned to buy out MCI shares of stock, WorldCom offered a stock-swap, which was more attractive to the stockholders. WorldCom took control in September 1998 and dissolved the BT/MCI alliance as of October 15, 1998.

====Concert&#x27;s headquarters in Reston, Virginia====
With the alliance gone, BT and MCI WorldCom began the process of unraveling and separating their extensive voice and data communications systems.

Concert created Project Leonardo to separate the BT and MCI WorldCom voice and data networks. At times over the next five years, advancements were made or stalled due to BT and MCI management negotiating and renegotiating the terms of their contractual obligations to each other made during the alliance. At times, things came to a standstill, or decisions made were reversed, and some reversed again at a later time. Parts of the project were to migrate customers from X.25 to IP based networks, while others created a duplicate set of services so that both Concert and MCI could separately continue to run and manage their own portions of the network. Accounting data for network usage was also shared by the two companies and had to be separated before clients could be billed properly.

==== Concert and BT+AT&amp;T&#x27;s headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia ====
In 2000 BT then went searching for another alliance, and created a new Concert alliance between BT and AT&amp;T, moving the headquarters to Atlanta, Georgia. This alliance did not help the negotiations between BT and MCI WorldCom as their partners from MCI and AT&amp;T were corporate enemies. For Tymnet, the data network portion of the split, and the &quot;CPS Leonardo&quot; project, the split was never fully realized. Instead, MCI WorldCom completed their migration of services from Tymnet to IP based services in March 2003 and disconnected their supervisor nodes and their portion of the network on March 31, 2003.
BT continued to run the network using their own supervisor and other utility nodes until February 2004 when their last customer was able to move all of its customers to other access services. BT and AT&amp;T dissolved their Concert alliance on September 30, 2003 and the remaining BT assets were combined with BTNA assets into BT Americas, Inc. Sometime in early March 2004, without ceremony, BT Americas disconnected the last two remaining Tymnet supervisors from the network, effectively shutting it down.

MCI WorldCom still had a profitable segment of its business based on EDI technology. This technology used Tymnet to interface between Tandem computers using a non-standard x.25 interface and a high speed bi-synch modem used by the EDI customers. Prior to shutting down the MCI/WorldCom portion of Tymnet, they adapted the Tymnet Engine node code to permit internal connections between the x.25 interface and the high-speed modem interface without the aid of the Tymnet Supervisor. Once this was tested and deployed, they were able to shut down the rest of the MCI/WorldCom portion of Tymnet and continue to support their EDI customers. These &quot;islands&quot; of Tymnet were still running 5 years later in 2008.

====WorldCom bankruptcy====
WorldCom executives were involved in a financial scandal resulting in the CEO, Bernie Ebbers, to be ousted and later charged with violations of federal statutes. This scandal sent the stock price down to 10 cents per share, and WorldCom filed for bankruptcy. It emerged from bankruptcy renamed as MCI several months later.

====AT&amp;T sold to SBC====
On January 31, 2005, SBC Communications (SBC) announced that it would purchase AT&amp;T Corp. for more than $16 billion. Shortly thereafter, the SBC name was changed to AT&amp;T Inc. to distinguish itself from the original AT&amp;T Corp.

====MCI sold to Verizon====
On February 14, 2005, Verizon agreed to acquire MCI, formerly WorldCom, after SBC agreed to acquire AT&amp;T Corp. just a few weeks earlier.

Verizon was formed in 2000 when Bell Atlantic, one of the Regional Bell Operating Companies, merged with GTE. Prior to its transformation into Verizon, Bell Atlantic had merged with another Regional Bell Operating Company, NYNEX, in 1997.

==Tymshare SUPER BASIC==

SUPER BASIC was a compile and go implementation of a variant of the BASIC programming language for the Scientific Data Systems SDS 940 time-sharing computer system, commercialized by Tymshare around 1968.

==Tymshare PDP-10 compatible computers==
Tymshare attempted marketing a line of computer developed by Foonly, using the name &quot;Tymshare XX Series Computer Family&quot;, of which the &quot;Tymshare System XXVI&quot; was the main focus.
The Foonly F4 was remarketed as the System 26KL (another name for the Tymshare System XXVI).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7860427" start="0" end="13" title="Tymshare" label="Tymshare, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="20" end="32" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="120" end="130" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455666" start="132" end="158" title="Service Bureau Corporation" label="Service Bureau Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971172" start="163" end="175" title="National CSS" label="National CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690189" start="256" end="283" title="electronic data interchange" label="electronic data interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="833" end="839" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="932" end="947" title="BT Group" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="954" end="976" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="982" end="995" title="AT&amp;amp;T" label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1177" end="1193" title="General Electric#Computing" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="1401" end="1418" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391523" start="1456" end="1463" title="SDS 940" label="SDS 940"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892120" start="1590" end="1617" title="Berkeley Timesharing System" label="Berkeley Timesharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q984038" start="1662" end="1673" title="IBM 7030 Stretch" label="IBM Stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q45740653" start="1685" end="1694" title="Ann Hardy" label="Ann Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878385" start="2034" end="2052" title="General Automation" label="General Automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8179096" start="3344" end="3358" title="Interdata 7/32 and 8/32" label="Interdata 7/32"/>
<link wikidata="Q779722" start="3667" end="3682" title="Crédit Lyonnais" label="Credit Lyonnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568240" start="4606" end="4612" title="PDP-10" label="PDP-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q967620" start="4669" end="4672" title="TRW Inc." label="TRW"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4713" end="4719" title="TRWNET" label="TRWNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="4803" end="4810" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5132" end="5149" title="Gary Morgenthaler" label="Gary Morgenthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q60463" start="5188" end="5194" title="Ingres (database)" label="INGRES"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="5363" end="5391" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="5397" end="5414" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="5826" end="5829" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="6330" end="6359" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327637" start="6836" end="6845" title="Microdata Corporation" label="Microdata"/>
<link wikidata="Q667808" start="8543" end="8557" title="Motorola 68000" label="Motorola 68000"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="8655" end="8659" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050358" start="8661" end="8666" title="Sun-3" label="Sun-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q841441" start="8707" end="8712" title="Sun-4" label="Sun-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="8772" end="8788" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208460" start="9034" end="9039" title="SunOS" label="SunOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="9864" end="9879" title="AOL" label="America On-Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="9902" end="9917" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089784" start="10134" end="10152" title="MCI Communications" label="MCI Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="11269" end="11273" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q242506" start="11538" end="11549" title="Frame Relay" label="Frame Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q273190" start="12070" end="12075" title="SPARC" label="SPARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="12176" end="12183" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="12337" end="12345" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="12350" end="12364" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="13019" end="13027" title="MCI Inc." label="WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="13453" end="13455" title="BT Group" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="13460" end="13472" title="MCI Inc." label="MCI WorldCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158497" start="14512" end="14519" title="Concert Communications Services" label="Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783846" start="15706" end="15722" title="Tandem Computers" label="Tandem computers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16689" end="16707" title="History of AT&amp;amp;T#1995–2000: Changes in the company" label="SBC Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="16747" end="16761" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corp." label="AT&amp;amp;T Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="16983" end="16986" title="MCI Inc." label="MCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="17109" end="17122" title="Verizon Communications" label="Bell Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356518" start="17135" end="17168" title="Regional Bell Operating Company" label="Regional Bell Operating Companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759492" start="17182" end="17185" title="GTE" label="GTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956079" start="17300" end="17305" title="NYNEX" label="NYNEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156373" start="17361" end="17375" title="Compile and go system" label="compile and go"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="17411" end="17437" title="BASIC" label="BASIC programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391523" start="17470" end="17477" title="SDS 940" label="SDS 940"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="17478" end="17490" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465709" start="17651" end="17657" title="Foonly" label="Foonly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141699" wikidata="Q4969358" url="?curid=1141699" title="British-American Project">
<text>The British-American Project (BAP) is an organisation intended to strengthen links between the United Kingdom and the United States. BAP operates on a not-for-profit basis, funded through its membership and support from corporate partners. It was originally named the British-American Project for the Successor Generation.

==Goals==
Established in 1985, BAP was created to help maintain and enrich the long-standing relationship between the United Kingdom and the United States. The Project was the brainchild of Nick Butler, an economist at BP, who at that time was also a prospective Labour Party parliamentary candidate. Along with others in both countries who viewed the special relationship favorably, he had become concerned about a growing tide of anti-American sentiment among his generation in the UK. Butler&#x27;s response was to propose a series of conferences, developing relationships between the participants and broadening understanding.

A US BAP organiser describes the BAP network as committed to &quot;grooming leaders&quot; while promoting &quot;the leading global role that [the US and Britain] continue to play&quot;.

==Organisation==
The British-American Project is affiliated with the Johns Hopkins University&#x27;s Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS). BAP is a non-profit, funded by its members and donations from corporate partners.

Nick Cohen, writing in &quot;The Observer&quot; in 1999, criticised the scheme on the grounds that it encouraged the adoption in Europe of policy from the United States.

Andy Beckett, writing in &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2004, said of the organisation &quot;You won&#x27;t have heard of the British-American Project, but its members include some of the most powerful men and women in the UK&quot;. He writes that in the work of the organisation &quot;a process of political education can be discerned of which J Howard Pew would have approved&quot;, and that &quot;American notions such as less regulated capitalism, a smaller &#x27;enabling state&#x27; and a world kept safe by the Pentagon came to be regarded as sensible, inevitable&quot;. He notes that people with military experience are important in BAP.

==Notable current and former members==
===Fellows===
====Politicians====
* Douglas Alexander, former Labour MP
* Rushanara Ali, Labour MP
* Stephen Dorrell, former Conservative MP and Liberal Democrat
* Steve Hilton, political commentator and former political adviser
* David Miliband, former Labour MP
* Peter Mandelson, Baron Mandelson, former Labour MP, life peer
* Mo Mowlam, former Labour MP
* Geoff Mulgan, academic and former Director of the Prime Minister&#x27;s Strategy Unit
* Jonathan Powell (Tony Blair&#x27;s chief of staff)
* George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen, former Labour MP
* Patricia Scotland, diplomat, barrister and Labour life peer
* Alan Sked, founder of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP)
* Elizabeth Symons, Baroness Symons of Vernham Dean, trade unionist and Labour life peer
* Matthew Taylor (political strategist), former head of the Number 10 Policy Unit, Chief Executive of the NHS Confederation
* David Willetts, former Conservative MP, life peer
* Kate Forbes, Deputy First Minister of Scotland and Scottish National Party MSP
* Anas Sarwar, Scottish Labour Party Leader
* Diana Villiers Negroponte, trade lawyer and academic

====Journalists====
* Yasmin Alibhai-Brown, &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;The London Evening Standard&quot;
* George Brock, &quot;The Times&quot;
* Diane Coyle, &quot;The Independent&quot;
* Evan Davis, BBC
* Daniel Drezner, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;The New Republic&quot;, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, &quot;Foreign Policy&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Slate&quot;, &quot;Tech Central Station&quot;, among others
* Daniel Franklin, &quot;The Economist&quot;
* Jane Hill, BBC
* Isabel Hilton, &quot;The Independent&quot;, &quot;The Guardian&quot;, BBC
* Frederick Kempe, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;
* Charles Moore, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Sunday Telegraph&quot;, &quot;The Spectator&quot;
* James Naughtie, BBC
* Jeremy Paxman, BBC
* Rowan Pelling, &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;
* Trevor Phillips, BBC
* Caroline St John-Brooks, &quot;The Times Educational Supplement&quot;, &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;
* Joel Stein, &quot;LA Times&quot;

====Arts and media====
* Margaret Hill, BBC current affairs producer
* Benjamin Zephaniah, poet

====Other====
* Janet Bloomfield, peace and disarmament campaigner
* Shami Chakrabarti, Former director, Liberty
* Caroline, Lady Dalmeny, former defence policy analyst
* Julia Hobsbawm, writer and public speaker
* Hardeep Singh Kohli British presenter and comedian

==References==
==External links==
* British-American Project (official website)
* Transatlantic Elite - British American Project for the successor generation &quot;collection of articles from various publications&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4969358" start="4" end="28" title="British-American Project" label="British-American Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="95" end="109" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="118" end="131" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969358" start="268" end="321" title="British-American Project" label="British-American Project for the Successor Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904466" start="403" end="429" title="Special Relationship (United Kingdom–United States)" label="long-standing relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026841" start="514" end="525" title="Nick Butler" label="Nick Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q152057" start="543" end="545" title="BP" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="587" end="599" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="1212" end="1236" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="1244" end="1298" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353423" start="1390" end="1400" title="Nick Cohen" label="Nick Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="1419" end="1431" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26465283" start="1561" end="1573" title="Andy Beckett" label="Andy Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1592" end="1604" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15438606" start="1903" end="1915" title="J. Howard Pew" label="J Howard Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q259106" start="2280" end="2297" title="Douglas Alexander" label="Douglas Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q259423" start="2318" end="2331" title="Rushanara Ali" label="Rushanara Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q300349" start="2345" end="2360" title="Stephen Dorrell" label="Stephen Dorrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498953" start="2408" end="2420" title="Steve Hilton" label="Steve Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q272670" start="2475" end="2489" title="David Miliband" label="David Miliband"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="2510" end="2542" title="Peter Mandelson, Baron Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson, Baron Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262727" start="2574" end="2583" title="Mo Mowlam" label="Mo Mowlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993665" start="2604" end="2616" title="Geoff Mulgan" label="Geoff Mulgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243286" start="2654" end="2689" title="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Strategy Unit" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s Strategy Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183438" start="2692" end="2707" title="Jonathan Powell (aide)" label="Jonathan Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333056" start="2745" end="2792" title="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen" label="George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q194713" start="2813" end="2830" title="Patricia Scotland" label="Patricia Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707775" start="2875" end="2884" title="Alan Sked" label="Alan Sked"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="2901" end="2934" title="United Kingdom Independence Party" label="United Kingdom Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="2936" end="2940" title="UKIP" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331326" start="2944" end="2993" title="Elizabeth Symons, Baroness Symons of Vernham Dean" label="Elizabeth Symons, Baroness Symons of Vernham Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791304" start="3033" end="3070" title="Matthew Taylor (political strategist)" label="Matthew Taylor (political strategist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069480" start="3091" end="3112" title="Number 10 Policy Unit" label="Number 10 Policy Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954119" start="3137" end="3154" title="NHS Confederation" label="NHS Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q266064" start="3157" end="3171" title="David Willetts" label="David Willetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039479" start="3209" end="3220" title="Kate Forbes" label="Kate Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261035" start="3222" end="3255" title="Deputy First Minister of Scotland" label="Deputy First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="3260" end="3283" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q478812" start="3290" end="3301" title="Anas Sarwar" label="Anas Sarwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179541" start="3303" end="3324" title="Scottish Labour Party" label="Scottish Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271332" start="3334" end="3359" title="Diana Villiers Negroponte" label="Diana Villiers Negroponte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049825" start="3410" end="3430" title="Yasmin Alibhai-Brown" label="Yasmin Alibhai-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537268" start="3503" end="3515" title="George Brock (journalist)" label="George Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q996967" start="3541" end="3552" title="Diane Coyle" label="Diane Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415364" start="3584" end="3594" title="Evan Davis" label="Evan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217004" start="3602" end="3616" title="Daniel Drezner" label="Daniel Drezner"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251427" start="3842" end="3857" title="Daniel Franklin" label="Daniel Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810095" start="3887" end="3896" title="Jane Hill" label="Jane Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077636" start="3904" end="3917" title="Isabel Hilton" label="Isabel Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498196" start="3980" end="3995" title="Frederick Kempe" label="Frederick Kempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081057" start="4035" end="4048" title="Charles Moore (journalist)" label="Charles Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140302" start="4145" end="4159" title="James Naughtie" label="James Naughtie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="4167" end="4180" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Jeremy Paxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371805" start="4188" end="4201" title="Rowan Pelling" label="Rowan Pelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839374" start="4237" end="4252" title="Trevor Phillips" label="Trevor Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045227" start="4260" end="4283" title="Caroline St John-Brooks" label="Caroline St John-Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180265" start="4362" end="4372" title="Joel Stein" label="Joel Stein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4421" end="4434" title="Margaret Hill (journalist)" label="Margaret Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q561142" start="4467" end="4485" title="Benjamin Zephaniah" label="Benjamin Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153211" start="4509" end="4525" title="Janet Bloomfield" label="Janet Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487533" start="4562" end="4579" title="Shami Chakrabarti" label="Shami Chakrabarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956774" start="4608" end="4630" title="Caroline, Lady Dalmeny" label="Caroline, Lady Dalmeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23409723" start="4664" end="4678" title="Julia Hobsbawm" label="Julia Hobsbawm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655834" start="4708" end="4727" title="Hardeep Singh Kohli" label="Hardeep Singh Kohli"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141701" wikidata="Q3894926" url="?curid=1141701" title="Santa and the Three Bears">
<text>Santa and the Three Bears is a 1970 animated feature film, which aired in syndication on television regularly during the holiday season.

== Background ==
The film was originally pitched to TV networks, which rejected it as it lacked a villain, but was then shown in theaters instead. This special has been rerun on TBN, USA Network, FOX Family (now Freeform), and on KTLA channel 5 in Los Angeles. It also received a &quot;blue ribbon&quot; award for Best Family Film at the San Francisco International Film Festival.

The live-action sequences, directed by Barry Mahon, at the beginning and end of the film are often edited out in television reruns. The edited version was later released on VHS in 1992 by Kids Klassics, and distributed by GoodTimes Home Video.

== Plot summary ==
Two young bears, Nikomi and Chinook, know nothing of Christmas until the local park ranger tells them about the legend, and they become curious to meet Santa Claus. Their mother, Nana, is preparing for Winter hibernation and cynically tells her children there is no Santa, but they are determined to believe. Mother finds it impossible to begin their sleep, since the young cubs wish to stay awake until Santa arrives.

== Voice cast ==
* Hal Smith as Grandfather, Santa and Mr. Ranger
* Jean Vander Pyl (credited as Jean van der Pyl) as Nana
* Christina Ferra-Gilmore (credited as Annette Ferra) as Nikomi
* Bobby Riha as Chinook
* Joyce Taylor
* Ken Engels
* Beth Goldfarb as Beth
* Brian Hobbs as Brian
* Lenard Keith
* Kathy Lemmon
* Roxanne Poole
* Michael Rodriguez

== Live action segments ==
The theatrical release of the film contains live-action sequences directed by director Barry Mahon, running for around four minutes in total. These sequences feature actor Hal Smith and two young children (Brian Hobbs and Beth Goldfarb) sitting in a cabin and conversing by the fireplace and Christmas tree, and a short montage of mechanical toys, Christmas decorations, and a pet kitten, during the opening and closing credits. The film has been also released by Modern Sound Pictures Inc. with the live-action sequences cut.

== Legacy ==
Bill Hutten and Tony Love, the film&#x27;s animators, created another Christmas television special in 1983 named &quot;The Christmas Tree Train&quot;, also starring a bear cub alongside a fox cub and a park ranger, which led to a TV series called &quot;Buttons &amp; Rusty&quot;.

The film is currently in the public domain and has seen numerous releases on DVD (mostly the theatrical cut from Super8 film masters) by Genius Entertainment/Classic Media, Mill Creek Entertainment and many other public domain companies.

Mary Jo Pehl and Bridget Nelson of the cult series &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; spoofed the film on RiffTrax December 22, 2023.

== See also ==
* List of American films of 1970
* List of Christmas films

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="36" end="44" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="316" end="319" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="TBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="321" end="332" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="350" end="358" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="Freeform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140873" start="368" end="372" title="KTLA" label="KTLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="386" end="397" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315947" start="424" end="435" title="blue ribbon" label="blue ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q579634" start="476" end="517" title="San Francisco International Film Festival" label="San Francisco International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885774" start="559" end="570" title="Barry Mahon" label="Barry Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="693" end="696" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582413" start="708" end="721" title="Kids Klassics" label="Kids Klassics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582413" start="742" end="762" title="GoodTimes Home Video" label="GoodTimes Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="837" end="846" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="936" end="947" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713545" start="1223" end="1232" title="Hal Smith (actor)" label="Hal Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174968" start="1272" end="1287" title="Jean Vander Pyl" label="Jean Vander Pyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885774" start="1671" end="1682" title="Barry Mahon" label="Barry Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2205" end="2215" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479935" start="2327" end="2338" title="park ranger" label="park ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584326" start="2645" end="2657" title="Mary Jo Pehl" label="Mary Jo Pehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q913846" start="2662" end="2676" title="Bridget Nelson" label="Bridget Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="2702" end="2730" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="2757" end="2765" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561530" start="2803" end="2833" title="List of American films of 1970" label="List of American films of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580173" start="2836" end="2859" title="List of Christmas films" label="List of Christmas films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141702" wikidata="Q5557918" url="?curid=1141702" title="Giacomo Raffaelli (artist)">
<text>Giacomo Raffaelli (February 2, 1753 - October 11, 1836) was an Italian mosaicist from Rome. He is the author of a copy of Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Last Supper&quot; commissioned by Napoleon I. The mosaic resides at Vienna in the Minoritenkirche.

== Sources ==
* Massimo Alfieri, &quot;New Notes on Giacomo Raffaelli and Michelangelo Barberi&quot;In:&quot;Micromosaics: The Gilbert Collection&quot;, by Jeanette Hanisee Gabriel, Anna Maria Massinelli, Judy Rudoe, Massimo Alfieri, Philip Wilson Publishers, London 2000, pp. 263-279

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5557918" start="0" end="17" title="Giacomo Raffaelli (artist)" label="Giacomo Raffaelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="71" end="77" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="86" end="90" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="122" end="139" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q128910" start="153" end="164" title="The Last Supper (Leonardo)" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="187" end="197" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="221" end="227" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q688468" start="235" end="250" title="Minoritenkirche (Vienna)" label="Minoritenkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q36950695" start="458" end="468" title="Judy Rudoe" label="Judy Rudoe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141714" wikidata="Q2155471" url="?curid=1141714" title="River Frome, Bristol">
<text>The Frome , historically the Froom, is a river that rises in Dodington Park, South Gloucestershire and flows southwesterly through Bristol to join the river Avon. It is approximately long, and the mean flow at Frenchay is . The name &quot;Frome&quot; is shared with several other rivers in South West England and means &#x27;fair, fine, brisk&#x27;. The river is known locally in east Bristol as the &quot;Danny&quot;.

As with many urban rivers, the Frome has suffered from pollution, but several stretches run through parks and reserves that sustain a range of wildlife. The river&#x27;s power was harnessed by many watermills, and the river mouth area was developed as shipyards by the eighteenth century. As the city of Bristol developed in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, flooding became a major problem, remedied by the construction of storm drains and diversions.

==Etymology==
The river&#x27;s name derives from the British Celtic, meaning &#x27;fair, fine, brisk’. It is not to be confused with other rivers in the south west of England with the same name. The historic spelling, Froom, is still sometimes used and this is how the name of the river is pronounced (as in broom). In the nineteenth and twentieth century, the River Frome became known in East Bristol as the &quot;Danny&quot;. The derivation of this name is uncertain, some suggest a nickname, taken from the &quot;Blue Danube Waltz&quot;, others that it was derived from the Australian slang word &quot;dunny&quot;.

==Course==
 long, the River Frome rises in the grounds of Dodington Park in the Cotswolds of South Gloucestershire, flows through Chipping Sodbury in a northwesterly direction through Yate, and is then joined by the Nibley brook at Nibley and the Mayshill brook at Algars Manor near Iron Acton, both on the left. The river turns south towards the next settlement of Frampton Cotterell, where it is met by the Ladden brook on the right bank. Continuing southwards between Yate and Winterbourne, the Frome crosses Winterbourne Down, to Damsons Bridge where the Folly brook tributary merges on the left bank.

The Bradley brook joins on the right bank at Hambrook just before the river passes underneath the M4 motorway and, also on the right, the Stoke brook (or Hambrook) joins at Bromley Heath. After passing under the A4174 the Frome enters a more urban environment, passing between Frenchay on the right and Bromley Heath and Downend on the left. Turning in a more southwesterly direction the river enters Oldbury Court estate, a city park also known as Vassal&#x27;s, where it is joined by the first of two Fishponds brooks both on the left. The river then passes Snuff Mills, entering a steep valley at Stapleton, where the second Fishponds brook joins, then passing Eastville park, where it feeds the former boating lake. Due to the steep valley and flood risk, the land immediately alongside the river between Frenchay and Eastville Park has not been developed, and is largely managed as public parkland, with the Frome Valley Greenway cycling and walking path following the river through a woodland landscape.

The river then flows under the M32 motorway and parallels its course for a while before disappearing into an underground culvert at Eastville Sluices, upstream of Baptist Mills. It is joined underground by Coombe brook on the left and Horfield brook on the right. A brief stretch in St Jude&#x27;s is uncovered, alongside Riverside Park.

The Frome originally joined the Avon somewhere on Welsh Back downstream of Bristol Bridge, and an offshoot formed part of the city defences. In the 13th century, the offshoot was arched over or infilled and the river itself was diverted into St Augustine&#x27;s Reach (also known as St Augustine&#x27;s Trench), an artificial branch of the docks constructed through marshland belonging to St Augustine&#x27;s Abbey (now Bristol Cathedral) as part of major port improvement works. From the mid-19th to the early 20th centuries the lower mile of the river was gradually culverted, so the river now runs underneath Broad Weir, Fairfax Street and Rupert Street.

To reduce sewage pollution and silting in the harbour, a new culvert was constructed in 1825 to redirect much of the flow from the Frome into the New Cut of the River Avon. Known as Mylne&#x27;s Culvert, this runs from the site of the former Stone Bridge, near the junction of Rupert Street and Christmas Street, and follows the course of Marsh Street, Prince Street and Wapping Road, passing below the Floating Harbour in an iron siphon pipe. It discharges into the New Cut close to Gaol Ferry Bridge. The original culverted section between Stone Bridge and St Augustine&#x27;s Reach remains in use as a flood relief channel.

===Navigation===
From Damsons Bridge (Grid Reference ) to Snuff Mills () the river is navigable, but only by canoe (kayak) though some portaging may be required. It&#x27;s also possible to start at Moorend Bridge () or Frenchay Bridge (). Some of the Bradley brook has also been kayaked.

==History==

Between Frenchay and Stapleton the river drops nearly , and as a result there a number of corn and other mills were established to harness the water power. They were undershot mills with no mill ponds. Today a wheel at Snuff Mills is preserved and the mill buildings of Cleeve Mill survive as a private residence.

The Frome originally flowed east of its present-day course from Stone Bridge (now under the paved concourse at the &quot;bow&quot; of Electricity House) with a probable moat along the line of St Stephen&#x27;s Street (formerly called Fisher Lane and Pylle End) and the old curving section of Baldwin Street (now a continuation of St Stephens&#x27;s Street) and the natural river or river delta itself actually flowing farther south, all joining the Avon at Welsh Back at or south of Bristol Bridge. The narrow strip of high land rising some 45 feet above high water between the two rivers was a naturally strategic place for the Saxon settlement which became the town of Brigstowe, later the walled centre of the city, to develop. When Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester, rebuilt Bristol Castle, from around 1110, an arm of the Frome was taken off the natural river (at present-day Broad Weir) to form the castle moat, so that the town and castle were entirely surrounded by water.

In the mid-thirteenth century the harbour, probably today&#x27;s Welsh Back had become so busy that it was decided to divert the Frome into a new course through the marsh belonging to St Augustine&#x27;s Abbey into a &quot;Deep Ditch&quot; that was dug from around a line opposite the Hippodrome of today to join the Avon opposite the present MShed. The section of meandering river back to the site of today&#x27;s culverted Stonebridge was also widened out as part of the new ocean going Frome harbour. This has been the line of the mouth of the river Frome ever since, known as St Augustine&#x27;s Trench or Reach.

The Floating Harbour was constructed in 1809, isolating the Avon and Frome from tides between Cumberland Basin and Totterdown Lock. The increasing use of the Frome as an open sewer combined with the loss of the scouring action of the tides meant that it was now becoming a health hazard and in 1828 it was again diverted, with a mitre floodgate at StoneBridge, channelling the main flow through Mylne&#x27;s Culvert, under the quays and under the bed of the floating harbour at Prince Street Bridge to the emerge in the tidal Avon New Cut, to the east of what is now Gaol Ferry Bridge, locally known as God&#x27;s Garden in the 21st century. Up to 1857 the Frome was open along its whole length, and both arms crossed by some 13 bridges. During the mid nineteenth century, a succession of culverts were built, eventually from Wade Street Bridge in St Jude&#x27;s to Stone Bridge, covering this stretch completely: Rupert Street, Fairfax Street and Broad Weir now run over the remaining culverted section. St Augustine&#x27;s Trench from Stone Bridge to the location of the former Draw Bridge (near the western end of Baldwin Street) was covered over between May 1892 and February 1893 and the section between that point and the foot of College Green was covered over in 1938.

===Shipbuilding===
Shipbuilding on the River Frome may have been carried out for centuries, with docks on the northern part of Narrow Quay (St Clement&#x27;s Dock and Aldworth&#x27;s Dock) being archaeologically excavated. By the seventeenth century, Francis Baylie built warships on the east bank at Narrow Quay. Tombs&#x27; Dock (later known as Green&#x27;s Dock) was built opposite at Dean&#x27;s Marsh in 1760, on the west bank of the Frome and was later lengthened to , the builders including FW Green, and two additional docks were built by at Teast&#x27;s Docks in 1790; a dry dock later known as Albert Dock and a mud dock at Mansfield&#x27;s point, the latter filled in by 1829. The last shipbuilder closed in 1883.

==Hydrology and flooding==
The mean flow as measured at Frampton Cottrell is , with a peak on 30 October 2000 of and a minimum on 10 August 1990 of . The mean flow as measured at Frenchay is , with a peak on 10 July 1968 of and a minimum on 9 August 1976 of .

The Environment Agency in 2008 classified the river as Grade A (highest grade) for chemical content, but the biology was assessed at C grade (mid). Measurements were taken over a stretch of river between Bradley brook and Broomhill.
Where it passes through Bristol the river was prone to flooding, but the Northern Stormwater Interceptor, running from Eastville Sluices to the River Avon downstream of Clifton Suspension Bridge, has since been constructed to control this. At Wade Street, St Judes, the river enters an underground culvert, emerging at what Bristolians call &quot;The Centre&quot; (formerly the &#x27;Tramways Centre&#x27;), but only when there is a risk of flooding. The river is otherwise channelled through Mylne&#x27;s Culvert into the River Avon at a point between Bathurst Basin and Gaol Ferry Bridge. Three further flood relief tunnels- Castle Ditch, Fosseway and Castle Green Tunnel - run under Castle Park in central Bristol to carry excess flows into the Floating Harbour.

Major floods have included Mina Road, St Werburghs and Wellington Road in October 1882; Eastville, St Werburghs and Broadmead in 1936 and 1937; Eastville Park and nearby due to melting snow in 1947; 1968 Bristol Rovers F.C. old ground at Eastville. The Broadmead area still remains at risk of flooding in severe weather conditions.

In December 2011, a kayaker was killed after capsizing in the flooded river at Snuff Mills weir in Frenchay during a night-time paddle.

==Frome Valley Walkway==
The Frome Valley Walkway is a public footpath, long, that runs almost the entire length of the river from Old Sodbury to Bristol. A guide pamphlet has been published. The walkway was created by a partnership between local authorities, the Environment Agency, wildlife organisations and location action groups, including Avon Biodiversity Partnership, Avon Invasive Weeds Forum, Avon Wildlife Trust, Bristol City Council, Bristol Naturalists&#x27; Society and South Gloucestershire Council. Regular events include clearing of invasive species and guided walks.

==Natural history==
The Frome valley supports a range of wildlife and plants, passing through or near to a number of nature reserves and parks, including Goose Green fields, Chill Wood, Cleeve Valley, Oldbury Court park and Eastville Park. Notable species include grey wagtails, wild service trees, dippers and several species of bats. One of the last British populations of the endangered native white-clawed crayfish in the Bristol area was found in the river, but became extinct in 2008.

==See also==

*Other Rivers Frome

==Works cited==

==Notes==
==External links==
* Environment Agency video of the underground river</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2155471" start="4" end="9" title="River Frome, Bristol" label="Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155471" start="29" end="34" title="River Frome, Bristol" label="Froom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287943" start="61" end="75" title="Dodington Park" label="Dodington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19711" start="151" end="161" title="River Avon (Bristol)" label="river Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502687" start="210" end="218" title="Frenchay" label="Frenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="290" end="308" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175194" start="433" end="444" title="urban river" label="urban river"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="475" end="484" title="Water pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="618" end="627" title="watermill" label="watermill"/>
<link wikidata="Q190928" start="672" end="680" title="shipyard" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="850" end="861" title="storm drain" label="storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="933" end="947" title="Brythonic languages" label="British Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1013" end="1025" title="Frome (disambiguation)#Rivers" label="other rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1047" end="1054" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q482621" start="1396" end="1413" title="The Blue Danube" label="Blue Danube Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824114" start="1457" end="1473" title="Australian English vocabulary" label="Australian slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q153938" start="1485" end="1490" title="dunny" label="dunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287943" start="1557" end="1571" title="Dodington Park" label="Dodington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="1579" end="1588" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369280" start="1592" end="1613" title="South Gloucestershire" label="South Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q666295" start="1629" end="1645" title="Chipping Sodbury" label="Chipping Sodbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025095" start="1683" end="1687" title="Yate" label="Yate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024225" start="1731" end="1737" title="Nibley, South Gloucestershire" label="Nibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q431822" start="1865" end="1883" title="Frampton Cotterell" label="Frampton Cotterell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215896" start="1979" end="1991" title="Winterbourne, Gloucestershire" label="Winterbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026432" start="2011" end="2028" title="Winterbourne Down, Gloucestershire" label="Winterbourne Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126359" start="2151" end="2159" title="Hambrook" label="Hambrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638174" start="2204" end="2215" title="M4 motorway" label="M4 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649276" start="2318" end="2323" title="A4174" label="A4174"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502687" start="2383" end="2391" title="Frenchay" label="Frenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303097" start="2409" end="2422" title="Bromley Heath" label="Bromley Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303097" start="2427" end="2434" title="Downend, South Gloucestershire" label="Downend"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809662" start="2507" end="2520" title="Oldbury Court" label="Oldbury Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065334" start="2531" end="2540" title="Parks of Bristol" label="city park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548827" start="2666" end="2677" title="Snuff Mills" label="Snuff Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600478" start="2706" end="2715" title="Stapleton, Bristol" label="Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809340" start="3148" end="3160" title="M32 motorway" label="M32 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857661" start="3280" end="3293" title="Baptist Mills" label="Baptist Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593871" start="3400" end="3414" title="St Jude&amp;#x27;s, Bristol" label="St Jude&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968819" start="3531" end="3545" title="Bristol Bridge" label="Bristol Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="3822" end="3831" title="marshland" label="marshland"/>
<link wikidata="Q917917" start="3845" end="3870" title="Bristol Cathedral" label="St Augustine&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="4024" end="4031" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967305" start="4781" end="4795" title="British national grid reference system" label="Grid Reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548827" start="4801" end="4812" title="Snuff Mills" label="Snuff Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="4878" end="4887" title="portage" label="portaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502687" start="5053" end="5061" title="Frenchay" label="Frenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600478" start="5066" end="5075" title="Stapleton, Bristol" label="Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5211" end="5220" title="Water wheel#Undershot wheel" label="undershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712253" start="5235" end="5244" title="mill pond" label="mill pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548827" start="5264" end="5275" title="Snuff Mills" label="Snuff Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968819" start="5843" end="5857" title="Bristol Bridge" label="Bristol Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q462997" start="6096" end="6126" title="Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester" label="Robert, 1st Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968836" start="6136" end="6150" title="Bristol Castle" label="Bristol Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q917917" start="6523" end="6548" title="Bristol Cathedral" label="St Augustine&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26874" start="6961" end="6977" title="Bristol Harbour" label="Floating Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193841" start="7051" end="7067" title="Cumberland Basin (Bristol)" label="Cumberland Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="8253" end="8265" title="Shipbuilding" label="Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480162" start="8485" end="8499" title="Francis Baylie" label="Francis Baylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="8506" end="8513" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="8542" end="8546" title="Quay" label="Quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124282" start="8560" end="8564" title="Dock (maritime)" label="Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603200" start="8732" end="8740" title="FW Green" label="FW Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659784" start="8784" end="8789" title="Sydenham Teast" label="Teast"/>
<link wikidata="Q811177" start="8814" end="8822" title="dry dock" label="dry dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262576" start="9527" end="9558" title="Northern Stormwater Interceptor, Bristol" label="Northern Stormwater Interceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="9752" end="9759" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="9778" end="9785" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721919" start="9801" end="9811" title="The Centre, Bristol" label="The Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050210" start="10140" end="10151" title="Castle Park, Bristol" label="Castle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726539" start="10259" end="10271" title="St Werburghs" label="St Werburghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330972" start="10309" end="10318" title="Eastville, Bristol" label="Eastville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10337" end="10346" title="Bristol city centre#Broadmead" label="Broadmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065334" start="10365" end="10379" title="Parks of Bristol" label="Eastville Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q48925" start="10425" end="10444" title="Bristol Rovers F.C." label="Bristol Rovers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="10574" end="10579" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505741" start="10720" end="10740" title="Frome Valley Walkway" label="Frome Valley Walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q776711" start="10822" end="10833" title="Old Sodbury" label="Old Sodbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="10837" end="10844" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="11241" end="11257" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q201316" start="11541" end="11553" title="grey wagtail" label="grey wagtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q159558" start="11561" end="11573" title="Sorbus domestica" label="service tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q201831" start="11576" end="11583" title="White-throated dipper" label="dippers"/>
<link wikidata="Q966376" start="11674" end="11695" title="Austropotamobius pallipes" label="white-clawed crayfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q442270" start="11790" end="11802" title="Frome (disambiguation)" label="Rivers Frome"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141726" wikidata="Q2066254" url="?curid=1141726" title="Something Is Out There">
<text>Something Is Out There is a 1988 American science fiction television miniseries that aired on NBC, and a weekly series that followed in the fall of 1988, which lasted from October to December 1988.

==Plot summary==
Jack Breslin (Joseph Cortese) is a police officer investigating brutal murders in which organs have been removed from the victims with (by human standards) surgically impossible speed. He learns that the crimes are being committed by a monstrous alien insectoid prisoner known as a xenomorph, possessing shape-shifting and physical possession abilities, who has escaped from an alien prison starship passing by the solar system, and he teams up with a beautiful medical officer from that ship, Ta&#x27;Ra (Maryam d&#x27;Abo), to track down the villain. Ta&#x27;Ra has assorted superhuman abilities, including telepathy and superhuman agility, which come in handy during the mission.

==Cast==
* Joe Cortese as Jack Breslin
* Maryam d&#x27;Abo as Ta&#x27;Ra
* George Dzundza as Frank Dileo
* Gregory Sierra as Victor Maldonado
* Kim Delaney as Mandy Estabrook
* John Putch as Wendle
* Robert Webber as Commissioner Estabrook
* Earl Billings as Coroner
* Michael DeLuise as Punk

==Notes==
Originally a miniseries, it drew high ratings for NBC and critics noted the chemistry between Jack and Ta&#x27;Ra as one of its high points. One week after its ratings success, Brandon Tartikoff announced it would become a weekly series. 13 episodes were ordered. &quot;Something Is Out There&quot; fared poorly opposite the very successful &quot;Dallas&quot; and the show was later moved to compete with &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; where ratings only worsened. The series was canceled after only six one-hour episodes were broadcast, with two additional episodes produced but not broadcast at the time except in isolated cases in the US.

Due to its short run, the series is not often found in syndication, but the Sci-Fi Channel did include it as part of a rotation of short-lived series, including broadcasting the previously unaired episodes. An edited down version of the miniseries has aired as a syndicated television movie.

The one-hour episodes also appear occasionally at Crackle&#x27;s website and on the app.

==Development==
Originally conceived by Frank Lupo in 1987 with the title &quot;Invader&quot;, NBC ordered a four-hour mini-series for broadcast on May 8, 1988 with a budget of $7.5 million. Shooting took 41 days on locations in Los Angeles and Australia.

Producers John Ashley and Frank Lupo decided to alter the program&#x27;s concept to cope with the comparatively smaller budget of the weekly series. &quot;Things definitely change fast when a mini-series or movie becomes a weekly series,&quot; said Ashley. &quot;It&#x27;s great when you&#x27;ve got four hours, $7.5 million and the talents of Rick Baker and John Dykstra to play around with. But what happens when you&#x27;re suddenly cut to a million per episode budget, don&#x27;t have the talents of Baker or Dykstra and have to take the mini-series concept to the next level while turning out an &quot;hour&quot; a week? What happens is that you make changes.&quot;

It was decided to focus the show on the relationship between Jack and Ta&#x27;Ra, on Ta&#x27;Ra&#x27;s special abilities and to reject a &quot;monster of the week&quot; approach. Ta&#x27;Ra, who was later revealed to be from a distant planet called Zeton, chooses to stay on Earth posing as Jack&#x27;s cousin. The show strayed from its science-fiction origins with supernatural stories featuring telekinesis and telepathy.

&quot;In the early episodes, we felt we had pulled our reins in too far. We discovered that many people were expecting an alien every week, because of the mini-series, and were being disappointed,&quot; said Ashley in an interview with Starlog during filming of the eighth episode. &quot;What we were giving them just wasn&#x27;t working. So, we took a step back and looked at what elements made the mini-series work and made the later episodes along the lines of where the show &quot;should&quot; have gone. We went back to basics. We brought the creature from the mini-series back for a two-part episode, gave Ta&#x27;Ra some additional powers and made the show more science fictional in nature.&quot;

The changes were not enough to draw audience members back however, and &quot;Something Is Out There&quot; was eventually cancelled.

==Episodes==
* Something Is Out There: (Two-part miniseries) Air Date:5/8 and 5/9/88.

===Series===
==References==

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="33" end="41" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="42" end="57" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="69" end="79" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="94" end="97" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282277" start="230" end="244" title="Joseph Cortese" label="Joseph Cortese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003852" start="607" end="615" title="starship" label="starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q262674" start="722" end="739" title="Maryam d&amp;#x27;Abo" label="Maryam d&amp;#x27;Abo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="825" end="834" title="telepathy" label="telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282277" start="911" end="922" title="Joe Cortese" label="Joe Cortese"/>
<link wikidata="Q262674" start="941" end="958" title="Maryam d&amp;#x27;Abo" label="Maryam d&amp;#x27;Abo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164624" start="975" end="989" title="George Dzundza" label="George Dzundza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545410" start="1007" end="1021" title="Gregory Sierra" label="Gregory Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q231780" start="1044" end="1055" title="Kim Delaney" label="Kim Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701481" start="1077" end="1087" title="John Putch" label="John Putch"/>
<link wikidata="Q714729" start="1100" end="1113" title="Robert Webber" label="Robert Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325737" start="1142" end="1155" title="Earl Billings" label="Earl Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344275" start="1169" end="1184" title="Michael DeLuise" label="Michael DeLuise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923786" start="1381" end="1398" title="Brandon Tartikoff" label="Brandon Tartikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q168708" start="1551" end="1557" title="Dallas (1978 TV series)" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216187" start="1615" end="1635" title="Beauty and the Beast (1987 TV series)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="1925" end="1939" title="Syfy" label="Sci-Fi Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q495321" start="2833" end="2843" title="Rick Baker (makeup artist)" label="Rick Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q568245" start="2848" end="2860" title="John Dykstra" label="John Dykstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q126994" start="3822" end="3829" title="Starlog" label="Starlog"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141731" wikidata="Q11845136" url="?curid=1141731" title="Lucy Torres-Gomez">
<text>Lucy Torres-Gomez (born Lucy Marie Martinez Torres; December 11, 1974), is a Filipina actress and politician currently serving as the mayor of Ormoc since 2022. She previously served as the Representative for Leyte&#x27;s 4th district from June 2010 to March 2013 and from June 2013 to June 2022.

She is married to fellow actor turned politician Richard Gomez, who currently serves as the representative for Leyte&#x27;s 4th district.

==Early life and media career==
Torres-Gomez was born on December 11, 1974, in Ormoc, Leyte, Philippines to Manuel &quot;Manoling&quot; Torres Jr. and Julie Martinez, the second of four children. She has an older sister and two younger brothers. For primary and secondary school, she attended the Benedictine founded Saint Peter&#x27;s College in Ormoc. Torres-Gomez later attended the University of the Philippines Cebu (then a college of the University of the Philippines Visayas), from which she earned a Bachelor of Science degree in business management.

In 1993, Torres-Gomez shot a TV commercial for Lux Shampoo at Lake Caliraya, Laguna, where she met her future husband, Richard Gomez. Five years later in 1998, the two starred in the ABS-CBN television sitcom &quot;Richard Loves Lucy,&quot; and married that same year. Torres-Gomez has also hosted the TV5 reality dance competition show &quot;Shall We Dance?&quot; and the Q lifestyle show &quot;The Sweet Life&quot;, and endorses Philippine brands bench/, and Kashieca.

==Political career==
Torres-Gomez was elected the Representative for Leyte&#x27;s 4th legislative district as substitute candidate for her husband Richard Gomez on May 10, 2010. Gomez was disqualified by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) due to his lack of one year residency in the district, a requirement of eligibility for office. On March 19, 2013, the Supreme Court, ruled on a protest filed by fellow congressional candidate Eufrocino Codilla Jr., ousting Torres-Gomez from office. The Courts said that she &quot;did not validly substitute&quot; her husband. Her ousting did not affect her re-election bid, and she regained her seat in May of that same year, beating incumbent Ormoc Mayor Eric Codilla. In May 2016, Torres-Gomez was again re-elected as representative, defeating Violeta Codilla.

As congresswoman, Torres-Gomez has principally authored over 100 bills and co-authored 35. She is the chairperson of the House Committee on Disaster Resilience, and the vice chairperson of committees on Tourism, and Women and Gender Equality, and the special committee on Creative Industry and Performing Arts.

At the height of the COVID-19 pandemic in June 2020, Torres-Gomez expressed her support for the controversial Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020, stating that fear of the abuse of law is not a valid reason to reject needed legislation. The bill was signed into law as Republic Act No. 11479 on July 3, 2020. The law&#x27;s constitutionality is currently being challenged in the Supreme Court by multiple groups.

Torres-Gomez, together with husband Richard Gomez, was a member of the then-ruling Liberal Party during her early political career, but left in June 2016 to join the Partido Demokratiko Pilipino–Lakas ng Bayan (PDP–Laban) shortly after Rodrigo Duterte won the presidential election.

==Personal life==
Torres-Gomez married actor and Leyte representative Richard Gomez on April 28, 1998 at the Saints Peter and Paul Parish Church in Ormoc, Leyte. They currently reside in Ormoc, and have one daughter, Juliana Marie Beatriz (b. 2000), who graduated cum laude from the UP National College of Public Administration and Governance.

Torres-Gomez is Roman Catholic. She speaks Cebuano, English, and Tagalog.

In 2018, Torres-Gomez was named Most Stylish Woman by Philippine Tatler.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11845136" start="0" end="17" title="Lucy Torres-Gomez" label="Lucy Torres-Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q11845136" start="24" end="50" title="Lucy Torres-Gomez" label="Lucy Marie Martinez Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="77" end="85" title="Filipinos" label="Filipina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014782" start="143" end="148" title="Ormoc" label="Ormoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q678545" start="190" end="204" title="House of Representatives of the Philippines" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="209" end="214" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q66771538" start="222" end="234" title="Leyte&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108639" start="347" end="360" title="Richard Gomez" label="Richard Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014782" start="516" end="521" title="Ormoc" label="Ormoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="523" end="528" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="530" end="541" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896720" start="823" end="857" title="University of the Philippines Cebu" label="University of the Philippines Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707494" start="881" end="918" title="University of the Philippines Visayas" label="University of the Philippines Visayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="945" end="964" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043282" start="975" end="994" title="Business administration" label="business management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027024" start="1059" end="1072" title="Lake Caliraya" label="Lake Caliraya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="1074" end="1080" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022113" start="1180" end="1187" title="ABS-CBN" label="ABS-CBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327467" start="1212" end="1230" title="Richard Loves Lucy" label="Richard Loves Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015057" start="1299" end="1302" title="TV5 (Philippine TV network)" label="TV5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487242" start="1340" end="1355" title="Shall We Dance? (TV series)" label="Shall We Dance?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579304" start="1370" end="1371" title="Q (Philippine TV network)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767629" start="1393" end="1407" title="The Sweet Life (TV program)" label="The Sweet Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886917" start="1446" end="1452" title="Bench (Philippine clothing brand)" label="bench/"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459712" start="1677" end="1710" title="Commission on Elections (Philippines)" label="Commission on Elections (COMELEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q514212" start="1830" end="1843" title="Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185100" start="2115" end="2136" title="2013 Philippine House of Representatives elections in Eastern Visayas" label="May of that same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246178" start="2218" end="2228" title="2016 Philippine House of Representatives elections in Eastern Visayas" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399108" start="2397" end="2435" title="Philippine House Committee on Disaster Resilience" label="House Committee on Disaster Resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q97798835" start="2479" end="2486" title="Philippine House Committee on Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399166" start="2492" end="2517" title="Philippine House Committee on Women and Gender Equality" label="Women and Gender Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863561" start="2548" end="2585" title="Philippine House Special Committee on Creative Industry and Performing Arts" label="Creative Industry and Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055544" start="2609" end="2626" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97183183" start="2698" end="2724" title="Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020" label="Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q514212" start="2958" end="2971" title="Supreme Court of the Philippines" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108639" start="3029" end="3042" title="Richard Gomez" label="Richard Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476937" start="3076" end="3089" title="Liberal Party (Philippines)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140531" start="3159" end="3214" title="PDP–Laban" label="Partido Demokratiko Pilipino–Lakas ng Bayan (PDP–Laban)"/>
<link wikidata="Q457786" start="3229" end="3244" title="Rodrigo Duterte" label="Rodrigo Duterte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161898" start="3253" end="3274" title="2016 Philippine presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108639" start="3347" end="3360" title="Richard Gomez" label="Richard Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="3432" end="3437" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="3541" end="3550" title="Latin honors" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865560" start="3560" end="3619" title="UP National College of Public Administration and Governance" label="UP National College of Public Administration and Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3638" end="3652" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33239" start="3665" end="3672" title="Cebuano language" label="Cebuano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3674" end="3681" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="3687" end="3694" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="3751" end="3768" title="Tatler" label="Philippine Tatler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141735" wikidata="Q7825379" url="?curid=1141735" title="Torak">
<text>Torak may refer to:
* Torak (Žitište), a village in Serbia
* Lake Torak, a spring on the river Čikola, Croatia
* Kal Torak, a deity in &quot;The Belgariad&quot;, a fantasy epic written by David Eddings
* Torak, the protagonist of the &quot;Chronicles of Ancient Darkness&quot; series by Michelle Paver</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610526" start="22" end="37" title="Torak (Žitište)" label="Torak (Žitište)"/>
<link wikidata="Q341510" start="61" end="71" title="Lake Torak" label="Lake Torak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261173" start="113" end="122" title="Kal Torak" label="Kal Torak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000165" start="240" end="270" title="Chronicles of Ancient Darkness" label="Chronicles of Ancient Darkness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141739" wikidata="Q6223514" url="?curid=1141739" title="John Brown (industrialist)">
<text>Sir John Brown (6 December 1816 – 27 December 1896), British industrialist, was born in Sheffield. He was known as the Father of the South Yorkshire Iron Trade.

==Background==
He was born at Sheffield in Flavell&#x27;s Yard, Fargate, on 6 December 1816.
He was the second son of Samuel Brown, a slater of that town. 
He was educated at a local school held in a garret, and was apprenticed at the age of fourteen to Earl, Horton, &amp; Co., factors, of Orchard Place, 
In 1831, his employers engaged in the manufacture of files and table cutlery, taking an establishment in Rockingham Street, which they styled the Hallamshire Works. 
Nonetheless he did take over the company&#x27;s factoring business with the help of a loan for £500 thanks to the backing of his father and uncle and for several years travelled the country selling goods. In 1839, he married Mary (b. 1813 – died 28 November 1881), eldest daughter of Benjamin Scholefield of Sheffield. Brown lived with his wife throughout much of his working career at Shirle Hill in Sheffield. He died without issue at Shortlands, the house of Mr. Barron, Bromley in Kent, on 27 December 1896, and was buried at Ecclesall on 31 December.

==Career==
He started his own company John Brown &amp; Company in 1844 manufacturing steel at a small foundry on a site at what is the now Orchard Square Shopping centre. The business prospered so well that he sold his factoring firm and moved to larger premises on Furnival Street. 

===Invention of volute spring buffer===
In 1848 Brown invented the conical steel spring buffer for railway carriages which he sold to the London and North Western Railway as well as other railways throughout the UK. 

===Atlas Works===
On 1 January 1856, Brown opened his new Atlas Works in Brightside in an effort to centralise his workshops and workforce in one place, the works originally were on a site but within three years had grown to . By 1859 Brown was producing rails for the quickly expanding railway industry using the Bessemer process.
Brown&#x27;s great achievement was the development of armour plating for war vessels. 
In 1860, he saw at Toulon the French ship &quot;La Gloire&quot;. 
She was a timber-built 90-gun three-decker, cut down and coated with hammered plate armour, four and a half inches thick. 
This contrivance occasioned the British government so much uneasiness that they ordered ten 90- and 100-gun vessels to be similarly adapted. 
Brown, from a distant inspection of &quot;La Gloire&quot;, came to the conclusion that the armoured plates used in protecting her might have been rolled instead of hammered. 
He was at that time mayor of Sheffield, and he invited the premier, Lord Palmerston, to inspect the process. 
Palmerston&#x27;s visit was followed in April 1863 by one from the lords of the admiralty, who saw a plate rolled to twelve inches thick and fifteen to twenty feet long. 
The latter visit was the subject of an article in &quot;Punch&quot; (18 April 1863). 
The admiralty were convinced of the merits of Brown&#x27;s methods, and the royal commission on armour plates ordered from his works nearly all the plates they required. 
In a few years, he had sheathed fully three-fourths of the British navy.
In 1856, he concentrated in Savile Street, Sheffield, the different manufactures in which he had been engaged in various parts of the town. 
His establishment, styled the Atlas Works, covered nearly thirty acres, and increased until it gave employment to over four thousand artisans. 
He undertook the manufacture of armour plates, ordnance forgings, railway bars, steel springs, buffers, tires, and axles, supplied Sheffield with iron for steel-making purposes, and was the first successfully to develop the Bessemer process, and to introduce into Sheffield the manufacture of steel rails. 
He received frequent applications from foreign governments for armour plates, but invariably declined such contracts unless the consent of the home government was obtained. 
During the civil war in America he refused large orders from the northern states.

===Retirement===
In 1864, his business was converted into a limited liability company, and he retired to Endfield Hall, Ranmoor, near Sheffield. 
He was Mayor of Sheffield in 1862 and 1863, and master cutler in 1865 and 1866, and was knighted in 1867.
In 1865 he had Endcliffe Hall built as his private residence, this was and still is the largest private house ever built in Sheffield. Between 1866 and 1869, he funded the building of All Saints Church, Brightside, Sheffield, designed by Flockton and Abbott to accommodate the increasing numbers of employees at Atlas Ironworks. All Saints was demolished in 1977 and replaced by St Peter&#x27;s in 1980.

==Merger==
In 1902, Sheffield steelmakers John Brown &amp; Company exchanged shares and came to a working agreement with neighbouring company Thomas Firth &amp; Sons, the companies continuing under their own management until they finally merged in 1930 Forming Firth Brown Ltd.

==References==

;Attribution

==See also==
*John Brown &amp; Company – In 1899, the company John Brown created purchased a shipyard on the River Clyde, and went on to become one of the most famous shipbuilders of the 20th century.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6223514" start="0" end="14" title="John Brown (industrialist)" label="Sir John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="88" end="97" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="192" end="201" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435081" start="226" end="233" title="Fargate" label="Fargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415295" start="296" end="302" title="slater" label="slater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="615" end="632" title="Hallamshire Works" label="Hallamshire Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q323336" start="683" end="692" title="Factor (agent)" label="factoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800900" start="1021" end="1032" title="Shirle Hill" label="Shirle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917516" start="1072" end="1082" title="Bishop Challoner School" label="Shortlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100210" start="1331" end="1345" title="Orchard Square" label="Orchard Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="1615" end="1647" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1753" end="1764" title="Atlas Works" label="Atlas Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967787" start="1768" end="1778" title="Brightside, South Yorkshire" label="Brightside"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="2009" end="2025" title="Bessemer process" label="Bessemer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="2081" end="2095" title="armour plating" label="armour plating"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="2133" end="2139" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347693" start="2162" end="2171" title="La Gloire" label="La Gloire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="2688" end="2703" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4008" end="4028" title="American Civil War" label="civil war in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679772" start="4233" end="4251" title="Lord Mayor of Sheffield" label="Mayor of Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q617252" start="4274" end="4287" title="Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire" label="master cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375972" start="4347" end="4361" title="Endcliffe Hall" label="Endcliffe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459961" start="4570" end="4589" title="Flockton (architects)" label="Flockton and Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454298" start="4998" end="5009" title="Firth Brown Steels" label="Firth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699428" start="5060" end="5084" title="John Brown &amp;amp; Company" label="John Brown &amp;amp; Company"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141748" wikidata="Q1789604" url="?curid=1141748" title="Krnov">
<text>Krnov (; , or &quot;Krnów&quot;) is a town in Bruntál District in the Moravian-Silesian Region of the Czech Republic. It has about 23,000 inhabitants.

==Administrative division==
Krnov consists of three municipal parts (in brackets population according to the 2021 census):
*Pod Bezručovým vrchem (14,445)
*Pod Cvilínem (7,099)
*Krásné Loučky (573)

==Geography==
Krnov is located about northwest of Opava and northwest of Ostrava, in the historic region of Czech Silesia on the border with Poland. The town is situated at the confluence of the rivers Opava and Opavice.

The northern part of the territory with the town proper lies in the Zlatohorská Highlands, the western and the southern part lie in the Nízký Jeseník range. A small part on the southeast extends into the Opava Hilly Land. The highest point is the hill Bednářský vrch at above sea level.

==History==

The first written mention of Krnov is from 1240. At the latest in 1269 and probably already in 1253, Krnov was a town. In the second half of the 13th century, town fortifications were built. In 1273, the Minorites came into the town and established a monastery.

Krnov was a part of Duchy of Troppau until 1377, when the Duchy of Krnov separated and the town became its capital. Krnov prospered, guilds were established and textile crafts developed. In 1523, the Duchy of Krnov was acquired by the Hohenzollern family. They had built a castle here and during their rule, the town achieved its greatest prosperity and population growth.

The prosperity ended with the Thirty Years&#x27; War. The battles caused the town to decline and subsequently stagnate. After the war, the duchy was acquired by the House of Liechtenstein who began the re-Catholicization of the entire duchy. In the 17th and 18th centuries, the town stagnated economically, but several Baroque monuments were created here. After the War of the Austrian Succession, Krnov became a border town. In 1779, a large fire destroyed almost the entire town.

The development of the town was restored by the industrial revolution in the 19th century. Textile factories began to be established, and within a few decades Krnov more than doubled its population. The railway, which was opened in 1872, also helped the development.

According to the Austrian census of 1910, the town had 16,681 inhabitants. The census had asked people for their native language; 15,390 (98.4%) were German-speaking and 247 (1.5%) were Czech-speaking. Jews were not allowed to declare Yiddish, thus most of them declared German as their native language. The most populous religious groups were Roman Catholics with 15,290 (91.7%), followed by Protestants with 885 (5.3%) and the Jews with 459 (2.8%).

From 1938 to 1945 it was occupied by Germany and administered as a part of the Reichsgau Sudetenland. During World War II, the Germans operated a &quot;Gestapo&quot; prison and four forced labour subcamps of the Stalag VIII-B/344 prisoner-of-war camp in the town. After the war, the German population was expelled, in accordance to the Potsdam Agreement.

In 1948, refugees from Greece fleeing as a result of the Greek Civil War came into Czechoslovakia, and in Krnov and its surroundings they formed a significant community. They successfully assimilated, and although most of them returned to their homeland after 1975, several hundred of them still remain.

In 2024, Krnov was damaged by the Central European floods.

==Demographics==
==Economy==
Krnov is known for the production of cola-based drink Kofola by the eponymous company, which is the largest industrial employer based in the town.

One of the largest local companies was Rieger–Kloss, which manufactured pipe organs. It was founded in 1873 and production has continued to the present, but after financial problems, it went into insolvency in 2018 and production was stopped.

==Transport==

Krnov is located on the Ostrava–Olomouc and Krnov–Głuchołazy railway lines. The town is served by has railway stations, &quot;Krnov&quot; and &quot;Cvilín&quot;.

The road border crossings &quot;Krnov-Horní Předměstí / Ciermięcice&quot;, &quot;Krnov / Pietrowice&quot;, and &quot;Chomýž / Chomiąża&quot; are located in the municipal territory.

==Sights==
The landmark of the town square is the Neorenaissance town hall. It was built in 1901–1903 on the site of an old town hall from the 16th century. It has a richly decorated high tower, which is a copy of the Währing town hall tower. The town hall was designed by Leopold Bauer, native of Krnov. The second urban landmark is the town savings bank, connected with the town hall. The Art Nouveau-Baroque building with a richly structured façade was built in 1906–1907.

The Krnov Synagogue is the only synagogue in the region which survived to this day in its original form. The interior is the Moorish Revival style. Today it serves as an exhibition and concert hall.

The Church of Saint Martin in the historic centre was first documented in 1281. The wooden church was replaced by the current stone one at the turn of the 14th and 15th centuries. The second tower was added in the 16th century. The high towers were part of the town&#x27;s defense system. One of the towers is open to the public as a lookout tower.

The Church of Saint Benedict consists of a rotunda from the 13th century and a church without a tower. The interior is decorated with valuable frescoes from the period between the 13th and 15th centuries.

The Baroque complex of the Minorite monastery with the Church of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary was built after 1779, when the original Gothic buildings were destroyed by a fire. The monastery was abolished in 1950 and restored in 1989.

Krnov Castle was built in 1531–1535. Today it serves commercial purposes and as an administrative seat, only the courtyard is freely accessible.

An important technical monument is the former spinning mill and warehouse of the Alois Larisch factory with a sample workshop, including a set of machinery. It is a Neoclassical building from 1922, protected as a national cultural monument.

===Cvilín===
Cvilín is hill known as a pilgrimage site with the Church of Our Lady of the Seven Sorrows and Stations of the Cross. The church was built in 1722–1727 and replaced the wooden chapel, which did not have enough capacity for the number of believers participating in the pilgrimage. It is one of the most important Baroque monuments in the region. Since 2018, it has been protected as a national cultural monument.

On the hill is also a high observation tower, constructed in 1902–1903. It is a stone romantic building topped by a lookout with a battlement. In the second part of the Cvilín hill is the ruin of the Cvilín Castle. It was built before 1253 and destroyed during the Thirty Years&#x27; War.

==Notable people==

*Carol Benesch (1822–1896), architect
*Charles Louis Fleischmann (1835–1897), Austrian inventor and distiller
*Leopold Bauer (1872–1938), Austrian architect
*Grete Berger (1883–1944), Austrian-German actress
*Robert Hohlbaum (1886–1955), Austrian-German writer and playwright
*Liesl Herbst (1903–1990), Austrian tennis player
*Norbert Riedel (1912–1963), Austrian engineer and entrepreneur
*Hanns Cibulka (1920–2004), German poet
*Edith Ballantyne (born 1922), Canadian activist
*Jiří Georg Dokoupil (born 1954), Czech-German painter and graphic artist
*Zdeňka Šilhavá (born 1954), discus thrower
*Leon Koudelak (born 1961), classical guitarist
*Jaroslav Sakala (born 1969), ski jumper
*Radek Bonk (born 1976), ice hockey player
*Jan Štefela (born 2001), high jumper
==Twin towns – sister cities==

Krnov is twinned with:

* Głubczyce, Poland
* Karben, Germany
* Lykovrysi-Pefki, Greece
* Mińsk Mazowiecki, Poland
* Nadvirna, Ukraine
* Prudnik, Poland
* Rajec, Slovakia
* Saint-Égrève, France
* Telšiai, Lithuania
==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*Tourist information centre
*Sudeten German homeland district of Jägerndorf 
*Krnov Friends&#x27; Club </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1789604" start="0" end="5" title="Krnov" label="Krnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q850323" start="46" end="62" title="Bruntál District" label="Bruntál District"/>
<link wikidata="Q190550" start="70" end="94" title="Moravian-Silesian Region" label="Moravian-Silesian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="102" end="116" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156080" start="401" end="406" title="Opava" label="Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8385" start="424" end="431" title="Ostrava" label="Ostrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q45551" start="459" end="472" title="Czech Silesia" label="Czech Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="492" end="498" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q577026" start="553" end="558" title="Opava (river)" label="Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281952" start="563" end="570" title="Opavice" label="Opavice"/>
<link wikidata="Q228131" start="641" end="662" title="Opawskie Mountains" label="Zlatohorská Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978" start="709" end="722" title="Nízký Jeseník" label="Nízký Jeseník"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="777" end="793" title="Opava Hilly Land" label="Opava Hilly Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="1078" end="1087" title="Franciscans" label="Minorites"/>
<link wikidata="Q566639" start="1157" end="1173" title="Duchy of Troppau" label="Duchy of Troppau"/>
<link wikidata="Q670892" start="1195" end="1209" title="Duchy of Krnov" label="Duchy of Krnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="1372" end="1384" title="Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1541" end="1563" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q698530" start="1676" end="1698" title="House of Liechtenstein" label="House of Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="1877" end="1907" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="2279" end="2287" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2464" end="2468" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="2497" end="2504" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2606" end="2621" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2655" end="2666" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2691" end="2695" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="2739" end="2758" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="occupied by Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q315432" start="2793" end="2814" title="Reichsgau Sudetenland" label="Reichsgau Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2823" end="2835" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="2866" end="2873" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="2896" end="2909" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q879221" start="2926" end="2943" title="Stalag VIII-B" label="Stalag VIII-B/344"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="2944" end="2964" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q542945" start="3019" end="3027" title="Expulsion of Germans from Czechoslovakia" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="3050" end="3067" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3093" end="3099" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="3127" end="3142" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602117" start="3217" end="3238" title="Greeks in the Czech Republic" label="significant community"/>
<link wikidata="Q130297776" start="3409" end="3432" title="2024 Central European floods" label="Central European floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="3501" end="3511" title="cola" label="cola-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955" start="3518" end="3524" title="Kofola" label="Kofola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333095" start="3651" end="3663" title="Rieger–Kloss" label="Rieger–Kloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="3684" end="3694" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8385" start="3895" end="3902" title="Ostrava" label="Ostrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="3903" end="3910" title="Olomouc" label="Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q629286" start="3915" end="3931" title="Krnov–Głuchołazy railway" label="Krnov–Głuchołazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499662" start="4090" end="4101" title="Ciermięcice" label="Ciermięcice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499603" start="4123" end="4133" title="Pietrowice, Opole Voivodeship" label="Pietrowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498824" start="4160" end="4168" title="Chomiąża, Opole Voivodeship" label="Chomiąża"/>
<link wikidata="Q690417" start="4434" end="4441" title="Währing" label="Währing"/>
<link wikidata="Q87071" start="4489" end="4502" title="Leopold Bauer" label="Leopold Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563544" start="4697" end="4712" title="Krnov Synagogue" label="Krnov Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q74156" start="4818" end="4839" title="Moorish Revival architecture" label="Moorish Revival style"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="5476" end="5484" title="Franciscans" label="Minorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q385405" start="6047" end="6073" title="Cultural monument (Czech Republic)" label="national cultural monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="6184" end="6205" title="Stations of the Cross" label="Stations of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23423" start="6633" end="6643" title="battlement" label="battlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044256" start="6813" end="6826" title="Carol Benesch" label="Carol Benesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065210" start="6851" end="6876" title="Charles Louis Fleischmann" label="Charles Louis Fleischmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q87071" start="6923" end="6936" title="Leopold Bauer" label="Leopold Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q90008" start="6970" end="6982" title="Grete Berger" label="Grete Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q89112" start="7021" end="7036" title="Robert Hohlbaum" label="Robert Hohlbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664527" start="7089" end="7101" title="Liesl Herbst" label="Liesl Herbst"/>
<link wikidata="Q122921" start="7139" end="7153" title="Norbert Riedel" label="Norbert Riedel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576442" start="7203" end="7216" title="Hanns Cibulka" label="Hanns Cibulka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308267" start="7243" end="7259" title="Edith Ballantyne" label="Edith Ballantyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q555152" start="7292" end="7311" title="Jiří Georg Dokoupil" label="Jiří Georg Dokoupil"/>
<link wikidata="Q218223" start="7366" end="7380" title="Zdeňka Šilhavá" label="Zdeňka Šilhavá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818892" start="7410" end="7423" title="Leon Koudelak" label="Leon Koudelak"/>
<link wikidata="Q539914" start="7458" end="7473" title="Jaroslav Sakala" label="Jaroslav Sakala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384170" start="7499" end="7509" title="Radek Bonk" label="Radek Bonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q107488083" start="7542" end="7553" title="Jan Štefela" label="Jan Štefela"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7620" end="7627" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470817" start="7637" end="7646" title="Gmina Głubczyce" label="Głubczyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q570057" start="7657" end="7663" title="Karben" label="Karben"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004826" start="7675" end="7690" title="Lykovrysi-Pefki" label="Lykovrysi-Pefki"/>
<link wikidata="Q648071" start="7701" end="7717" title="Mińsk Mazowiecki" label="Mińsk Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q156820" start="7728" end="7736" title="Nadvirna" label="Nadvirna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051441" start="7748" end="7755" title="Gmina Prudnik" label="Prudnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q909333" start="7766" end="7771" title="Rajec" label="Rajec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069745" start="7784" end="7796" title="Saint-Égrève" label="Saint-Égrève"/>
<link wikidata="Q588916" start="7807" end="7814" title="Telšiai District Municipality" label="Telšiai"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141753" wikidata="Q4592590" url="?curid=1141753" title="Flak jacket">
<text>A flak jacket or flak vest is a form of body armor. A flak jacket is designed to provide protection from case fragments (&quot;frag&quot;) from high explosive weaponry, such as anti-aircraft artillery (&quot;flak&quot; is a German contraction for , &quot;aircraft-defense gun&quot;), grenade fragments, very small pellets used in shotguns such as the &quot;Birdshot&quot;, and other lower-velocity projectiles. It is not designed to protect against bullets fired from most small arms such as rifles or handguns. However flak jackets are able to sustain certain gunshots, depending on the angle at which the shot was fired (an oblique angle for example), the caliber of the bullet, the speed of the projectile and the range from which the shot was fired.

The term &quot;flak jacket&quot; is often colloquially applied to newer body armor featuring protection against small arms projectiles, but the original usage predated the existence of modern and more resistant bulletproof vests and the two are not interchangeable in performance.

== History ==
Anecdotes describing garments designed to protect the wearer from penetrating weapons can be found far back into recorded history.

Two types of protective garment from the American Civil War in the 1860s had a basic design similar to the flak jacket or ballistic armor of modern times in that solid plates were used as the main ballistic protection. The &quot;Soldiers&#x27; Bullet Proof Vest&quot; was manufactured by the G. &amp; D. Cook &amp; Company of New Haven, Connecticut. It consisted of two pieces of steel inserted into the pockets of a regular black military vest. Versions for infantry weighed while a version for cavalry and artillery weighed . They sold for $5–7. A more medieval-looking type of armor was made by the Atwater Armor Company, also of New Haven. It consisted of four large plates of steel held on the body by broad metal hooks over the shoulders and a belt around the waist. The Atwater vest was heavier than the Cook models and cost about twice as much.

During World War I, a number of British and American officers recognized that many casualties could be avoided if effective armor were available. Isolated efforts at developing armor were made, and soldiers could make individual purchases or efforts, but there was no armor issued to the troops. As it is today, issues of weight, cost, availability of materials and/or environmental stability complicated the issue of developing armor that would also be effective. For example, soft armor made of silk was tried on a small scale based on Japanese designs, but this material did not last well under harsh environmental conditions.

The first usage of the term &quot;flak jacket&quot; refers to the armor originally developed by the Wilkinson Sword company during World War II to help protect Royal Air Force (RAF) aircrew from the flying debris and shell fragments thrown by German anti-aircraft guns&#x27; high-explosive shells (flak itself is an abbreviation for the German word &quot;Fliegerabwehrkanone&quot; (&quot;aircraft-defense gun&quot;)). The idea for the flak jacket came from Col. Malcolm C. Grow, Surgeon of the US Eighth Air Force in Britain. He thought that many wounds he was treating could have been prevented by some kind of light armor. In 1943, he was awarded the Legion of Merit.
The Royal Air Force subsequently offered the jackets to the United States Army Air Forces, which adopted them as a Defense Standard. The UK subsequently supplied the USAAF with 9,600 flak jackets under lend-lease.

During World War II, flak jackets and steel helmets were worn by US Navy personnel on aircraft carriers during battle, since the ships and especially their flight decks offered little protection for their crew. The jackets were supposed to protect against shell fragments and heat.

== Ballistic protection == 
Col. Grow’s request to the Wilkinson Sword company was to develop a vest that could stop a .45 caliber (11.43 mm) round fired at close range. Although flak jackets offered protection against some small caliber pistol bullets and shell fragments, ultimately they proved to be less effective than hoped. Flak jackets are now considered to be inferior to modern ballistic vests.

It was claimed that the Marine&#x27;s M-1951 flak jacket could stop a 7.62×25mm Tokarev pistol round at the muzzle of the gun. However, even the Vietnam era revised Flak jackets were not capable to stop high power or high velocity pistol rounds, much less an AK-47 rifle bullet (7.62×39mm). Nevertheless the Army&#x27;s and Marine&#x27;s Flak vests did a good job of stopping mortar shells, debris, grenade fragments, ricochets, and direct hits from mild-power pistol rounds.

Although they were not tested to be compliant with the NIJ standards, the Army&#x27;s M1952a and M69 ballistic nylon Flak Jackets performed slightly better than NIJ level 1 body armor (a vest required 10 layers of Ballistic Nylon to meet the level 1 NIJ standard as seen in the Smith &amp; Wesson&#x27;s Barrier Vest), while the Marine&#x27;s Doron plates inside their Flak vests were capable at stopping .45 ACP FMJ bullets at the muzzle of the gun.

It was not until 1970, that the U.S. National Institute of Justice, which now publishes test and performance standards for body armor, began a deliberate program to develop body armor for law enforcement personnel that would be effective against specific threats that were common causes of officer injury and death. At the time that included .38 Special and .22 Long Rifle bullets, in particular, and also bullets from 9mm, .45, and .32 caliber firearms.

== Materials ==
The first flak jackets consisted of manganese steel plates sewn into a waistcoat made of cotton canvas, with later revisions of the vest, the waistcoat was made of ballistic nylon (a material engineered by the DuPont company); therefore, flak jackets functioned as an evolved form of plate armor or brigandine. The first flak jacket weighed .

During the Korean and Vietnam wars, the flak jacket was changed and the manganese steel plates were replaced by other materials. The U.S. Army&#x27;s vests (Body Armor, Fragmentation Protective, Vest M1952a &amp; M69) weighed under eight pounds and were made of 12 layers of ballistic nylon sealed in a vinyl plastic bag to repel water and later revisions added polyethylene stiffeners to alleviate bunching of the ballistic nylon. The exterior of the vest was made of standard nylon fabric.

The vests used by the U.S. Marines (Vest, Armored M-1955) weighed more than ten pounds, the exterior of the vest was made of a heavy duty Cotton Poplin, with the third revision of the vest the material was changed to nylon fabric, and the interior were a combination of ballistic nylon layers and fiberglass plates known as Doron. Doron was made of fiberglass layers placed in an ethyl cellulose resin under high pressure. It was named after then-Colonel Georges F. Doriot, then director of the Military Planning Division, Office of the Quartermaster General.

The generation of armor developed in the 1970s through the National Institute of Justice incorporated layers of soft armor in the form of DuPont’s Kevlar fabric, which has since become synonymous with ballistic protection and a general term used for several similar (aramid-based) materials.

==See also==

*Buff coat, an early modern era protective jacket; if several layers of leather were used, it was capable of protecting from spent bullets and other low-velocity rounds fired from a distance
*Hauberk, an earlier form of body armor, was used to defend against swords, knives, etc.
*Chain mail, an ancient form of personal armour consisting of linked metal rings which has also been used to protect against shrapnel and low-velocity ammunition, like the Spanish mail used by Comanche chief Iron Jacket to protect his body from revolver rounds.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4592590" start="2" end="13" title="Flak jacket" label="flak jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592590" start="17" end="26" title="Flak jacket" label="flak vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="40" end="50" title="body armor" label="body armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="105" end="119" title="Fragmentation (weaponry)" label="case fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="144" end="158" title="high explosive" label="high explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="177" end="200" title="anti-aircraft artillery" label="anti-aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="284" end="301" title="grenades" label="grenade fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="330" end="338" title="shotguns" label="shotguns"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="398" end="408" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="449" end="456" title="bullets" label="bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="473" end="483" title="small arms" label="small arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="492" end="498" title="rifles" label="rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="502" end="510" title="handguns" label="handguns"/>
<link wikidata="Q391752" start="966" end="982" title="bulletproof vest" label="bulletproof vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1224" end="1242" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="1509" end="1518" title="New Haven" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1520" end="1531" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="1563" end="1568" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q958210" start="1623" end="1627" title="vest" label="vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="1642" end="1650" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1679" end="1686" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="1691" end="1700" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2044" end="2055" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="2534" end="2538" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q653630" start="2768" end="2783" title="Wilkinson Sword" label="Wilkinson Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2799" end="2811" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2828" end="2843" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024411" start="2867" end="2880" title="spall" label="flying debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="2885" end="2900" title="Fragmentation (weaponry)" label="shell fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2911" end="2917" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="2918" end="2935" title="anti-aircraft gun" label="anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="2966" end="2970" title="flak" label="flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150366" start="3130" end="3145" title="Malcolm C. Grow" label="Malcolm C. Grow"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="3321" end="3336" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="3398" end="3427" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q919510" start="3453" end="3469" title="Defense Standard" label="Defense Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="3540" end="3550" title="lend-lease" label="lend-lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3560" end="3572" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158803" start="3955" end="3966" title=".45 ACP" label=".45 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q259170" start="4311" end="4328" title="7.62×25mm Tokarev" label="7.62×25mm Tokarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="4500" end="4505" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q259196" start="4520" end="4529" title="7.62×39mm" label="7.62×39mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q24634" start="5512" end="5523" title=".38 Special" label=".38 Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q158715" start="5528" end="5542" title=".22 Long Rifle" label=".22 Long Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849964" start="5657" end="5663" title="jacket" label="jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159176" start="5678" end="5693" title="manganese steel" label="manganese steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851804" start="5806" end="5821" title="ballistic nylon" label="ballistic nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="5852" end="5858" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="5926" end="5937" title="plate armor" label="plate armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569863" start="5941" end="5951" title="brigandine" label="brigandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="5997" end="6003" title="Korean War" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6008" end="6020" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105007" start="6803" end="6808" title="Doron Plate" label="Doron"/>
<link wikidata="Q207344" start="7187" end="7193" title="Kevlar" label="Kevlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q422054" start="7307" end="7313" title="aramid" label="aramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373195" start="7348" end="7357" title="Buff coat" label="Buff coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="7362" end="7378" title="early modern era" label="early modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="7539" end="7546" title="Hauberk" label="Hauberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="7628" end="7638" title="Chain mail" label="Chain mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072624" start="7835" end="7846" title="Iron Jacket" label="Iron Jacket"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141758" wikidata="Q7548827" url="?curid=1141758" title="Snuff Mills">
<text>Snuff Mills is a park in the Stapleton area of north Bristol, also known as Whitwood Mill.

There are pleasant walks along the steep wooded banks of the River Frome, for example to Oldbury Court. The park was purchased in 1926 by the Corporation of Bristol as &quot;a pleasure walk for citizens of Bristol&quot; and restored in the 1980s by the Fishponds Local History Society.

The park&#x27;s name originates from one of the millers. His nickname was &#x27;Snuffy Jack&#x27; because his smock was always covered in snuff.

The park includes an old quarry and a stone mill. The old mill within the park was used for cutting and crushing stone from the many quarries along the Frome Valley during the late 19th century. It contains a waterwheel, egg-ended boiler in its setting and the remains of a vertical steam engine. Despite the name, tobacco snuff was never ground in this mill.

Today, Snuff Mills is still a popular site for locals and visitors who come to enjoy the tranquility and natural surroundings. This stretch of the River Frome is also home to some of Bristol&#x27;s otters.

==References==
Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7548827" start="0" end="11" title="Snuff Mills" label="Snuff Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="17" end="21" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600478" start="29" end="38" title="Stapleton, Bristol" label="Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="53" end="60" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155471" start="153" end="164" title="River Frome, Bristol" label="River Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809662" start="181" end="194" title="Oldbury Court" label="Oldbury Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743902" start="489" end="494" title="smock-frock" label="smock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="517" end="522" title="Tobacco" label="snuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="550" end="556" title="quarry" label="quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="734" end="744" title="waterwheel" label="waterwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608001" start="746" end="762" title="egg-ended boiler" label="egg-ended boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="1084" end="1089" title="otter" label="otter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141761" wikidata="Q1692800" url="?curid=1141761" title="Kido">
<text>Kido or KIDO may refer to:

* Kido (surname)
* KIDO, an American radio station
* Kidō, a form of magic used by characters in the manga and anime &quot;Bleach&quot;
* Conficker or Kido, computer worm
* Gao Hanyu or Kido, Chinese actor and singer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16871375" start="30" end="44" title="Kido (surname)" label="Kido (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330613" start="47" end="51" title="KIDO" label="KIDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566902" start="81" end="85" title="Kidō" label="Kidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q474330" start="166" end="175" title="Conficker" label="Conficker"/>
<link wikidata="Q56435843" start="201" end="210" title="Gao Hanyu" label="Gao Hanyu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141779" wikidata="Q2739652" url="?curid=1141779" title="Bell (crater)">
<text>Bell is a lunar impact crater that is located on the far side of the Moon, just past the western limb. It lies in an area of terrain that is marked by many small craters, a number of which are satellite craters of Bell listed in the table below. Bell lies within two crater diameters of Laue to the north, and to the west of the smaller Helberg.

The outer wall of Bell has been worn, eroded, and somewhat reshaped by subsequent impacts. The satellite crater Bell Q lies across the southwest rim, and smaller craterslie across the rim to the north and the east. The interior floor is relatively level, and marked by the crater Bell E which is offset to the east of the midpoint.

Prior to formal naming by the IAU in 1970, Bell was called &quot;Crater 182&quot;. 

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Bell.


==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2739652" start="0" end="4" title="Bell (crater)" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="10" end="15" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="16" end="29" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="53" end="61" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="69" end="73" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497914" start="287" end="291" title="Laue (crater)" label="Laue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701539" start="337" end="344" title="Helberg (crater)" label="Helberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="710" end="713" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141784" wikidata="Q1063236" url="?curid=1141784" title="Château Margaux">
<text>Château Margaux (), archaically La Mothe de Margaux, is a wine estate of Bordeaux wine located in Margaux-Cantenac, France, and was one of five wines to achieve &quot;Premier cru&quot; (first growth) status in the Bordeaux Classification of 1855. The estate&#x27;s best wines are very expensive, with a bottle of Château Margaux &quot;grand vin&quot; reaching over $1,000. The estate is located in the commune of Margaux on the left bank of the Garonne estuary in the Médoc region, in the département of Gironde, and the wine is delimited to the AOC of Margaux.

The estate also produces a second wine named Pavillon Rouge du Château Margaux, a third wine named Margaux de Château Margaux, a dry white wine named Pavillon Blanc du Château Margaux which does not conform to the Margaux appellation directives, as well as a second dry white wine named Pavillon Blanc Second Vin, launched in 2024.

==History==
The estate has been occupied since at least the 12th century, with the site occupied by a fortified castle known as Lamothe or La Mothe (from &quot;motte&quot;, a small rise in the land), and wine under names such as &quot;Margou&quot; and &quot;Margous&quot; was known in the 15th century, but it was with the arrival of the Lestonnac family in the 16th century that wine production became of particular importance, and in the 1570s Pierre de Lestonnac expanded the property and cleared many of the grain fields to make way for vines.

The lineage of ownership was to continue in a relatively direct path from the Lestonnacs, though through the female side, with proprietors&#x27; names such as d&#x27;Aulède, Fumel, d&#x27;Hargicourt, including an alliance of marriage with the Pontac family of Château Haut-Brion in 1654, which became crucial to the inclusion of Château Margaux among the four first growths.

By the beginning of the 18th century, the estate comprised with a third devoted to viticulture, which is nearly identical to the modern layout. As with many of Médoc&#x27;s châteaux, the early 18th century saw the wine develop from a pale watery drink that faded within only a few years, to the dark, complex liquid that has been stored in cellars ever since, and a transformation was largely due to an estate manager named Berlon, who revolutionised techniques of wine-making by introducing novel ideas such as banning harvesting in the early morning to avoid dew-covered grapes and subsequently dilution, and acknowledged the importance of soil quality in the various &quot;terroir&quot; found on the estate.

In 1771, wine from the estate became the first claret to be sold at Christie&#x27;s, and upon visiting Bordeaux in 1787, Thomas Jefferson made note of Château Margaux as one of the &quot;four vineyards of first quality&quot;.

Following the French Revolution, the owner Elie du Barry was executed by guillotine and the estate expropriated, eventually becoming the property of the citizen Miqueau who neglected its care and maintenance. Briefly rescued by Laure de Fumel, she was soon forced to sell, and in 1802 the estate was purchased by the Marquis de la Colonilla, Bertrand Douat for 654,000 francs.

The estate&#x27;s old château was torn down and completely rebuilt when Douat commissioned one of Bordeaux&#x27; foremost architects, , to create the buildings in the First Empire style, the mansion for the Marquis to move into by 1812.
On 17 August 1835, Margaux was bought by the Spanish magnate Alejandro María Aguado, 1st Marquess of Marismas del Guadalquivir, who had amassed a vast fortune as a banker.

Large portions of shares in the estate were bought by the Bordeaux wine merchant Fernand Ginestet (then owner of the adjacent Château Lascombes) in 1925, and the family share was gradually increased to allow his son Pierre Ginestet to take complete ownership in 1949. In 1965, Pierre Ginestet controversially declared a new estate policy that the vintage year would only be affixed to great vintages, while selling the wine of lesser years as non-vintage wine, like the customary practice of Champagne.

=== Modern history ===
Following the Bordeaux economic crisis of 1973, the Ginestet family were forced to sell Château Margaux. An attempt by National Distillers &amp; Chemical Corporation to acquire Château Margaux was vetoed by the French government on grounds that the estate was a national treasure. This was later reported to be an attempt backed by The Coca-Cola Company, and was directly prevented by French President Valéry Giscard d&#x27;Estaing.

A successful acquisition took place in 1976 by French grocery and finance group Félix Potin, headed by Greek André Mentzelopoulos, for a sum near 72 million francs, or US$16 million. Mentzelopoulos transformed the vineyard through restoring the neglected vineyard, chais, and mansion and the consultancy of oenologist Émile Peynaud. By the time of Mentzelopoulos&#x27; death in 1980, Château Margaux was considered substantially restored to its former reputation, with the 1978 and 1979 vintages declared &quot;exceptional&quot;.
At the beginning of the 1990s, an exchange of shares was negotiated with the Agnelli family but the management remained in the hands of Mentzelopoulos&#x27; daughter Corinne Mentzelopoulos. She promoted Paul Pontallierwhose dissertation for his PhD in Oenology was on the effect of barrel ageing on red winesto managing director of First Growth (&quot;Premier Cru&quot;), and their owner/director partnership is credited with elevating Château Margaux in its standing amongst the (only) five Châteaux with &quot;Premier Cru&quot; status. In 2003, Corinne Mentzelopoulos bought back the majority stake and became the sole shareholder of Château Margaux.

2023 marks a new era with a generational change within the Mentzelopoulos family. After 43 years been Chief Executive Officer, Corinne hands over the reins to her children and appoints Alexis as CEO of the Estate. As for her daughter Alexandra, she becomes President of the Supervisory Board of the holding company.

Since 1989, a bottle of Château Margaux 1787, bearing the etched initials of previous owner Thomas Jefferson, holds the record as the most expensive bottle of wine insured at $225,000 ().

Margaux Hemingway received her given name from this wine; born Margot, she changed the spelling to Margaux when her parentswho drank the wine on the night she was conceivedtold her this background.

== Production ==
The domaine of Château Margaux extends , of which are entitled to the Margaux AOC declaration. are planted with 75% Cabernet Sauvignon, 20% Merlot, with 2% Cabernet Franc and Petit verdot. are cultivated with Sauvignon blanc to make the dry white Pavillon Blanc.

The average annual production of the &quot;Grand vin&quot;, Château Margaux, is 150,000 bottles, while the second wine Pavillon Rouge du Château Margaux has an average production of 200,000 bottles. The dry white Pavillon Blanc du Château Margaux has a production of around 35,000 bottles, and must be sold under the generic Bordeaux AOC as the cultivation of Sauvignon blanc does not fall under the directives of the Margaux AOC. The remainder of the production, what is determined to be &quot;lesser grapes&quot;, is sold off in bulk.

==References==
;Footnotes
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063236" start="0" end="15" title="Château Margaux" label="Château Margaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063236" start="32" end="51" title="Château Margaux" label="La Mothe de Margaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="58" end="62" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="73" end="86" title="Bordeaux wine" label="Bordeaux wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922737" start="98" end="114" title="Margaux-Cantenac" label="Margaux-Cantenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="116" end="122" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750129" start="161" end="199" title="First Growth" label="&amp;quot;Premier cru&amp;quot; (first growth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q893393" start="214" end="245" title="Bordeaux Wine Official Classification of 1855" label="Bordeaux Classification of 1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="402" end="409" title="Communes of France" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q274884" start="413" end="420" title="Margaux" label="Margaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077" start="445" end="452" title="Garonne" label="Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435049" start="468" end="473" title="Médoc" label="Médoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="489" end="500" title="Departments of France" label="département"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="504" end="511" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565828" start="546" end="549" title="Appellation d&amp;#x27;Origine Contrôlée" label="AOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q532734" start="553" end="560" title="Margaux AOC" label="Margaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q243774" start="590" end="601" title="second wine" label="second wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q243774" start="645" end="655" title="third wine" label="third wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="1437" end="1442" title="vitis" label="vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q518582" start="1705" end="1723" title="Château Haut-Brion" label="Château Haut-Brion"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="1904" end="1915" title="viticulture" label="viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2463" end="2467" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q627003" start="2497" end="2504" title="terroir" label="terroir"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="2580" end="2586" title="claret" label="claret"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="2601" end="2616" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="2654" end="2670" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2774" end="2791" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q275038" start="2859" end="2871" title="Confiscation" label="expropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="3305" end="3317" title="First French Empire" label="First Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347962" start="3436" end="3501" title="Alejandro María Aguado, 1st Marquess of Marismas del Guadalquivir" label="Alejandro María Aguado, 1st Marquess of Marismas del Guadalquivir"/>
<link wikidata="Q939256" start="3674" end="3691" title="Château Lascombes" label="Château Lascombes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="4040" end="4049" title="Champagne (region)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4089" end="4121" title="History of Bordeaux wine#20th_century" label="Bordeaux economic crisis of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="4407" end="4428" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124" start="4477" end="4506" title="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Valéry Giscard d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092573" start="4589" end="4600" title="Félix Potin" label="Félix Potin"/>
<link wikidata="Q286313" start="4827" end="4840" title="Émile Peynaud" label="Émile Peynaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q21055394" start="5116" end="5130" title="Agnelli family" label="Agnelli family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997349" start="5205" end="5227" title="Corinne Mentzelopoulos" label="Corinne Mentzelopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="5284" end="5287" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q297672" start="5291" end="5299" title="Oenology" label="Oenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750129" start="5371" end="5383" title="First Growth" label="First Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6102" end="6118" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q253167" start="6199" end="6216" title="Margaux Hemingway" label="Margaux Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207310" start="6531" end="6549" title="Cabernet Sauvignon" label="Cabernet Sauvignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213338" start="6555" end="6561" title="Merlot" label="Merlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q63591" start="6571" end="6585" title="Cabernet Franc" label="Cabernet Franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q637453" start="6590" end="6602" title="Petit verdot" label="Petit verdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44542" start="6624" end="6639" title="Sauvignon blanc" label="Sauvignon blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743615" start="7004" end="7016" title="Bordeaux AOC" label="Bordeaux AOC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141790" wikidata="Q2739654" url="?curid=1141790" title="Bellinsgauzen (crater)">
<text>Bellinsgauzen is a lunar impact crater that lies in the southern part of Moon, on the far side from the Earth. It is attached to the northern rim of the larger crater Berlage, and within a half crater diameter of Cabannes to the west. North of Bellinsgauzen is the crater Bhabha.

The outer rim of Bellinsgauzen is worn but the general shape is still intact. There are small craters lying along the inside and attached to the exterior of the rim to the southeast. A pair of small craters are also attached to the outside of the west and northwest rim. The inner surface is marked by a number of tiny craterlets, particularly near the northern end. The interior floor is otherwise relatively featureless.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2739654" start="0" end="13" title="Bellinsgauzen (crater)" label="Bellinsgauzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="19" end="24" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="25" end="38" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="73" end="77" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="86" end="94" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="104" end="109" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740431" start="167" end="174" title="Berlage (crater)" label="Berlage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024732" start="213" end="221" title="Cabannes (crater)" label="Cabannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589634" start="272" end="278" title="Bhabha (crater)" label="Bhabha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141791" wikidata="Q2337623" url="?curid=1141791" title="Adolf Dymsza">
<text>Adolf Dymsza (born Adolf Bagiński; 7 April 1900 – 20 August 1975) was a Polish comedy actor of both the pre-World War II and post-war eras. He starred in both theatre and film productions, mainly before World War II. He and Kazimierz Krukowski performed as the duo &quot;Lopek and Florek&quot; in &quot;kleynkunst&quot; productions at Qui Pro Quo and other noted Warsaw cabarets. Another pseudonym was &quot;Dodek.&quot; He was arguably the most popular Polish comic actor of the 1930s, Andrzej Wajda remarked once, that for him Dymsza and Bodo were symbols of pre-war Polish cinema in general. To this day he is considered the king of Polish film comedy.

==Life==

Dymsza was born Adolf Bagiński on 7 April 1900 in Warsaw, then in Russian Empire, to Adolf Sr. and Matylda née Połądkiewicz. At the age of 15 he worked as a busboy in some of Warsaw&#x27;s cabarets. He graduated from a local II Gymnasium and then studied at the Hipolit Wawelberg&#x27;s Trade School. During World War I and the subsequent Polish-Bolshevik War he started his career as a dancer in cabarets and theatres of Warsaw, Minsk and Grodno. He returned to Warsaw after the war, but no theatre would hire him and he spent several years giving dance lessons and occasionally singing in cabarets. It is speculated that he might have appeared in a number of silent films in that period, none of them survive to our times however.

His debut came in 1925, when he was hired by the famous &quot;Qui Pro Quo&quot; cabaret as a singer and dancer, &quot;immediately conquering the audience with his natural juvenile wit and temperamental performances of Warsaw street types.&quot; He remained part of Qui Pro Quo&#x27;s crew until 1931, appearing on stage along such stars of contemporary Polish cabaret and cinema as Marian Hemar, Eugeniusz Bodo, Hanka Ordonówna, Mieczysław Fogg, Mira Zimińska, Zula Pogorzelska and Fryderyk Jarosy.

Initially &quot;rarely seen on screen&quot;, Dymsza first made a name for himself as an excellent comedian in Warsaw&#x27;s cabarets in the 1920s. In 1930 he starred in the first of his films: the &quot;Wiatr od morza&quot; and &quot;Niebezpieczny romans&quot;. Altogether, in the inter-war period, Dymsza appeared in 24 feature sound films, acting the leads for the most part. Many of them were &quot;cheap comedies and farces, replete with songs and music and a few excellent actors such as Adolf Dymsza&quot;. Modern critics consider some of those films &quot;remarkable only because of the performance of Dymsza&quot;. A popular actor in film comedies, he recorded very few of the great hits from his cabaret and film performances.

After the German and Soviet invasions of Poland, Dymsza ignored the Polish actors&#x27; boycott and worked in the Nazi-administered cabarets of Warsaw.

&quot;Yet, after 1945 when Second World War was over, his disloyal attitude to the patriotic attitude was quickly forgotten by Polish fans of his talent. Perhaps, need to laugh again was strong enough in the society so deeply traumatised by the atrocities of war, and Dymsza&#x27;s talent in evoking happy-go-lucky air of the past Warsaw street was highly desirable. Also, rather proletaryan style of his roles was a helpful circumstance in revival of his career in a postwar communist Poland. After few years of being banned from public performing in Warsaw, in 1951 Dymsza was back on stage of the Warsaw comedy theatre &quot;Syrena&quot; and in the movies.&quot;

After the war it was revealed that Dymsza helped to save several Poles from hands of Gestapo, helped Jews in the Warsaw Ghetto and hid a Jewish performance artist in his apartment, Mieczysław L. Kittay, despite the threat of death penalty for harboring a Jew.

In 1958, he toured the United States and Canada with Kabaret Wagabunda.

Late in his years he retired to a care house in Góra Kalwaria, where he died on 20 August 1975. He is buried at Warsaw&#x27;s Powązki Cemetery.

In 2013 the Polish Post issued a commemorative stamp of him, with Helena Grossówna and Mieczysława Ćwiklińska.

==Selected filmography==
*1930 – &quot;Wiatr od morza&quot; (as Stefek)
*1930 – &quot;Niebezpieczny romans&quot;
*1932 – &quot;Sto metrów miłości&quot; (as Dodek)
*1933 – &quot;Romeo i Julcia&quot; (as Teofil Rączka)
*1933 – &quot;Każdemu wolno kochać&quot; (as Hipek)
*1933 – &quot;Dwanaście krzeseł&quot; (as antiquary Wladyslaw Kepka)
*1935 – &quot;Antek policmajster&quot; (as Antek Król)
*1935 – &quot;ABC miłości&quot;
*1935 – &quot;Wacuś&quot; (as Wacuś, Tadeusz)
*1936 – &quot;Dodek na froncie&quot; (as Dodek)
*1937 – &quot;Niedorajda&quot; (as Florek)
*1938 – &quot;Robert and Bertram&quot; (as Robert)
*1938 – &quot;Paweł i Gaweł&quot; (as Gaweł)
*1939 – &quot;Sportowiec mimo woli&quot; (as Dodek Czwartek)
*1948 – &quot;Skarb&quot; (as Alfred Ziółko)
*1953 – &quot;Sprawa do załatwienia&quot; (in eight different roles)
*1955 – &quot;Irena do domu!&quot; (as Zygmunt Majewski)
*1956 – &quot;Nikodem Dyzma&quot; (as Dyzma Nikodem) based on &quot;The Career of Nicodemus Dyzma&quot;
*1959 – &quot;Cafe Pod Minogą&quot; (as Maniuś Kitajec)
*1962 – &quot;Mój stary&quot; (as Grzela)
*1969 – &quot;Sól ziemi czarnej&quot; (as Ordynans)
*1970 – &quot;Pan Dodek&quot; (as Dodek)

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2337623" start="0" end="12" title="Adolf Dymsza" label="Adolf Dymsza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337623" start="19" end="33" title="Adolf Dymsza" label="Adolf Bagiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="108" end="120" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154399" start="224" end="243" title="Kazimierz Krukowski" label="Kazimierz Krukowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="487" end="500" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q926902" start="569" end="582" title="Polish cinema" label="Polish cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="717" end="723" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="733" end="747" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001288" start="824" end="830" title="busboy" label="busboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524971" start="929" end="946" title="Wawelberg" label="Hipolit Wawelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="975" end="986" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="1006" end="1026" title="Polish-Bolshevik War" label="Polish-Bolshevik War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="1097" end="1102" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="1107" end="1113" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="1328" end="1339" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1463" end="1474" title="Qui Pro Quo" label="Qui Pro Quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q367234" start="1783" end="1795" title="Marian Hemar" label="Marian Hemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q117444" start="1797" end="1811" title="Eugeniusz Bodo" label="Eugeniusz Bodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q453555" start="1813" end="1828" title="Hanka Ordonówna" label="Hanka Ordonówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q652292" start="1830" end="1845" title="Mieczysław Fogg" label="Mieczysław Fogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379760" start="1847" end="1860" title="Mira Zimińska" label="Mira Zimińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q82959" start="1862" end="1878" title="Zula Pogorzelska" label="Zula Pogorzelska"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1883" end="1898" title="Fryderyk Jarosy" label="Fryderyk Jarosy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2104" end="2118" title="Wiatr od morza" label="Wiatr od morza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030982" start="2135" end="2155" title="Niebezpieczny romans" label="Niebezpieczny romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11733105" start="3772" end="3789" title="Kabaret Wagabunda" label="Kabaret Wagabunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q985642" start="3840" end="3853" title="Góra Kalwaria" label="Góra Kalwaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q168886" start="3918" end="3934" title="Powązki Cemetery" label="Powązki Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150339" start="4003" end="4019" title="Helena Grossówna" label="Helena Grossówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115737" start="4024" end="4046" title="Mieczysława Ćwiklińska" label="Mieczysława Ćwiklińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030982" start="4135" end="4155" title="Niebezpieczny romans" label="Niebezpieczny romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q573091" start="4176" end="4194" title="Sto metrów miłości" label="Sto metrów miłości"/>
<link wikidata="Q9313072" start="4226" end="4240" title="Romeo i Julcia" label="Romeo i Julcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6381981" start="4280" end="4300" title="Każdemu wolno kochać" label="Każdemu wolno kochać"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490676" start="4332" end="4349" title="Dvanáct křesel" label="Dwanaście krzeseł"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209428" start="4401" end="4419" title="Police Chief Antek" label="Antek policmajster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650283" start="4456" end="4467" title="ABC miłości" label="ABC miłości"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958883" start="4488" end="4493" title="Wacuś" label="Wacuś"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287821" start="4534" end="4550" title="Dodek na froncie" label="Dodek na froncie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11791383" start="4582" end="4592" title="Niedorajda" label="Niedorajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395101" start="4625" end="4643" title="Robert and Bertram (1938 film)" label="Robert and Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q55020" start="4676" end="4689" title="Paweł i Gaweł" label="Paweł i Gaweł"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4721" end="4741" title="Sportowiec mimo woli" label="Sportowiec mimo woli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4782" end="4787" title="Skarb" label="Skarb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4827" end="4848" title="Sprawa do załatwienia" label="Sprawa do załatwienia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203138" start="4896" end="4910" title="Irena do domu!" label="Irena do domu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614387" start="5007" end="5036" title="The Career of Nicodemus Dyzma" label="The Career of Nicodemus Dyzma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5057" end="5072" title="Cafe Pod Minogą" label="Cafe Pod Minogą"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405996" start="5155" end="5172" title="Sól ziemi czarnej" label="Sól ziemi czarnej"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141795" wikidata="Q289982" url="?curid=1141795" title="List of typefaces included with macOS">
<text>This list of fonts contains every font shipped with Mac OS X 10.0 through macOS 10.14, including any that shipped with language-specific updates from Apple (primarily Korean and Chinese fonts). For fonts shipped only with Mac OS X 10.5, 
please see Apple&#x27;s documentation.

== System fonts up to Mac OS X 10.7 ==

==New fonts added with OS X 10.10 Yosemite==
The following system fonts have been added with Yosemite:

* ITC Bodoni 72: Book, Italic, Bold (these three in separate fonts with lining and text figures), Small Caps, Ornaments (Sumner Stone)
* ITF Devanagari
* Kohinoor Devanagari (Satya Rajpurohit)
* Luminari (Philip Bouwsma)
* Phosphate: Inline and Solid (Steve Jackaman &amp; Ashley Muir)
* Shree Devanagari 714 (Modular Infotech)
* SignPainter (House Industries)
* Skia: Light, Light Condensed, Light Extended, Condensed, Extended, Bold, Black, Black Condensed, Black Extended (Matthew Carter; system previously only included regular)
* Sukhumvit Set: Thin, Light, Text, Medium, SemiBold, Bold (Anuthin Wongsunkakon; previously used as a system font for iOS 7.0)
* Bitstream Symbols
* Trattatello (James Grieshaber)

==New fonts added with OS X 10.11 El Capitan==
At least the following system fonts have been added with El Capitan:

* PingFang SC / PingFang TC / PingFang HK, a new set of Chinese UI Fonts produced by DynaComware in lieu of deprecated STHeiti Family.
* San Francisco UI / Display / Text.

==New fonts added with macOS 10.12 Sierra==
At least the following system fonts have been added with Sierra:

* Toppan Bunkyu Mincho Pr6N Regular
* Toppan Bunkyu Midashi Mincho StdN ExtraBold
* Toppan Bunkyu Gothic Pr6N Regular / Demibold
* Toppan Bunkyu Midashi Gothic StdN Extrabold
* Monotype LingWai Medium (SC / TC)
* Songti (SC / TC)
* Yu Kyokasho N (Medium / Bold) (Vertical Version / Horizontal Version)
* San Francisco Mono

==New fonts added with macOS 10.13 High Sierra==
High Sierra added several system fonts or additional weights of existing system fonts:
* Charter (Roman, Italic, Bold, Bold Italic, Black, Black Italic)
* DIN (Alternate Bold, Condensed Bold)
* Hiragino Kaku Gothic StdN W8
* InaiMathi (Bold)
* Kai (Regular)
* Kaiti SC (Regular, Bold, Black)
* Myriad Arabic (Semibold)
* Noto Nastaliq Urdu
* Rockwell (Regular, Italic, Bold, Bold Italic)
* STIX Two Math
* STIX Two Text (Regular, Italic, Bold, Bold Italic)
* Sukothai (Regular, Bold)

==macOS 10.14 Mojave==

No new fonts were provided with Mojave.

== Font appearances ==

* These images compare Roman fonts only, in most styles:

* The fonts in the following list were included as &quot;extras&quot; with AppleWorks 6, which was bundled with new iMacs until 2006.

==Hidden fonts==
A number of fonts have also been provided with iMovie, iLife, iDVD and other Apple applications in hidden folders, for the sole use of these applications. The reason why these fonts are hidden is unknown, with licensing issues suggested as the cause. However, one may easily install them for use by all applications by copying them out of their Library directories and installing them as with any third-party font, although one should always check that the license for the fonts allows them to be used outside the given software.

Notable hidden fonts on macOS include Bank Gothic, Bodoni, Century Gothic, Century Schoolbook, Garamond, several cuts of Lucida, Superclarendon and Monotype Twentieth Century.

==See also==
* List of typefaces
* Unicode typefaces
* List of typefaces included with Microsoft Windows
* Fonts on the Mac

==Notes==
==References==

* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.3 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.4 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.5 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.6 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.7 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.8 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.9 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.12 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.13 (names only, no images)
* Apple&#x27;s font list for 10.14 (names only, no images)
*Apple&#x27;s font list for 11 (names only, no images)

* Advanced Typography with Mac OS X Tiger (Appendix B contains representations of Latin fonts included with Mac OS 10.4 Tiger)
* Microsoft&#x27;s list of Mac OS X installed fonts
* Alan Wood&#x27;s list of common Mac OS X fonts
* Code Style&#x27;s survey of Mac OS fonts (includes OS 8/9 users)
* Szántó Tibor: &quot;A betű&quot; (The type) (Hungarian; Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest, 1982, ), Chapter XVI.

==External links==
* Revised (cross-platform) font stack (for the web)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q912481" start="52" end="65" title="Mac OS X 10.0" label="Mac OS X 10.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q54807273" start="74" end="85" title="macOS Mojave" label="macOS 10.14"/>
<link wikidata="Q222996" start="222" end="235" title="Mac OS X Leopard" label="Mac OS X 10.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107792" start="411" end="419" title="OS X Yosemite" label="Yosemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q833029" start="424" end="437" title="Bodoni" label="ITC Bodoni 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q956716" start="505" end="517" title="text figures" label="text figures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="532" end="541" title="Typeface#Ornamental typefaces" label="Ornaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637992" start="543" end="555" title="Sumner Stone" label="Sumner Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="563" end="573" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q942044" start="645" end="672" title="Erbar_(typeface)" label="Phosphate: Inline and Solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534970" start="785" end="789" title="Skia (typeface)" label="Skia"/>
<link wikidata="Q383244" start="898" end="912" title="Matthew Carter" label="Matthew Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777951" start="1015" end="1035" title="Anuthin Wongsunkakon" label="Anuthin Wongsunkakon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426339" start="1074" end="1081" title="IOS 7" label="iOS 7.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056454" start="1241" end="1251" title="OS X El Capitan" label="El Capitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1256" end="1264" title="PingFang" label="PingFang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18628928" start="1391" end="1424" title="San Francisco (sans-serif typeface)" label="San Francisco UI / Display / Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q24575588" start="1528" end="1534" title="macOS Sierra" label="Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30134996" start="1910" end="1921" title="macOS High Sierra" label="High Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q591913" start="2065" end="2068" title="DIN 1451" label="DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q830067" start="2252" end="2260" title="Rockwell (typeface)" label="Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54807273" start="2451" end="2457" title="macOS Mojave" label="Mojave"/>
<link wikidata="Q621196" start="2617" end="2627" title="AppleWorks" label="AppleWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="2658" end="2662" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4333890" start="3263" end="3274" title="Bank Gothic" label="Bank Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q833029" start="3276" end="3282" title="Bodoni" label="Bodoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q472836" start="3284" end="3298" title="Century Gothic" label="Century Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753355" start="3300" end="3318" title="Century Schoolbook" label="Century Schoolbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q246110" start="3320" end="3328" title="Garamond" label="Garamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q267249" start="3346" end="3352" title="Lucida" label="Lucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857698" start="3373" end="3399" title="Twentieth Century (typeface)" label="Monotype Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q632304" start="3417" end="3434" title="List of typefaces" label="List of typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526631" start="3437" end="3454" title="Unicode typefaces" label="Unicode typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870403" start="3457" end="3506" title="List of typefaces included with Microsoft Windows" label="List of typefaces included with Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465205" start="3509" end="3525" title="Fonts on the Mac" label="Fonts on the Mac"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141797" wikidata="Q2895193" url="?curid=1141797" title="Belyaev (crater)">
<text>Belyaev is a lunar impact crater that is attached to the outer edge of the Mare Moscoviense, on the far side of the Moon. It is a worn formation with a small crater pair overlaying the southern rim, and several smaller craters across the relatively irregular interior.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Belyaev.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2895193" start="0" end="7" title="Belyaev (crater)" label="Belyaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="13" end="18" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q326868" start="75" end="91" title="Mare Moscoviense" label="Mare Moscoviense"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="100" end="108" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="116" end="120" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141801" wikidata="Q30704927" url="?curid=1141801" title="Lauren Townsend">
<text>Lauren Townsend may refer to:
*Lauren Townsend (footballer) (born 1990), Welsh footballer
*Lauren Townsend (Columbine massacre victim), a victim of the Columbine high school massacre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22957731" start="31" end="59" title="Lauren Townsend (footballer)" label="Lauren Townsend (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="91" end="134" title="Lauren Townsend (Columbine massacre victim)" label="Lauren Townsend (Columbine massacre victim)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141804" wikidata="Q933327" url="?curid=1141804" title="Jack the Ripper suspects">
<text>A series of murders that took place in the East End of London between August and November 1888 have been attributed to an unidentified assailant nicknamed Jack the Ripper. Since then, the identity of the Ripper has been widely debated, with over 100 suspects named. Though many theories have been advanced, experts find none widely persuasive, and some are hardly taken seriously at all.

==Contemporaneous police opinion==
Metropolitan Police files show that their investigation into the serial killings encompassed eleven separate murders between 1888 and 1891, known in the police docket as the &quot;Whitechapel murders&quot;. Five of these—the murders of Mary Ann Nichols, Annie Chapman, Elizabeth Stride, Catherine Eddowes and Mary Jane Kelly—are generally agreed to be the work of a single killer, known as &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot;. These murders occurred between August and November 1888 within a short distance of each other and are collectively known as the &quot;canonical five&quot;. The six other murders—those of Emma Elizabeth Smith, Martha Tabram, Rose Mylett, Alice McKenzie, Frances Coles, and the Pinchin Street torso—have been linked with the Ripper to varying degrees.

The swiftness of the attacks and the manner of the mutilations performed on some of the bodies, which included disembowelment and removal of organs, led to speculation that the murderer had the skills of a physician or butcher. However, others disagreed strongly, and thought the wounds too crude to be professional. The alibis of local butchers and slaughterers were investigated, with the result that they were eliminated from the inquiry. Over 2,000 people were interviewed, &quot;upwards of 300&quot; people were investigated, and 80 people were detained.

During the course of their investigations of the murders, police regarded several men as strong suspects, but none were formally charged.

===Montague John Druitt===
Montague John Druitt (15 August 1857 – early December 1888) was a Dorset-born barrister who worked to supplement his income as an assistant schoolmaster in Blackheath, London, until his dismissal shortly before his suicide by drowning in 1888. His decomposed body was found floating in the Thames near Chiswick on 31 December 1888. Some modern authors suggest that Druitt may have been dismissed because he was homosexual and that this could have driven him to commit suicide. However, both his mother and his grandmother suffered mental health problems, and it is possible that he was dismissed because of an underlying hereditary psychiatric illness. He was said to be &quot;sexually insane&quot; and was allegedly suspected of being the Ripper by members of his family. His death shortly after the last canonical murder (which took place on 9 November 1888) led Assistant Chief Constable Sir Melville Macnaghten to name him as a suspect in a memorandum of 23 February 1894. However, Macnaghten incorrectly described the 31-year-old barrister as a 41-year-old doctor. On 1 September, the day after the first &quot;canonical&quot; murder, Druitt was in Dorset playing cricket; most experts now believe that the killer was local to Whitechapel, whereas Druitt lived miles away, on the other side of the Thames, in Kent. Inspector Frederick Abberline appeared to dismiss Druitt as a serious suspect on the basis that the only evidence against him was the coincidental timing of his suicide shortly after the last canonical murder.

===Jacob Isenschmid===

Jacob Isenschmid, or Joseph Isenschmid (born ), was a Swiss butcher living in the Milford Road. He experienced severe depression and other psychiatric disorders, and he had a history of violent attacks on women in the Whitechapel area, which had led to his hospitalization for psychiatric treatment in the past. On 11 September 1888, two physicians reported to the police that they suspected Isenschmid of being the Ripper due to his strange habits. Isenschmid&#x27;s wife told police that he was violent and erratic, that he always carried large knives (even when they were not required for his trade), that he had threatened to kill her on at least one occasion, and that he had left home for no reason two months ago and returned only sporadically. Isenschmid was arrested on 13 September, and a psychiatric evaluation found he was violently insane and potentially dangerous, with a judge ordering him imprisoned in a mental hospital. However, the &quot;Double Event&quot; murders of Elizabeth Stride and Catherine Eddowes occurred on 30 September while Isenschmid was in the hospital, exonerating him of the murders.

===Seweryn Kłosowski===
Seweryn Antonowicz Kłosowski ( George Chapman; no relation to victim Annie Chapman; 14 December 1865 – 7 April 1903) was born in Congress Poland but emigrated to the United Kingdom sometime between 1887 and 1888—shortly before the start of the Whitechapel murders. Between 1893 and 1894, he assumed the name of Chapman. He successively poisoned three of his wives and became known as &quot;the borough poisoner&quot;. He was hanged for his crimes in 1903. At the time of the Ripper murders, he lived in Whitechapel, London, where he had been working as a barber under the name Ludwig Schloski. According to H. L. Adam, who wrote a book on the poisonings in 1930, Chapman was Inspector Frederick Abberline&#x27;s favoured suspect, and the &quot;Pall Mall Gazette&quot; reported that Abberline suspected Chapman after his conviction. Some argue against the idea that Chapman was the likely culprit, as he killed his three wives using poison. It is uncommon, though not unheard of, for a serial killer to make such a drastic change in their &quot;modus operandi&quot;.

===Aaron Kosminski===

Aaron Kosminski (born Aron Mordke Kozminski; 11 September 1865 – 24 March 1919) was a Polish Jew admitted to Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum in 1891. &quot;Kosminski&quot; (no forename given) was named as a suspect by Sir Melville Macnaghten in his 1894 memorandum and by former Chief Inspector Donald Swanson in handwritten comments in the margin of his copy of Assistant Commissioner Sir Robert Anderson&#x27;s memoirs.

Anderson wrote that &quot;the only person who had ever had a good view of the murderer unhesitatingly identified the suspect the instant he was confronted with him&quot;. This suspect also apparently fit their profile: &quot;a sexual maniac of a virulent type; that he was living in the immediate vicinity of the scenes of the murders; and that, if he was not living immediately alone, his people knew of his guilt, and refused to give him up to justice&quot;. Furthermore, a &quot;house-to-house search was conducted&quot; for &quot;the case of every man in the district whose circumstances were such that he could go and come and get rid of his bloodstains in secret&quot;. Sir Robert Anderson goes on to state the conclusion the police came to following this investigation &quot;was that he [Jack the Ripper] and his people were certain low-class Polish Jews&quot; but since the person who identified him was also a Polish Jew and &quot;people of that class in the East End will not give up one of their number to Gentile justice&quot;, the suspect was never prosecuted. Anderson was firmly convinced of the suspect&#x27;s guilt, also writing within the &quot;Whitechapel Murders&quot; section of his memoirs that undiscovered murders&#x27; are rare in London and the &#x27;Jack-the-Ripper&#x27; crimes are not within that category&quot;. Some authors are skeptical of this, while others use it in their theories.

In his memorandum, Macnaghten stated that no one was ever identified as the Ripper, which directly contradicts Anderson&#x27;s recollection. In 1987, author Martin Fido searched asylum records for any inmates called Kosminski and found only one: Aaron Kosminski. Kosminski lived in Whitechapel, but he was largely harmless in the asylum. His insanity took the form of auditory hallucinations, a paranoid fear of being fed by other people, a refusal to wash or bathe, and &quot;self-abuse&quot;. In his book &quot;The Cases That Haunt Us&quot;, former FBI profiler John E. Douglas stated that a paranoid individual such as Kosminski would likely have openly boasted of the murders while incarcerated had he been the killer, but there is no record that he ever did so.

It is possible Kosminski was confused with another Polish Jew of the same age named Aaron or David Cohen (real name possibly Nathan Kaminsky), who was a violent patient at the Colney Hatch Asylum (see David Cohen below). In 2014, DNA analysis tenuously linked Kosminski with a shawl said to have belonged to victim Catherine Eddowes, but experts—including Sir Alec Jeffreys, the inventor of genetic fingerprinting—dismissed the DNA-based claims about Kosminski as unreliable. This was because the genetic match, determined from maternal descendants of Eddowes and Kosminski, was based on mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondrial DNA can be shared by thousands of individuals and, therefore, can be reliably used in crime analysis only to exclude suspects, not to implicate them. Many consider it conjecture without substantial evidence that the shawl, allegedly taken from the crime scene by police constable Amos Simpson, even belonged to Eddowes—who was impoverished and arguably could not have afforded to purchase it herself. In March 2019, the &quot;Journal of Forensic Sciences&quot; published a study that claimed DNA from both Kosminski and Eddowes was found on the shawl. A 2019 BBC documentary entitled &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Case Reopened&quot;, broadcast and presented by Emilia Fox, concluded that Kosminski was the most likely suspect. Other scientists cast doubt on the study, and the journal printed an expression of concern after the authors were unable to produce the original data.

===Michael Ostrog===

Michael Ostrog ( in or after 1904) was a Russian-born professional con man and thief. He used numerous aliases and assumed titles. Among his many dubious claims was that he had once been a surgeon in the Russian Navy. He was mentioned as a suspect by Macnaghten, who joined the case in 1889, the year after the &quot;canonical five&quot; victims were killed. Researchers have failed to find evidence that he had committed crimes any more serious than fraud and theft. Author Philip Sugden discovered prison records showing that Ostrog was jailed for petty offences in France during the Ripper murders. Ostrog was last mentioned alive in 1904; the date of his death is unknown.

===John Pizer===

John Pizer (or Piser; c. 1850 – 1897) was a Polish Jew who worked as a bootmaker in Whitechapel. In the early days of the Whitechapel murders, many locals suspected that &quot;Leather Apron&quot; was the killer, which was picked up by the press; Pizer was known as &quot;Leather Apron&quot;. He had a prior conviction for a stabbing offence, and Police Sergeant William Thicke apparently believed that he had committed a string of minor assaults on prostitutes. After the murders of Mary Ann Nichols and Annie Chapman in late August and early September 1888, respectively, Thicke arrested Pizer on 10 September even though the investigating inspector reported that &quot;there is no evidence whatsoever against him&quot;. He was cleared of suspicion when it turned out that he had alibis for two of the murders. He was staying with relatives at the time of one of the murders, and he was talking with a police officer while watching a spectacular fire on the London Docks at the time of another. Pizer and Thicke had known each other for years, and Pizer implied that his arrest was based on animosity rather than evidence. Pizer successfully obtained monetary compensation from at least one newspaper that had named him as the murderer. Thicke himself was accused of being the Ripper by H. T. Haslewood of Tottenham in a letter to the Home Office dated 10 September 1889; the presumably malicious accusation was dismissed as without foundation.

===James Thomas Sadler===

James Thomas Sadler or Saddler (c. 1837 – 1906 or 1910) was a friend of Frances Coles, the last victim added to the Whitechapel murders police file. Coles was murdered on 13 February 1891. Her body was discovered beneath a railway arch in Swallow Gardens, Whitechapel. Two deep slash wounds had been inflicted on her neck. She was still alive but died before medical help could arrive. Sadler was arrested, but little evidence existed against him. Although briefly considered by the police as a Ripper suspect, he was at sea at the time of the first four &quot;canonical&quot; murders and was released without charge. Sadler was named in Macnaghten&#x27;s 1894 memorandum in connection with Coles&#x27;s murder. Macnaghten thought Sadler &quot;was a man of ungovernable temper and entirely addicted to drink, and the company of the lowest prostitutes&quot;.

===Francis Tumblety===
Francis Tumblety (c. 1833 – 1903) earned a small fortune posing as an &quot;Indian Herb&quot; doctor throughout the United States and Canada and was commonly perceived as a misogynist and a quack. He was connected to the death of one of his patients but escaped prosecution. In 1865, he was arrested for alleged complicity in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, but no connection was found and he was released without being charged. Tumblety was in England in 1888 and was arrested on 7 November, apparently for engaging in homosexual acts, which were illegal at the time. Some of his friends reported that he showed off a collection of &quot;matrices&quot; (wombs) from &quot;every class of woman&quot; at around this time. Awaiting trial, he fled to France and then to the United States. Already notorious in the States for his self-promotion and previous criminal charges, his arrest was reported as connected to the Ripper murders. American reports that Scotland Yard tried to extradite him were not confirmed by the British press or the London police, and the New York City Police said, &quot;there is no proof of his complicity in the Whitechapel murders, and the crime for which he is under bond in London is not extraditable&quot;. In 1913, Tumblety was mentioned as a Ripper suspect by Chief Inspector John Littlechild of the Metropolitan Police Service in a letter to journalist and author George R. Sims.

==Contemporaneous press and public opinion==
The Whitechapel murders were featured heavily in the media and attracted the attention of Victorian society at large. Journalists, letter writers, and amateur detectives all suggested names either in the press or to the police. Most were not and could not be taken seriously. For example, at the time of the murders, Richard Mansfield, a famous actor, starred in a theatrical version of Robert Louis Stevenson&#x27;s book &quot;Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde&quot;. The subject matter of horrific murder in the London streets and Mansfield&#x27;s convincing portrayal led letter writers to accuse him of being the Ripper.

===William Henry Bury===

William Henry Bury (25 May 1859 – 24 April 1889) had recently moved to Dundee from the East End of London, when he strangled his wife Ellen Elliott, a former prostitute, on 4 February 1889. He inflicted extensive wounds to her abdomen after she was dead and packed the body into a trunk. On 10 February, Bury went to the local police and told them his wife had committed suicide. He was arrested, tried, found guilty of her murder, and hanged in Dundee. A link with the Ripper crimes was investigated by police, but Bury denied any connection, despite making a full confession to his wife&#x27;s homicide. Nevertheless, the executioner, James Berry, promoted the idea that Bury was the Ripper. This hypothesis was built upon by historians Euan Macpherson and William Beadle, who argued that comments by Ellen had indicated she had inside knowledge of the Ripper&#x27;s whereabouts. There was also graffiti at Bury&#x27;s flat accusing the occupant of being &quot;Jack Ripper&quot;, which Macpherson argues Bury had written as a form of confession, and the final of the Ripper&#x27;s five &quot;canonical&quot; murders occurred shortly before Bury moved away from Whitechapel. Upon arrest, Bury had remarked to Lieutenant James Parr that he was afraid of being accused of being the Ripper and an acquaintance of his claimed that Bury had thrown down a newspaper with a loud cry after being asked to look up news of the Ripper. However, Ellen Elliott had been strangled to death and had only light cuts to her abdomen, whereas the victims of the Ripper had their throats cut and had much more extensive abdominal wounds.

===Thomas Neill Cream===

Dr. Thomas Neill Cream (27 May 1850 – 15 November 1892) was a doctor secretly specialising in abortions. He was born in Glasgow, educated in London and Canada, and entered practice in Canada and later in Chicago, Illinois. In 1881 he was found guilty of the fatal poisoning of his mistress&#x27;s husband. He was imprisoned in the Illinois State Penitentiary in Joliet, Illinois, from November 1881 until his release on good behaviour on 31 July 1891. He moved to London, where he resumed killing and was soon arrested. He was hanged on 15 November 1892 at Newgate Prison. According to some sources, his last words were reported as being &quot;I am Jack the...&quot;, interpreted to mean Jack the Ripper. However, police officials who attended the execution made no mention of this alleged interrupted confession. As he was still imprisoned at the time of the Ripper murders, most authorities consider it impossible for him to have been the culprit. However, Donald Bell suggested that he could have bribed officials and left the prison before his official release, and Sir Edward Marshall-Hall suspected that his prison term may have been served by a look-alike in his place. Such notions are unlikely and contradict evidence given by the Illinois authorities, newspapers of the time, Cream&#x27;s solicitors, Cream&#x27;s family and Cream himself.

===Thomas Hayne Cutbush===

Thomas Hayne Cutbush (1865–1903) was a medical student sent to Lambeth Infirmary in 1891 suffering delusions thought to have been caused by syphilis. After stabbing a woman in the backside and attempting to stab a second, he was pronounced insane and committed to Broadmoor Hospital in 1891, where he remained until his death in 1903. In a series of articles in 1894, &quot;The Sun&quot; newspaper suggested that Cutbush was the Ripper. There is no evidence that police took the idea seriously, and Melville Macnaghten&#x27;s memorandum naming the three police suspects—Druitt, Kosminski and Ostrog—was written to refute the idea that Cutbush was the Ripper. Cutbush was the suspect advanced in a 1993 book by A. P. Wolf, who suggested that Macnaghten wrote his memo to protect Cutbush&#x27;s uncle, a fellow police officer. In a 2011 book, author Peter Hodgson considers Cutbush the most likely candidate. David Bullock, in his 2012 book, also firmly believes Cutbush to be the real Ripper.

===Frederick Bailey Deeming===

Frederick Bailey Deeming (30 July 1853 – 23 May 1892) murdered his first wife and four children in Rainhill near St. Helens, Lancashire, in 1891. His crimes went undiscovered and later that year he emigrated to Australia with his second wife, whom he then also murdered. Her body was found buried under their house, and the subsequent investigation led to the discovery of the other bodies in England. He was arrested, sent to trial, and found guilty. He wrote in a book, and later boasted in jail that he was Jack the Ripper, but he was either imprisoned or in South Africa at the time of the Ripper murders. The police denied any connection between Deeming and the Ripper. He was hanged in Melbourne. According to Robert Napper, a former Scotland Yard detective, the British police did not consider him a suspect because of his two possible alibis but Napper believed Deeming was not in jail at the time, and there is some evidence that he was back in England.

===Carl Feigenbaum===

Carl Ferdinand Feigenbaum (alias Anton Zahn; 1840 – 27 April 1896) was a German merchant seaman arrested in 1894 in New York City for cutting the throat of Mrs Juliana Hoffmann. After his execution, his lawyer, William Sanford Lawton, claimed that Feigenbaum had admitted to having a hatred of women and a desire to kill and mutilate them. Lawton further stated that he believed Feigenbaum was Jack the Ripper. Though covered by the press at the time, the idea was not pursued for more than a century. Using Lawton&#x27;s accusation as a base, author Trevor Marriott, a former British murder squad detective, argued that Feigenbaum was responsible for the Ripper murders as well as other murders in the United States and Germany between 1891 and 1894. According to Wolf Vanderlinden, some of the murders listed by Marriott did not actually occur; the newspapers often embellished or created Ripper-like stories to boost sales. Lawton&#x27;s accusations were disputed by a partner in his legal firm, Hugh O. Pentecost, and there is no proof that Feigenbaum was in Whitechapel at the time of the murders. Xanthé Mallett, a Scottish forensic anthropologist and criminologist who investigated the case in 2011, wrote there is considerable doubt that all of the Jack the Ripper murders were committed by the same person. She concludes that &quot;Feigenbaum could have been responsible for one, some or perhaps all&quot; of the Whitechapel murders.

===Robert Donston Stephenson===

Robert Donston Stephenson (also known as Roslyn D&#x27;Onston; 20 April 1841 – 9 October 1916) was a journalist and writer interested in the occult and black magic. He admitted himself as a patient at the London Hospital in Whitechapel shortly before the murders started, and left shortly after they ceased. He wrote a newspaper article in which he claimed that black magic was the motive for the killings and alleged that the Ripper was a Frenchman. Stephenson&#x27;s strange manner and interest in the crimes resulted in an amateur detective reporting him to Scotland Yard on Christmas Eve, 1888. Two days later Stephenson reported his own suspect, a Dr Morgan Davies of the London Hospital. Subsequently, he fell under the suspicion of newspaper editor William Thomas Stead. In his books on the case, author and historian Melvin Harris argued that Stephenson was a leading suspect, but the police do not appear to have treated either him or Dr Davies as serious suspects. London Hospital night-shift rosters and practices indicate that Stephenson was not able to leave on the nights of the murders and hence could not have been Jack the Ripper.

==Proposed by later authors==
Suspects proposed years after the murders include virtually anyone remotely connected to the case by contemporary documents, as well as many famous names, who were not considered in the police investigation at all. As everyone alive at the time is now dead, modern authors are free to accuse anyone they can, &quot;without any need for any supporting historical evidence&quot;. Most of their suggestions cannot be taken seriously, and include English novelist George Gissing, British prime minister William Ewart Gladstone, and syphilitic artist Frank Miles.

===Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale===

Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale (8 January 1864 – 14 January 1892) was first mentioned in print as a potential suspect when Philippe Jullian&#x27;s biography of Prince Albert Victor&#x27;s father, King Edward VII, was published in 1962. Jullian made a passing reference to rumours that Prince Albert Victor might have been responsible for the murders. Though Jullian did not detail the dates or sources of the rumour, it is possible that the rumour derived indirectly from Dr Thomas E. A. Stowell. In 1960, Stowell told the rumour to writer Colin Wilson, who in turn told Harold Nicolson, a biographer loosely credited as a source of &quot;hitherto unpublished anecdotes&quot; in Jullian&#x27;s book. Nicolson could have communicated Stowell&#x27;s theory to Jullian. The theory was brought to major public attention in 1970 when an article by Stowell was published in &quot;The Criminologist&quot; that revealed his suspicion that Prince Albert Victor had committed the murders after being driven mad by syphilis. The suggestion was widely dismissed, as Prince Albert Victor had strong alibis for the murders, and it is unlikely that he suffered from syphilis. Stowell later denied implying that Prince Albert Victor was the Ripper but efforts to investigate his claims further were hampered, as Stowell was elderly, and he died from natural causes just days after the publication of his article. The same week, Stowell&#x27;s son reported that he had burned his father&#x27;s papers, saying &quot;I read just sufficient to make certain that there was nothing of importance.&quot;

Subsequently, conspiracy theorists, such as Stephen Knight in &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution&quot;, have elaborated on the supposed involvement of Prince Albert Victor in the murders. Rather than implicate Albert Victor directly, they claim that he secretly married and had a daughter with a Catholic shop assistant, and that Queen Victoria, British Prime Minister Lord Salisbury, his Freemason friends, and the Metropolitan Police conspired to murder anyone aware of Albert Victor&#x27;s supposed child. Many facts contradict this theory and its originator, Joseph Gorman (also known as Joseph Sickert), later retracted the story and admitted to the press that it was a hoax. Variations of the theory involve the physician William Gull, the artist Walter Sickert, and the poet James Kenneth Stephen to greater or lesser degrees, and have been fictionalised in novels and films, such as &quot;Murder by Decree&quot; and &quot;From Hell&quot;.

===Joseph Barnett===

Joseph Barnett (c. 1858–1927) was a former fish porter, and victim Mary Kelly&#x27;s lover from 8 April 1887 to 30 October 1888, when they quarrelled and separated after he lost his job and she returned to prostitution to make a living. Inspector Abberline questioned him for four hours after Kelly&#x27;s murder, and his clothes were examined for bloodstains, but he was then released without charge. A century after the murders, author Bruce Paley proposed him as a suspect as Kelly&#x27;s scorned or jealous lover, and suggested that he&#x27;d committed the other murders to scare Kelly off the streets and out of prostitution. Other authors suggest he killed Kelly only, and mutilated the body to make it look like a Ripper murder, but Abberline&#x27;s investigation appears to have exonerated him. Other acquaintances of Kelly put forward as her murderer include her landlord John McCarthy and her former boyfriend Joseph Fleming.

===Lewis Carroll===
Lewis Carroll (pen name of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson; 27 January 1832 – 14 January 1898) was the author of &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; and &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot;. He was named as a suspect based upon anagrams which author Richard Wallace devised for his book &quot;Jack the Ripper, Light-Hearted Friend.&quot; Wallace argues that Carroll had a psychotic breakdown after being assaulted by a man when he was 12. Moreover, according to Wallace, Carroll wrote a diary every day in purple ink, but on the days of the Whitechapel killings, he switched to black. This claim is not taken seriously by scholars. When an excerpt of Wallace&#x27;s book appeared in &quot;Harper&#x27;s&quot;, a letter to the editor written by Guy Jacobson and Francis Heaney took the first paragraph of Wallace&#x27;s excerpt and produced an anagram that had Wallace confessing to the murder of Nicole Brown and the framing of O. J. Simpson, thus demonstrating how incriminating anagrams could be produced from any reasonably lengthy passage.

===Willy Clarkson===
William Berry &quot;Willy&quot; Clarkson (1861 – 12 October 1934) was the royal wigmaker and costume-maker to Queen Victoria and lived approximately from each of the canonical five crime scenes. He was first named as a suspect in 2019, with many of the assertions based on Clarkson&#x27;s 1937 biography written by Harry J. Greenwall. Clarkson is known to have stalked his ex-fiancée and was reputedly a blackmailer and arsonist. He is suspected of committing the murders to cover up his blackmail schemes. Evidence presented to support the theory of Clarkson as a suspect included the revelation that he admitted one of his custom-made wigs was found near the scene of one of the Ripper killings, a fact not previously widely known in the &quot;ripperology&quot; community. Additionally, Clarkson&#x27;s biography quotes him as stating that the police obtained disguises from him for their search for the Ripper, and as such, he would have been aware of the trails they followed, allowing him to elude capture. Hair-cutting shears and barber-surgeon tools (his father or grandfather allegedly being a barber-surgeon) of the kind used by a wig-maker at the time closely match the shape and style of the weapons suspected to have been used in the murders.

===David Cohen===
David Cohen (1865 – 20 October 1889) was a 23-year-old Polish Jew whose incarceration at Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum on 7 December 1888 roughly coincided with the end of the murders. An unmarried tailor, Cohen was described as a violently antisocial, poor East End local. He was suggested as a suspect by author and ripperologist Martin Fido in his book &quot;The Crimes, Detection and Death of Jack the Ripper&quot; (1987).

Fido claimed that the name &quot;David Cohen&quot; was a generic substitute, used at that time to refer to any Jewish immigrant who either could not be positively identified, or whose name was too difficult for police to spell, much in the same fashion that &quot;John Doe&quot; is used in the United States today. Fido identified Cohen with &quot;Leather Apron&quot; (see John Pizer above), and speculated that Cohen&#x27;s true identity was Nathan Kaminsky, a bootmaker living in Whitechapel who had been treated at one time for syphilis, and who could not be traced after May 1888, whilst records of Cohen began that December. Fido suggested that police officials confused the name Kaminsky with Kosminski, resulting in the wrong man coming under suspicion (see Aaron Kosminski above).

Cohen exhibited violent, destructive tendencies while at the asylum, and had to be restrained. He died at the asylum in October 1889. In his book &quot;The Cases That Haunt Us&quot;, former FBI criminal profiler John Douglas asserted that behavioural clues gathered from the murders all point to a person &quot;known to the police as David Cohen ... or someone very much like him&quot;.

===William Withey Gull===

Sir William Withey Gull, Bt (31 December 1816 – 29 January 1890) was physician-in-ordinary to Queen Victoria. He was named as the Ripper as part of the evolution of the widely discredited Masonic/royal conspiracy theory outlined in such books as &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution&quot; (1976). Coachman John Netley has been named as his accomplice. Thanks to the popularity of this theory among fiction writers and for its dramatic nature, Gull shows up as the Ripper in a number of books and films including the TV film &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot; (1988), Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell&#x27;s graphic novel &quot;From Hell&quot; (1999), and its 2001 film adaptation, in which Ian Holm plays Gull. Conventional historians have never taken Gull seriously as a suspect due to sheer lack of evidence; in addition, he was in his seventies at the time of the murders and had recently suffered a stroke.

===George Hutchinson===

George Hutchinson was an unemployed labourer. On 12 November 1888, he made a formal statement to the London police that in the early hours of 9 November 1888, Mary Jane Kelly approached him in the street and asked him for money. He stated that he had then followed her and another man of conspicuous appearance to her room, and had watched the room for about three-quarters of an hour without seeing either leave. He gave a very detailed description of the man, claiming he was &quot;of Jewish appearance&quot;, despite the darkness of that night. The accuracy of Hutchinson&#x27;s statement was disputed among the senior police. Inspector Frederick Abberline, after interviewing Hutchinson, believed that Hutchinson&#x27;s account was truthful. However, Robert Anderson, head of the CID, later claimed that the only witness who got a good look at the killer was Jewish. Hutchinson was not a Jew, and thus not that witness. Hutchinson&#x27;s statement was made on the day that Mary Kelly&#x27;s inquest was held, and he was not called to testify. Some modern scholars have suggested that Hutchinson was the Ripper himself, trying to confuse the police with a false description, but others suggest he may have just been an attention seeker who made up a story he hoped to sell to the press.

===Hyam Hyams===
Hyam Hyams, a cigar-maker in his mid-thirties, was a Jewish lunatic first uncovered by author Martin Fido during research for his book &quot;The Crimes, Detection and Death of Jack the Ripper&quot; while searching for the identity of the police&#x27;s Jewish suspect, although he ultimately concluded it was another man (see David Cohen above). Hyams was later suggested as a suspect in his own right by ripperologist Mark King. According to King, Hyams, who was institutionalized repeatedly throughout his life and eventually died in an asylum in 1913, was homicidally insane and repeatedly attacked asylum staff and fellow patients. His wife, whom he had attacked with a knife in 1889, described him as suffering from epilepsy and becoming progressively more violent as his mental state declined due to periodic epileptic fits. 

Sarah Bax Horton supported the theory in her 2023 book &quot;One-Armed Jack: Uncovering the Real Jack the Ripper&quot;. Bax Horton, a descendant of Harry Garrett who had been a Metropolitan Police sergeant at Leman Street Police Station, examined Hyams&#x27;s medical records, which revealed that he suffered from a severe form of epilepsy and had a stiff arm and an irregular gait with bent knees, which resembles the physical description of the suspect. Bax Horton argued that the crimes coincided with his mental and physical decline which started when he broke his left arm in February 1888 and ended before his incarceration in September 1889 in the Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum, where he remained until his death in 1913.

===James Kelly===

James Kelly (20 April 1860 – 17 September 1929; no relation to victim Mary Kelly) was first identified as a suspect in Terence Sharkey&#x27;s &quot;Jack the Ripper. 100 Years of Investigation&quot; (Ward Lock 1987) and documented in &quot;Prisoner 1167: The madman who was Jack the Ripper&quot;, by Jim Tully, in 1997.

James Kelly murdered his wife in 1883 by stabbing her in the neck. Deemed insane, he was committed to the Broadmoor Asylum, from which he later escaped in early 1888, using a key he fashioned himself. The day after the November 1888 murder of Mary Jane Kelly, whose murder is widely considered by scholars to be the final murder committed by Jack the Ripper, the police searched for Kelly at what had been his residence prior to his wife&#x27;s murder, but they were not able to locate him. In 1927, almost forty years after his escape, he unexpectedly turned himself in to officials at the Broadmoor Asylum. He died two years later, presumably of natural causes.

Retired New York Police Department cold-case detective Ed Norris examined the Jack the Ripper case for a Discovery Channel programme called &quot;Jack the Ripper in America&quot;. In it, Norris claims that James Kelly was Jack the Ripper and that he was also responsible for multiple murders in cities around the United States. Norris highlights a few features of the Kelly story to support his contention. Norris reported Kelly&#x27;s Broadmoor Asylum file from before his escape and his eventual return had never been opened since 1927 until Norris was given special permission for access to it, and that the file is the perfect profile match for Jack the Ripper.

===Charles Allen Lechmere===

Charles Allen Lechmere (5 October 1849 – 23 December 1920), also known as Charles Cross, was a van driver for the Pickfords company, and is conventionally regarded as an innocent witness who discovered the body of the first canonical Ripper victim, Mary Ann Nichols. In a documentary titled &quot;Jack the Ripper: The New Evidence&quot;, Swedish journalist Christer Holmgren and criminologist Gareth Norris of Aberystwyth University, with assistance from former detective Andy Griffiths, proposed that Lechmere was the Ripper. According to Holmgren, Lechmere lied to police, claiming that he had been with Nichols&#x27;s body for a few minutes, whereas research on his route to work from his home demonstrated that he must have been with her for about nine minutes.

Lechmere&#x27;s family background is also similar to that of many serial killers: he grew up in a &quot;broken home&quot;; having never known his biological father, he had two stepfathers; and his childhood was characterized by an instability of residence, growing up in a series of different homes. Holmgren believes that Lechmere may have been responsible for several other murders in addition to those of the canonical five victims and Martha Tabram.

===Jacob Levy===

Jacob Levy (1856 – 29 July 1891) was born in Aldgate in 1856. He followed in his father&#x27;s trade as a butcher, and by 1888 he was living in Middlesex Street with his wife and children, which was right in the heart of Ripper territory (and close to where Catherine Eddowes was murdered). Levy was a butcher with the necessary skills to remove certain organs from the victims, and was recorded as suffering from general paralysis of the insane. His 1890 asylum records report that he “feels that if he is not restrained he will do some violence to some one”. The 2009 video game &quot;Sherlock Holmes Versus Jack the Ripper&quot; uses a combination of historically attested and embellished evidence to propose his candidacy.

Jacob Levy&#x27;s life is featured on an episode of the podcast &quot;Bad Women: The Ripper Retold&quot; where Jennifer Wallis, a historian of medicine and psychiatry, comments that it is unlikely a person in Levy&#x27;s condition would have been able to carry out serial murders and persistently conceal having done so.

===James Maybrick===
James Maybrick (24 October 1838 – 11 May 1889) was a Liverpool cotton merchant. His wife Florence was convicted of poisoning him with arsenic in a sensational, and possibly unjust, trial presided over by Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, the father of another modern suspect, James Kenneth Stephen. In her book, &quot;Jack the Ripper: The American Connection&quot; author Shirley Harrison asserted James Maybrick was both Jack the Ripper and the Servant Girl Annihilator of Austin, Texas. A diary purportedly by Maybrick, published in the 1990s by Michael Barrett, contains a confession to the Ripper murders. In 1995, Barrett confessed to writing the diary himself, and described the process of counterfeiting the diary in detail. He swore under oath that he and his wife, Anne, had forged it. Anne Barrett, after their divorce, later denied forgery, and their story changed several times over the years. The diary was discredited by historians who pointed to factual errors in relation to some of the crimes, and document experts pronounced the diary a fake; the handwriting does not match that of Maybrick&#x27;s will. 

It has also been alleged that the ink contains the preservative chloroacetamide and that this was not commercially used in ink until 1972, although scientific testing was inconclusive. Other sources also state that chloroacetamide has been found in ink dating back to 1857. In addition to the diary, a gentleman&#x27;s pocket watch made around 1847 was presented by Albert Johnson in 1993. The inside cover of the watch has the inscription &quot;J. Maybrick&quot; and the words &quot;I am Jack&quot; scratched into the inside cover alongside the initials of the Ripper&#x27;s five canonical victims. Examination using electron microscopes by the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology and Bristol University determined based on aged brass flakes inside the scratches that they likely predated the discovery of both the watch and the diary, and therefore the idea of Maybrick as the Ripper, by several decades and could potentially have been made in the late 1880s.

===Michael Maybrick===
Michael Maybrick (alias Stephen Adams; 31 January 1841 – 26 August 1913) was an English composer and singer best known under his pseudonym Stephen Adams as the composer of &quot;The Holy City&quot;. In his book from 2015 &quot;They All Love Jack: Busting the Ripper&quot; Bruce Robinson documents how this suspect frequented the Whitechapel area where the murders took place and investigates a description of a man seen by Matthew Packer on the night of the murder of Elizabeth Stride who resembled Michael Maybrick. The suspect&#x27;s profession meant he frequently travelled around the UK and the dates and locations of his performances coincide with when and where the letters to the police were sent from. The suspect&#x27;s presence in Bradford around Christmas 1888 also coincides with the murder of a seven-year-old boy, Johnnie Gill, a murder which the Ripper had foretold to police in a letter.

===Alexander Pedachenko===
Alexander Pedachenko (alleged dates 1857–1908) was named in the 1923 memoirs of William Le Queux, &quot;Things I Know about Kings, Celebrities and Crooks&quot;. Le Queux claimed to have seen a manuscript in French written by Rasputin stating that Jack the Ripper was an insane Russian doctor named Alexander Pedachenko, an agent of the Okhrana (the Secret Police of Imperial Russia), whose aim in committing the murders was to discredit Scotland Yard. He was supposedly assisted by two accomplices: &quot;Levitski&quot; and a tailoress called Winberg. However, there is no hard evidence that Pedachenko ever existed, and many parts of the story as recounted by Le Queux fall apart when examined closely. For example, one of the sources named in the manuscript was a London-based Russian journalist called Nideroest, who was known for inventing sensational stories. Reviewers of Le Queux&#x27;s book were aware of Nideroest&#x27;s background, and unabashedly referred to him as an &quot;unscrupulous liar&quot;. Pedachenko was promoted as a suspect by Donald McCormick, who may have developed the story by adding his own inventions.

===Walter Sickert===

Walter Richard Sickert (31 May 1860 – 22 January 1942) was a German-born artist of British and Danish ancestry, who was first mentioned as a possible Ripper suspect in Donald McCormick&#x27;s book &quot;The Identity of Jack the Ripper&quot; (1959). He had a fascination with the Ripper murders, going so far as to stay in a room that was rumoured to have once had Jack the Ripper himself as a lodger, and depicted similar scenes in many of his paintings.

In 1976 Stephen Knight, in his book &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution&quot;, maintained that Sickert had been forced to become an accomplice in the Ripper murders. Knight&#x27;s information came from the royal/masonic conspiracy theory concocted by Joseph Gorman, who claimed to be Sickert&#x27;s illegitimate son. Gorman later admitted that his story was a hoax.

From 1989 to 1998 Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell published the graphic novel &quot;From Hell&quot;, which was based on Stephen Knight&#x27;s theory. In 1990 Jean Overton Fuller, in her book &quot;Sickert and the Ripper Crimes&quot;, maintained that Sickert was the killer.

In 2002 crime novelist Patricia Cornwell, in &quot;Portrait of a Killer: Jack the Ripper—Case Closed&quot;, maintained that Sickert was Jack the Ripper.&lt;ref name=&quot;TimesOnline.co.uk / Portrait&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Cornwell purchased 31 of Sickert&#x27;s paintings, and some in the art world have said that she destroyed one of them in searching for Sickert&#x27;s DNA, but Cornwell denies having done this. Cornwell claimed that mitochondrial DNA from one of more than 600 Ripper letters sent to Scotland Yard and mitochondrial DNA from a letter written by Sickert belong to only one per cent of the population. In 2017, Cornwell published another book on the subject, &quot;Ripper: The Secret Life of Walter Sickert&quot;, in which she presented what she believes to be further evidence of Sickert&#x27;s guilt.&lt;ref name=&quot;TimesOnline.co.uk / Ripper&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 2004 the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, in its article on Sickert, dismissed any claim that he was Jack the Ripper as &quot;fantasy&quot;. In 2005, Matthew Sturgis included a lengthy &quot;Postscript&quot; in his substantial biography of the artist, exploring Cornwell&#x27;s and others&#x27; claims; it begins, &quot;Walter Sickert was not Jack the Ripper&quot;. Sickert scholar Richard Shone, reviewing Sturgis&#x27;s book, refers to &quot;Sturgis&#x27;s superb demolition of Cornwell&quot; and adds that Sturgis &quot;lays waste the crimewriter&#x27;s theory with extraordinary conviction.&quot; In 2019, an article in &quot;Science&quot;, the journal of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, stated that Cornwell&#x27;s allegation that Sickert was the Ripper was based on a DNA analysis of letters that &quot;many experts believe ... to be fake&quot; and that &quot;another genetic analysis of the letters claimed the murderer could have been a woman&quot;.

In 2024, Johann Naldi, a French gallery owner, claimed to have confirmed the identity of the serial killer by finding a portrait that he attributes to the French painter Jacques-Émile Blanche which depicts a man that Naldi says resembles Sickert.

Sickert is not considered a serious suspect by most who study the case, and strong evidence shows he was in France at the time of most of the Ripper murders.

===Joseph Silver===

South African historian Charles van Onselen claimed, in the book &quot;The Fox and the Flies: The World of Joseph Silver, Racketeer and Psychopath&quot; (2007), that Joseph Silver (1868–1918), also known as Joseph Lis, a Polish Jew, was Jack the Ripper. Critics note, among other things, that van Onselen provides no evidence that Silver was ever in London during the time of the murders, and that the accusation is based entirely upon speculation. Van Onselen has responded by saying that the number of circumstances involved should make Silver a suspect.

===James Kenneth Stephen===

James Kenneth Stephen (25 February 1859 – 3 February 1892) was first suggested as a suspect in a biography of another Ripper suspect, Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale by Michael Harrison published in 1972. Harrison dismissed the idea that Albert Victor was the Ripper but instead suggested that Stephen, a poet and one of Albert Victor&#x27;s tutors from Trinity College, Cambridge, was a more likely suspect. Harrison&#x27;s suggestion was based on Stephen&#x27;s misogynistic writings and on similarities between his handwriting and that of the &quot;From Hell&quot; letter, supposedly written by the Ripper. Harrison supposed that Stephen may have had sexual feelings for Albert Victor and that Stephen&#x27;s hatred of women arose from jealousy because Albert Victor preferred female company and did not reciprocate Stephen&#x27;s feelings. However, Harrison&#x27;s analysis was rebutted by professional document examiners. There is no proof that Stephen was ever in love with Albert Victor, although he did commit suicide by starvation shortly after hearing of Albert&#x27;s death.

Frank Spiering further developed the theory in his book &quot;Prince Jack&quot; (1978), which depicted Albert Victor as the murderer and Stephen as his lover. The book is widely dismissed as sensational fiction based on previous theories rather than genuine historical research. Spiering claimed to have discovered a copy of some private notes written by another suspect, Sir William Gull, in the library of the New York Academy of Medicine and that the notes included a confession by Albert Victor under a state of hypnosis. Spiering further suggested that Albert Victor died due to an overdose of morphine, administered to him on the order of Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and possibly Albert Victor&#x27;s own father, Edward VII of the United Kingdom. The New York Academy of Medicine denies possessing the records Spiering mentioned, and when Spiering was offered access to the Royal Archives, he retorted: &quot;I don&#x27;t want to see any files.&quot;

===Francis Thompson===
Francis Thompson (18 December 1859 – 13 November 1907) was an ascetic poet and opium addict with some medical training. Between 1885 and 1888, he spent some time homeless in the Docks area south of Whitechapel. He was proposed as a suspect in the self-published 2016 book &quot;Francis Thompson: A Ripper Suspect&quot; by Australian teacher Richard Patterson, who cites interpretations of his poetry.

===Sir John Williams===
Sir John Williams, 1st Baronet (6 November 1840 – 24 May 1926) was obstetrician to Queen Victoria&#x27;s daughter Princess Beatrice, and was accused of the Ripper crimes in the book, &quot;Uncle Jack&quot; (2005), written by one of the surgeon&#x27;s descendants, Tony Williams, and Humphrey Price. The authors claim that the victims knew the doctor personally, that they were killed and mutilated in an attempt to research the causes of infertility, and that a badly blunted surgical knife, which belonged to Williams, was the murder weapon. Jennifer Pegg demonstrated in two articles that much of the research in the book was flawed; for example, the version of the notebook entry used to argue that Williams had met Ripper victim Mary Ann Nichols had been altered for print and did not match the original document, and the line as found in the original document was in handwriting that did not match the rest of the notebook.

Williams&#x27;s wife, Lizzie, was named as a possible suspect by author John Morris, who claims that she was unable to have children and, in an unhinged state, took revenge on those who could by killing them.

===Boston Corbett===
Boston Corbett (January 29, 1832 – ) was an English-born American soldier who killed John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of Abraham Lincoln. Corbett was known for his devout religious beliefs and eccentric behavior, and had disappeared in 1888, just a few months before the murders. Writer Dale L. Walker proposed Corbett as a suspect in the Ripper murders, stating that &quot;Corbett was London-born. He was certifiably insane. He escaped from a Topeka insane asylum in June 1888... He was &#x27;down on whores&#x27;. He had killed - men, to be sure- before. He was acquainted with sharp instruments in his hat finishing trade. He had motive, means, and opportunity.&quot;

==Further theories==
Other named suspects include German hairdresser Charles Ludwig, apothecary and mental patient Oswald Puckridge (1838–1900), insane medical student John Sanders (1862–1901), Swedish tramp Nikaner Benelius, and even social reformer Thomas Barnardo, who claimed he had met one of the victims (Elizabeth Stride) shortly before her murder. Isenschmid and Ludwig were exonerated after another murder was committed while they were in custody. There was no evidence against Barnardo, Benelius, Puckridge or Sanders. According to Donald McCormick, other suspects included mountebank L. Forbes Winslow, whose own suspect in the case was a religious maniac, G. Wentworth Bell Smith. The theories continue, such as the 2009 addition of morgue assistant Robert Mann to the long list of suspects. More outlandish theories have included artist Vincent van Gogh and Leopold II of Belgium.

Named suspects who may be entirely fictional include &quot;Dr Stanley&quot;, cult leader Nicolai Vasiliev, Norwegian sailor &quot;Fogelma&quot;, and Russian needlewoman Olga Tchkersoff, as well as the aforementioned Alexander Pedachenko.

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle advanced theories involving a female murderer dubbed &quot;Jill the Ripper&quot;. Supporters of this theory believe that the murderer worked, or at least posed, as a midwife, who could be seen with bloody clothes without attracting suspicion and would be more easily trusted by the victims than a man. Women proposed as the Ripper include the convicted murderers Mary Pearcey and Constance Kent, and even Theosophist Helena Blavatsky. The 19 December 1893 edition of the Ohio &quot;Marion Daily Star&quot; reported that Lizzie Halliday, a mentally ill Irish immigrant suspected of leaving a string of dead husbands in her wake before being arrested in upper New York State for the murder of two women and her last husband, was likewise accused of the Whitechapel murders, of which she spoke &quot;constantly&quot;. She denied any relation to them, however, and there was no evidence to contradict her claim.

Some Ripper authors, such as Patricia Cornwell, believe the killer sent letters to the police and press. DNA analysis of the gum used on a postage stamp of one of these letters was &quot;inconclusive&quot; and &quot;not forensically reliable&quot;. The available material has been handled many times and is therefore far too contaminated to provide any meaningful results. Moreover, most authorities consider the letters hoaxes. Nevertheless, Jeff Mudgett, himself a descendant of notorious American serial killer H. H. Holmes, used these handwriting samples in an attempt to link Holmes to the Ripper case. The H. H. Holmes theory is the basis for an eight-part cable TV series entitled &quot;American Ripper&quot;, which premiered on the History Channel on 11 July 2017.

Author Frank Pearse, who purports to have access to a written confession, argues that the murders were performed by a man named John Pavitt Sawyer (who held multiple similarities, such as residence and profession, to alternate suspect George Chapman), as part of an occult Freemason initiation.

Several theorists suggest that &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot; was actually more than one killer. Stephen Knight argued that the murders were a conspiracy involving multiple miscreants, whereas others have proposed that each murder was committed by unconnected individuals acting independently of each other.

The police of the time believed the Ripper was a local Whitechapel resident. His apparent ability to disappear immediately after the killings suggests an intimate knowledge of the Whitechapel neighbourhood, including its back alleys and hiding places. However, the population of Whitechapel was largely transient, impoverished and often used aliases. There is hardly any record of the lives of its residents.

In 2023, historian Rod Beattie proposed police officer Bowden Endacott, who had previously been demoted and reassigned to guarding the British Museum after falsely accusing a woman named Elizabeth Cass of being a prostitute.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Jakuboski, Maxim; Braund, Nathan (2005). &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot;. Castle Books. 
*Knight, Stephen (1976; rev. 1984; repr. 2000). &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution&quot;. London: Bounty Books. .
* Marriott, Trevor (2005). &quot;Jack the Ripper: The 21st Century Investigation&quot;. London: John Blake. .
* Meikle, Denis (2002). &quot;Jack the Ripper: The Murders and the Movies&quot;. Richmond, Surrey: Reynolds and Hearn Ltd. .
* Rumbelow, Donald (2004). &quot;The Complete Jack the Ripper: Fully Revised and Updated&quot;. Penguin Books. .
* Stewart, William (1939). &quot;Jack The Ripper: A New Theory&quot;. Quality Press.
* Sugden, Philip (2002). &quot;The Complete History of Jack the Ripper&quot;. London: Robinson. .
* Trow, M. J. (1997). &quot;The Many Faces of Jack the Ripper&quot;. Chichester, West Sussex: Summersdale. .
* Werner, Alex (editor) (2008). &quot;Jack the Ripper and the East End&quot;. London: Chatto &amp; Windus. 
* Whitehead, Mark; Rivett, Miriam (2006). &quot;Jack the Ripper&quot;. Harpenden, Hertfordshire: Pocket Essentials. 
* Woods, Paul; Baddeley, Gavin (2009). &quot;Saucy Jack: The Elusive Ripper&quot;. Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allan Publishing. 

==External links==
*Casebook: Jack the Ripper
*FBI criminal profile of the Ripper
*BBC News article pertaining to the Jack the Ripper suspects</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="43" end="61" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q43963" start="155" end="170" title="Jack the Ripper" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="424" end="443" title="Metropolitan Police Service" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062923" start="604" end="623" title="Whitechapel murders" label="Whitechapel murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q239251" start="660" end="676" title="Mary Ann Nichols" label="Mary Ann Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q263123" start="678" end="691" title="Annie Chapman" label="Annie Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q263094" start="693" end="709" title="Elizabeth Stride" label="Elizabeth Stride"/>
<link wikidata="Q263112" start="711" end="728" title="Catherine Eddowes" label="Catherine Eddowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q242469" start="733" end="748" title="Mary Jane Kelly" label="Mary Jane Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="991" title="Jack the Ripper#Canonical five" label="canonical five"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052461" start="1030" end="1050" title="Emma Elizabeth Smith" label="Emma Elizabeth Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774579" start="1052" end="1065" title="Martha Tabram" label="Martha Tabram"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1119" end="1139" title="Whitechapel murders#Pinchin Street torso" label="Pinchin Street torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1400" end="1409" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="1987" end="1993" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1999" end="2008" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q880861" start="2077" end="2095" title="Blackheath, London" label="Blackheath, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="2136" end="2143" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2211" end="2217" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q845015" start="2223" end="2231" title="Chiswick" label="Chiswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2332" end="2342" title="homosexual" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="2452" end="2465" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242291" start="2796" end="2811" title="Chief Constable" label="Chief Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919772" start="2816" end="2835" title="Melville Macnaghten" label="Melville Macnaghten"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="3224" end="3230" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="3235" end="3239" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q691133" start="3251" end="3270" title="Frederick Abberline" label="Frederick Abberline"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="3530" end="3535" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="3587" end="3604" title="severe depression" label="severe depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3615" end="3635" title="psychiatric disorder" label="psychiatric disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="3694" end="3705" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q694381" start="3733" end="3748" title="Involuntary commitment" label="hospitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="3753" end="3774" title="psychiatric treatment" label="psychiatric treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="4275" end="4297" title="psychiatric evaluation" label="psychiatric evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="4397" end="4412" title="mental hospital" label="mental hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q263123" start="4691" end="4704" title="Annie Chapman" label="Annie Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="4751" end="4766" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q691133" start="5307" end="5326" title="Frederick Abberline" label="Frederick Abberline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628706" start="5366" end="5383" title="Pall Mall Gazette" label="Pall Mall Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="5666" end="5680" title="modus operandi" label="modus operandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="5798" end="5808" title="Polish Jew" label="Polish Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866638" start="5821" end="5848" title="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum" label="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="5884" end="5892" title="forename" label="forename"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919772" start="5930" end="5949" title="Melville Macnaghten" label="Melville Macnaghten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295210" start="6003" end="6017" title="Donald Swanson" label="Donald Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6033" end="6055" title="Donald Swanson#The .27Swanson Marginalia.27" label="comments in the margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15894241" start="6071" end="6093" title="Assistant Commissioner" label="Assistant Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q321122" start="6094" end="6113" title="Sir Robert Anderson" label="Sir Robert Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="7148" end="7155" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729795" start="7706" end="7717" title="Martin Fido" label="Martin Fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054088" start="7917" end="7939" title="auditory hallucination" label="auditory hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228053" start="8062" end="8085" title="The Cases That Haunt Us" label="The Cases That Haunt Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="8100" end="8103" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191309" start="8104" end="8112" title="offender profiling" label="profiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q724506" start="8113" end="8128" title="John E. Douglas" label="John E. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="8143" end="8151" title="paranoia" label="paranoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8518" end="8529" title="#David Cohen" label="David Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="8547" end="8559" title="DNA analysis" label="DNA analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q263112" start="8632" end="8649" title="Catherine Eddowes" label="Catherine Eddowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q511916" start="8677" end="8690" title="Alec Jeffreys" label="Alec Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="8708" end="8730" title="DNA profiling" label="genetic fingerprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="8905" end="8922" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760026" start="9364" end="9392" title="Journal of Forensic Sciences" label="Journal of Forensic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9497" end="9500" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q213257" start="9597" end="9607" title="Emilia Fox" label="Emilia Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q56478376" start="9732" end="9753" title="expression of concern" label="expression of concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="9904" end="9911" title="Confidence trick" label="con man"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="10041" end="10053" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484433" start="10312" end="10325" title="Philip Sugden (historian)" label="Philip Sugden"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10405" end="10411" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q239251" start="11016" end="11032" title="Mary Ann Nichols" label="Mary Ann Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q263123" start="11037" end="11050" title="Annie Chapman" label="Annie Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488404" start="11492" end="11504" title="London Docks" label="London Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q503375" start="11840" end="11849" title="Tottenham" label="Tottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="11869" end="11880" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12079" end="12092" title="Whitechapel murders#Frances Coles" label="Frances Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062923" start="12123" end="12142" title="Whitechapel murders" label="Whitechapel murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="12797" end="12814" title="alcoholism" label="addicted to drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="13062" end="13072" title="misogyny" label="misogynist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="13079" end="13084" title="Quackery" label="quack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="13219" end="13251" title="assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassination of Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="13849" end="13862" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="13956" end="13976" title="New York City Police" label="New York City Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031582" start="14202" end="14218" title="John Littlechild" label="John Littlechild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="14226" end="14253" title="Metropolitan Police Service" label="Metropolitan Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q531150" start="14291" end="14305" title="George R. Sims" label="George R. Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150168" start="14670" end="14687" title="Richard Mansfield" label="Richard Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="14740" end="14762" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217352" start="14781" end="14818" title="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde" label="Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="15080" end="15086" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129732" start="15646" end="15657" title="James Berry (executioner)" label="James Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="16775" end="16782" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="16859" end="16876" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702652" start="16986" end="17013" title="Joliet Prison" label="Illinois State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q40345" start="17017" end="17033" title="Joliet, Illinois" label="Joliet, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="17212" end="17226" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344347" start="17729" end="17749" title="Edward Marshall-Hall" label="Edward Marshall-Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="18097" end="18104" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="18174" end="18182" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972265" start="18298" end="18316" title="Broadmoor Hospital" label="Broadmoor Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767310" start="18408" end="18415" title="The Sun (1893–1906)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429969" start="19158" end="19166" title="Rainhill" label="Rainhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q153647" start="19172" end="19182" title="St. Helens, Merseyside" label="St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="19184" end="19194" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19270" end="19279" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="19621" end="19633" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="19751" end="19760" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="20162" end="20175" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486489" start="21045" end="21062" title="Hugh O. Pentecost" label="Hugh O. Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q20731789" start="21149" end="21163" title="Xanthé Mallett" label="Xanthé Mallett"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="21664" end="21670" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q690768" start="21675" end="21686" title="black magic" label="black magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374421" start="21728" end="21743" title="London Hospital" label="London Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q288301" start="22279" end="22299" title="William Thomas Stead" label="William Thomas Stead"/>
<link wikidata="Q369790" start="23162" end="23176" title="George Gissing" label="George Gissing"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="23201" end="23224" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751879" start="23248" end="23259" title="Frank Miles" label="Frank Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q285654" start="23465" end="23481" title="Philippe Jullian" label="Philippe Jullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="23538" end="23553" title="Edward VII" label="King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789135" start="23817" end="23837" title="Thomas E. A. Stowell" label="Thomas E. A. Stowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q368831" start="23882" end="23894" title="Colin Wilson" label="Colin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q332956" start="23913" end="23928" title="Harold Nicolson" label="Harold Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="24346" end="24354" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="24938" end="24958" title="Conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269676" start="24968" end="24982" title="Stephen Knight (author)" label="Stephen Knight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24992" end="25027" title="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution" label="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25227" end="25235" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="25261" end="25275" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="25277" end="25299" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="British Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="25300" end="25314" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="25320" end="25329" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="25347" end="25366" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863354" start="25659" end="25671" title="William Gull" label="William Gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q703369" start="25684" end="25698" title="Walter Sickert" label="Walter Sickert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365829" start="25713" end="25734" title="James Kenneth Stephen" label="James Kenneth Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q968292" start="25828" end="25844" title="Murder by Decree" label="Murder by Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q470771" start="25861" end="25870" title="From Hell (film)" label="From Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="26873" end="26881" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="26970" end="27007" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="27024" end="27049" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q122981" start="27094" end="27101" title="anagram" label="anagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116019" start="27159" end="27196" title="Jack the Ripper, Light-Hearted Friend" label="Jack the Ripper, Light-Hearted Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="27752" end="27774" title="O. J. Simpson murder case" label="murder of Nicole Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="27794" end="27807" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866638" start="29295" end="29322" title="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum" label="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729795" start="29536" end="29547" title="Martin Fido" label="Martin Fido"/>
<link wikidata="Q302057" start="29896" end="29904" title="John Doe" label="John Doe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30005" end="30015" title="#John Pizer" label="John Pizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="30163" end="30171" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30397" end="30412" title="#Aaron Kosminski" label="Aaron Kosminski"/>
<link wikidata="Q724506" start="30634" end="30646" title="John E. Douglas" label="John Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="30931" end="30945" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="31025" end="31032" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31089" end="31124" title="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution" label="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250283" start="31148" end="31159" title="John Netley" label="John Netley"/>
<link wikidata="Q932874" start="31372" end="31387" title="Jack the Ripper (1988 TV series)" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="31402" end="31412" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282723" start="31417" end="31431" title="Eddie Campbell" label="Eddie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q513101" start="31459" end="31468" title="From Hell" label="From Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q470771" start="31491" end="31511" title="From Hell (film)" label="2001 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q223091" start="31522" end="31530" title="Ian Holm" label="Ian Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="31735" end="31741" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130829" start="33137" end="33144" title="lunatic" label="lunatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33402" end="33413" title="#David Cohen" label="David Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="33797" end="33805" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="33891" end="33905" title="epileptic fits" label="epileptic fits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866638" start="34564" end="34591" title="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum" label="Colney Hatch Lunatic Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972265" start="35082" end="35098" title="Broadmoor Hospital" label="Broadmoor Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q242469" start="35219" end="35234" title="Mary Jane Kelly" label="Mary Jane Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335227" start="35696" end="35705" title="Ed Norris" label="Ed Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43404" start="35746" end="35763" title="Discovery Channel" label="Discovery Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q239251" start="36587" end="36603" title="Mary Ann Nichols" label="Mary Ann Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q319761" start="36748" end="36770" title="Aberystwyth University" label="Aberystwyth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q115345739" start="37992" end="38023" title="General paresis of the insane" label="general paralysis of the insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q765359" start="38165" end="38203" title="Sherlock Holmes Versus Jack the Ripper" label="Sherlock Holmes Versus Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="38702" end="38711" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912678" start="38738" end="38746" title="Florence Maybrick" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="38783" end="38790" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q680631" start="38857" end="38880" title="James Fitzjames Stephen" label="James Fitzjames Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365829" start="38920" end="38941" title="James Kenneth Stephen" label="James Kenneth Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069795" start="39090" end="39114" title="Servant Girl Annihilator" label="Servant Girl Annihilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q209345" start="39832" end="39847" title="chloroacetamide" label="chloroacetamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q849813" start="40087" end="40099" title="pocket watch" label="pocket watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="40386" end="40405" title="electron microscope" label="electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="40414" end="40474" title="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology" label="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="40479" end="40497" title="Bristol University" label="Bristol University"/>
<link wikidata="Q991798" start="41051" end="41065" title="Bruce Robinson" label="Bruce Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232165" start="41791" end="41807" title="William Le Queux" label="William Le Queux"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="41936" end="41944" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="42047" end="42054" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="42077" end="42092" title="Russian Empire" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294821" start="42762" end="42778" title="Donald McCormick" label="Donald McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294821" start="43034" end="43050" title="Donald McCormick" label="Donald McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269676" start="43330" end="43344" title="Stephen Knight (author)" label="Stephen Knight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43364" end="43399" title="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution" label="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43534" end="43565" title="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution#Claims of Joseph Gorman" label="royal/masonic conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q770956" start="43579" end="43592" title="Joseph Gorman" label="Joseph Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="43713" end="43723" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282723" start="43728" end="43742" title="Eddie Campbell" label="Eddie Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q513101" start="43777" end="43786" title="From Hell" label="From Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q524943" start="43851" end="43870" title="Jean Overton Fuller" label="Jean Overton Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q231467" start="43991" end="44008" title="Patricia Cornwell" label="Patricia Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="44019" end="44068" title="Portrait of a Killer: Jack the Ripper—Case Closed" label="Portrait of a Killer: Jack the Ripper—Case Closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="44257" end="44266" title="The arts" label="art world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="44340" end="44343" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="44405" end="44422" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="44874" end="44913" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329026" start="45261" end="45274" title="Richard Shone" label="Richard Shone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="45509" end="45516" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="45543" end="45594" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45872" end="45884" title=":fr:Johann Naldi" label="Johann Naldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q936710" start="46033" end="46054" title="Jacques-Émile Blanche" label="Jacques-Émile Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084053" start="46315" end="46334" title="Charles van Onselen" label="Charles van Onselen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159670" start="47012" end="47063" title="Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale" label="Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830978" start="47067" end="47083" title="Michael Harrison (writer)" label="Michael Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="47252" end="47278" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="47362" end="47374" title="misogyny" label="misogynistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290260" start="47444" end="47465" title="From Hell letter" label="&amp;quot;From Hell&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863354" start="48357" end="48373" title="Sir William Gull, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822445" start="48397" end="48425" title="New York Academy of Medicine" label="New York Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="48501" end="48509" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="48584" end="48592" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="48645" end="48659" title="Robert Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="48706" end="48738" title="Edward VII of the United Kingdom" label="Edward VII of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373684" start="48867" end="48881" title="Royal Archives" label="Royal Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="49030" end="49037" title="Asceticism" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="49130" end="49138" title="Homelessness" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="49477" end="49498" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q158140" start="49508" end="49525" title="Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom" label="Princess Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q180914" start="50640" end="50657" title="John Wilkes Booth" label="John Wilkes Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025404" start="50663" end="50690" title="assassination of Abraham Lincoln" label="assassin of Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210515" start="50841" end="50855" title="Dale L. Walker" label="Dale L. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="51311" end="51321" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q692235" start="51477" end="51492" title="Thomas John Barnardo" label="Thomas Barnardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q263094" start="51537" end="51553" title="Elizabeth Stride" label="Elizabeth Stride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294821" start="51768" end="51784" title="Donald McCormick" label="Donald McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430956" start="51810" end="51820" title="charlatan" label="mountebank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456451" start="51821" end="51838" title="L. Forbes Winslow" label="L. Forbes Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451172" start="51971" end="51977" title="morgue" label="morgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="52076" end="52092" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967" start="52097" end="52118" title="Leopold II of Belgium" label="Leopold II of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817291" start="52278" end="52289" title="needlewoman" label="needlewoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="52364" end="52382" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185196" start="52549" end="52556" title="midwife" label="midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395318" start="52746" end="52758" title="Mary Pearcey" label="Mary Pearcey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163554" start="52763" end="52777" title="Constance Kent" label="Constance Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="52788" end="52799" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="52800" end="52816" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="52854" end="52858" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750327" start="52865" end="52882" title="Marion Daily Star" label="Marion Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664490" start="52903" end="52918" title="Lizzie Halliday" label="Lizzie Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="53041" end="53055" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q231467" start="53321" end="53338" title="Patricia Cornwell" label="Patricia Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="53713" end="53719" title="hoaxes" label="hoaxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q360680" start="53806" end="53818" title="H. H. Holmes" label="H. H. Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621107" start="54032" end="54047" title="History (U.S. TV channel)" label="History Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q350959" start="54301" end="54315" title="George Chapman (murderer)" label="George Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="54339" end="54348" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269676" start="54456" end="54470" title="Stephen Knight (author)" label="Stephen Knight"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54502" end="54512" title="Jack the Ripper: The Final Solution" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="55213" end="55227" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051197" start="55265" end="55279" title="Elizabeth Cass" label="Elizabeth Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269676" start="55438" end="55453" title="Stephen Knight (author)" label="Knight, Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17484433" start="55993" end="56007" title="Philip Sugden (historian)" label="Sugden, Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918215" start="56091" end="56102" title="M. J. Trow" label="Trow, M. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q203316" start="56438" end="56453" title="Gavin Baddeley" label="Baddeley, Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="56630" end="56638" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141810" wikidata="Q816852" url="?curid=1141810" title="Benedict (crater)">
<text>Benedict is a small, bowl-shaped crater that lies on the floor of the walled basin Mendeleev. It is located near the lunar equator on the far side of the Moon from the Earth.

This crater is circular in shape, with little appearance of wear. At the midpoint of the sloping inner walls is a small central floor. The higher albedo of the inner walls, compared to the surrounding terrain, indicates that this is a relatively young formation.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q816852" start="0" end="8" title="Benedict (crater)" label="Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="33" end="39" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333763" start="83" end="92" title="Mendeleev (crater)" label="Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="117" end="122" title="moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="123" end="130" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="138" end="146" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="154" end="158" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="168" end="173" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="322" end="328" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141813" wikidata="Q6181663" url="?curid=1141813" title="Jeremy Mansfield">
<text>Robert Jeremy Clayton Mansfield (15 August 1963 – 31 October 2022) was a South African radio and television celebrity. He worked on numerous radio stations as a presenter, and also presented numerous television shows and inserts for popular television magazine programs.

==Early life==
Mansfield was born in Grahamstown, South Africa. He attended school at Kingswood College. He remained in Grahamstown attending Rhodes University, where he studied speech, drama and journalism.

==Media career==
===Radio===
In 1985, while at university, he started working for the Durban-based radio station &quot;Capital Radio 604&quot;. During the same year, he was awarded the AA Vita Award as &quot;The Most Promising Young South African Actor&quot;. In 1990, Mansfield left Capital Radio (then broadcasting from Johannesburg). He was recruited to work for Super Sport on M-Net and was requested to do sport on the John Berks show on the Primedia-owned 702 Talk Radio.

Mansfield&#x27;s popularity continued to grow, and in 1993, he was appointed as a regular presenter of 702&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Afternoon&quot; magazine program. In 1995, Mansfield took over hosting of the afternoon show.

In 1997, Mansfield moved to &quot;702 Talk Radio&quot;&#x27;s sister station 94.7 Highveld Stereo where he created and hosted the hugely popular weekday breakfast show, &quot;The Rude Awakening&quot; which at its peak was the most commercially successful show in southern Africa with over 1.5 million listeners. In 2009, he was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia and received six months of medical treatment. In June 2010, Mansfield announced he would be leaving the show. He hosted his last show on Monday 12 July 2010.

Jeremy Mansfield returned to radio in November 2018 as the host of the breakfast show, &quot;Mansfield in the Morning&quot;, on community radio station, Hot 91.9fm. His show changed its name to Joburg&#x27;s Biggest Breakfast Show and Mansfield left after personal issues.

===Television and film===

In the mid-1990s, Mansfield started appearing as a features contributor and guest presenter on South African Pay television channels M-Net for &quot;Front Row&quot; and SuperSport. In 1998 he left the channel and started presenting &quot;A Word or 2&quot;, on SABC 2. The show ran for 10 seasons.

In 2005, Mansfield presented the M-Net comedy show &quot;Laugh Out Loud&quot; for two seasons.

In 2010, Mansfield was cast in Disney&#x27;s local release of &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; as the voice of &quot;Lifer&quot;.

In 2010, Mansfield hosted his own weekly finance show, &quot;Mansfield&#x27;s Moneysense&quot; on CNBC Africa.

Mansfield presented &quot;Mansfield2day&quot; on the YouTube channel of the same name.

===CDs and books===
Mansfield released five CDs containing characters he created on-air, humorous stories and songs (most of which he wrote himself) poking fun at many South African personalities and situations.

Mansfield leant his name to a number of joke books, of which &quot;Vrot Jokes&quot; () is a South African bestseller.

He co-authored multi award-winning contemporary cookbook titled &quot;Zhoozsh!&quot; () in February 2009 with his wife, Jacqui. It won over seven awards including Best Cook Book in South Africa and Third Best Cook Book in the World at the Gourmand Awards. Their second cookbook, &quot;Zhoozsh! Faking It&quot; () is also an award-winner. Both books are best-sellers.

==Death==
Mansfield was diagnosed with liver cancer in January 2022. He died on 31 October 2022, at the age of 59.

==Awards and accolades==

1985: AA Vita Award as &quot;The Most Promising Young South African Actor&quot;

1996–2010: Best Radio Personality of the year (Best of Johannesburg Readers&#x27; Choice Awards) wins 14 years in a row

1996–2010: Best Radio Show wins 14 years in a row

2004: The only radio personality to make the &quot;Top 100 South Africans list&quot;

Won Leisure Options&#x27; Most Popular Personality

2008: Three wins in the South African sector of the Gourmand Cookbook Awards: wins Book of the Year, Innovative and Media for &#x27;Zhoozsh!&#x27;

2008: Zhoozsh! wins Bronze as Third Best Cookbook in the World at London ceremony on 13 April

2008: &#x27;Zhoozsh!&#x27;wins Random House Struik Best Seller of the Year

2009: &quot;You&quot; magazine wins Radio Personality of the Year 2009

2011: &quot;Zhoozsh! Faking It&quot; wins South Africa&#x27;s Easy Cook Book in the South African sector of the Gourmand Cookbook Awards

2019 Liberty Radio Awards: Community Radio category: wins Best Breakfast Show Presenter, Best Breakfast Show for &quot;Mansfield in the Morning&quot; and his show wins Best Content Producer

2020: He wins both Breakfast Show Presenter and Best Breakfast Show again.

==Charity work==

* &quot;The Christmas Wish&quot;: 
* &quot;Hear for Life Trust&quot;: the Hear for Life Trust was established out of the &quot;Christmas Wish&quot;. The trust was set up to assist in Cochlear implants to needy individuals who can not otherwise afford the procedures.
* He was a patron, along with Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu, of The Sunflower Fund and an Ambassador of Hope for them
* He was an Honorary Member of the SA Chef&#x27;s Association.
* Jeremy was also an ambassador for the Springbok Rugby Supporter&#x27;s Club. 
* Recipient of the first SAB Inqaba Award (2010)

Mansfield was thanked personally by South Africa&#x27;s former president Nelson Mandela for the charity work he had done which raised over R12 million.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6181663" start="0" end="31" title="Jeremy Mansfield" label="Robert Jeremy Clayton Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q951161" start="309" end="320" title="Grahamstown" label="Grahamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413768" start="358" end="375" title="Kingswood College (South Africa)" label="Kingswood College"/>
<link wikidata="Q377757" start="414" end="431" title="Rhodes University" label="Rhodes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="567" end="573" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q112234792" start="905" end="915" title="John Berks" label="John Berks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083881" start="928" end="936" title="Primedia" label="Primedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280637" start="943" end="957" title="Radio 702" label="702 Talk Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645936" start="1261" end="1281" title="94.7 Highveld Stereo" label="94.7 Highveld Stereo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1868" end="1878" title="Hot 91.9fm" label="Hot 91.9fm"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="2125" end="2139" title="Pay television" label="Pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155995" start="2149" end="2154" title="M-Net" label="M-Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644483" start="2185" end="2195" title="SuperSport (South African broadcaster)" label="SuperSport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2254" end="2265" title="Des chiffres et des lettres#South African version" label="A Word or 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459136" start="2276" end="2282" title="SABC 2" label="SABC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155995" start="2347" end="2352" title="M-Net" label="M-Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="2441" end="2447" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="2478" end="2489" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259574" start="2630" end="2641" title="CNBC Africa" label="CNBC Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3134" end="3142" title="Zhoozsh" label="Zhoozsh!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4097" end="4105" title="Zhoozsh!" label="Zhoozsh!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4220" end="4228" title="Zhoozsh!" label="Zhoozsh!"/>
<link wikidata="Q724965" start="4962" end="4978" title="Cochlear implant" label="Cochlear implant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141823" wikidata="Q215308" url="?curid=1141823" title="Giulio Caccini">
<text>Giulio Romolo Caccini (also Giulio Romano) (8 October 1551 – buried 10 December 1618) was an Italian composer, teacher, singer, instrumentalist and writer of the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras. He was one of the founders of the genre of opera, and one of the most influential creators of the new Baroque style. He was also the father of the composer Francesca Caccini and the singer Settimia Caccini.

==Life==
Little is known about his early life, but he is thought to have been born in Rome, the son of the carpenter Michelangelo Caccini; he was the older brother of the Florentine sculptor Giovanni Caccini. In Rome he studied the lute, the viol and the harp, and began to acquire a reputation as a singer. In the 1560s, Francesco de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, was so impressed with his talent that he took the young Caccini to Florence for further study.

By 1579, Caccini was singing at the Medici court. He was a tenor, and he was able to accompany himself on the viol or the archlute; he sang at various entertainments, including weddings and affairs of state, and took part in the sumptuous &quot;intermedi&quot; of the time, the elaborate musical, dramatic, visual spectacles which were one of the precursors of opera. Also during this time he took part in the movement of humanists, writers, musicians and scholars of the ancient world who formed the Florentine Camerata, the group which gathered at the home of Count Giovanni de&#x27; Bardi, and which was dedicated to recovering the supposed lost glory of ancient Greek dramatic music. With Caccini&#x27;s abilities as a singer, instrumentalist, and composer added to the mix of intellects and talents, the Camerata developed the concept of monody—an emotionally affective solo vocal line, accompanied by relatively simple chordal harmony on one or more instruments—which was a revolutionary departure from the polyphonic practice of the late Renaissance.

In the last two decades of the 16th century, Caccini continued his activities as a singer, teacher and composer. His influence as a teacher has perhaps been underestimated, since he trained dozens of musicians to sing in the new style, including the castrato Giovanni Gualberto Magli, who sang in the first production of Monteverdi&#x27;s first opera &quot;Orfeo&quot;.

Caccini made at least one further trip to Rome, in 1592, as the secretary to Count Bardi. According to his own writings, his music and singing met with an enthusiastic response. However, Rome, the home of Palestrina and the Roman School, was musically conservative, and music following Caccini&#x27;s stylistic lead was relatively rare there until after 1600.

Caccini&#x27;s character seems to have been less than perfectly honorable, as he was frequently motivated by envy and jealousy, not only in his professional life but for personal advancement with the Medici. On one occasion, he informed the Grand Duke Francesco of two lovers in the Medici household— Eleonora, the wife of Pietro de&#x27; Medici, who was having an illicit affair with Bernardino Antinori—and his informing led directly to Eleonora&#x27;s murder by Pietro. His rivalry with both Emilio de&#x27; Cavalieri and Jacopo Peri seems to have been intense: he may have been the one who arranged for Cavalieri to be removed from his post as director of festivities for the wedding of Henry IV of France and Maria de&#x27; Medici in 1600 (an event which caused Cavalieri to leave Florence in fury), and he also seems to have rushed his own opera &quot;Euridice&quot; into print before Peri&#x27;s opera on the same subject could be published, while simultaneously ordering his group of singers to have nothing to do with Peri&#x27;s production.

After 1605, Caccini was less influential, though he continued to take part in composition and performance of sacred polychoral music. He died in Florence, and is buried in the church of St. Annunziata.

==Music and influence==
The &quot;stile recitativo&quot;, as the newly created style of monody was called, proved to be popular not only in Florence, but elsewhere in Italy. Florence and Venice were the two most progressive musical centers in Europe at the end of the 16th century, and the combination of musical innovations from each place resulted in the development of what came to be known as the Baroque style. Caccini&#x27;s achievement was to create a type of direct musical expression, as easily understood as speech, which later developed into the operatic recitative, and which influenced numerous other stylistic and textural elements in Baroque music.
Caccini&#x27;s most influential work was a collection of monodies and songs for solo voice and basso continuo, published in 1602, called &quot;Le nuove musiche&quot;. Although it is often considered the first published collection of monodies, it was actually preceded by the first collection by Domenico Melli published in Venice in March 1602 (&quot;stile veneto&quot;, in which the new year began on 1 March). In fact, the collection was Caccini&#x27;s attempt, evidently successful, to situate himself as the inventor and codifier of monody and basso continuo. Although the collection was not published until July 1602, Caccini&#x27;s dedication of the collection to Signor Lorenzo Salviati is dated February 1601, in the &quot;stile fiorentino&quot;, when the new year began on 25 March. This likely explains why the collection is often dated to 1601. Moreover, he explicitly positions himself as the inventor of the style when describing it in the introduction. He writes:

The introduction to this volume is probably the most clearly written description of the performance of monody, what Caccini called &quot;affetto cantando&quot; (passionate singing), from the time (a detailed discussion of the &quot;affetto cantando&quot; performance style can be found in Toft, &quot;With Passionate Voice&quot;, pp. 227–40). Caccini&#x27;s preface includes musical examples of ornaments—for example how a specific passage can be ornamented in several different ways, according to the precise emotion that the singer wishes to convey; it also includes effusive praise for the style and amusing disdain for the work of more conservative composers of the period.

The introduction is also important in the history of music theory, as it contains the first attempt to describe the figured bass of the basso continuo style of the Seconda pratica. Caccini writes:

This passage is often overlooked, because it is brief, and located at the very end of the introduction. It is even indicated by Caccini as a &quot;note&quot;; an aside or addendum to the main purpose. It is important to observe, however, that the first explanation of this practice is in the context of an essay about vocal expression and intelligibility. Indeed, it was largely the aim of textual intelligibility that led to the development of this musical style, and to the music of the common practice period.

==Works==
Caccini wrote music for three operas—&quot;Euridice&quot; (1600), &quot;Il rapimento di Cefalo&quot; (1600, excerpts published in the first &quot;Nuove musiche&quot;), and &quot;Euridice&quot; (1602), though the first two were collaborations with others (mainly Peri for the first &quot;Euridice&quot;). In addition he wrote the music for one &quot;intermedio&quot; (&quot;Io che dal ciel cader farei la luna&quot;) (1589). No music for multiple voices survives, even though the records from Florence indicate he was involved with polychoral music around 1610.

He was predominantly a composer of monody and solo song accompanied by a chordal instrument (he himself played harp), and it is in this capacity that he acquired his immense fame. He published two collections of songs and solo madrigals, both titled &quot;Le nuove musiche&quot;, in 1602 (new style) and 1614 (the latter as &quot;Nuove musiche e nuova maniera di scriverle&quot;). Most of the madrigals are through-composed and contain little repetition; some of the songs, however, are strophic. Among the most famous and widely disseminated of these is the madrigal &quot;Amarilli, mia bella&quot;.

A setting of Ave Maria written by Russian composer Vladimir Vavilov is often misattributed to Caccini.

==Recordings==
*&quot;Euridice.&quot; Scherzi Musicali with Nicolas Achten, conductor. 2009, Ricercar RIC 269

==See also==
* Ave Maria (Vavilov) - a popular composition misattributed to Caccini.

==References==
Notes
Sources
*Article &quot;Giulio Caccini&quot;, in &quot;The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians&quot;, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 2001. 
*Gustave Reese, &quot;Music in the Renaissance&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1954. 
*Manfred Bukofzer, &quot;Music in the Baroque Era&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1947. 
*Giulio Caccini, &quot;Le nuove musiche&quot;, tr. John Playford and Oliver Strunk, in &quot;Source Readings in Music History&quot;. New York, W.W. Norton &amp; Co., 1950.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215308" start="0" end="21" title="Giulio Caccini" label="Giulio Romolo Caccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q215308" start="28" end="41" title="Giulio Caccini" label="Giulio Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="167" end="178" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="189" end="196" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="246" end="251" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q232035" start="359" end="376" title="Francesca Caccini" label="Francesca Caccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456882" start="392" end="408" title="Settimia Caccini" label="Settimia Caccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="497" end="501" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="582" end="592" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086991" start="602" end="618" title="Giovanni Caccini" label="Giovanni Caccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="643" end="647" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q40125" start="653" end="657" title="viol" label="viol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="666" end="670" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q299675" start="733" end="758" title="Francesco I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Francesco de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="850" end="858" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="915" end="921" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="938" end="943" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633881" start="1001" end="1009" title="archlute" label="archlute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734120" start="1124" end="1133" title="intermedio" label="intermedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465592" start="1380" end="1399" title="Florentine Camerata" label="Florentine Camerata"/>
<link wikidata="Q154899" start="1447" end="1470" title="Giovanni de&amp;#x27; Bardi" label="Giovanni de&amp;#x27; Bardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q827775" start="1722" end="1728" title="monody" label="monody"/>
<link wikidata="Q170439" start="1804" end="1811" title="chord (music)" label="chordal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184421" start="1812" end="1819" title="harmony" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="1892" end="1902" title="polyphony" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563876" start="2197" end="2221" title="Giovanni Gualberto Magli" label="Giovanni Gualberto Magli"/>
<link wikidata="Q53068" start="2259" end="2269" title="Monteverdi" label="Monteverdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q724008" start="2295" end="2300" title="L&amp;#x27;Orfeo" label="Orfeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="2514" end="2524" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294582" start="2533" end="2545" title="Roman School" label="Roman School"/>
<link wikidata="Q299675" start="2911" end="2931" title="Francesco I de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Grand Duke Francesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q367077" start="2971" end="2979" title="Eleonora di Garzia di Toledo" label="Eleonora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529833" start="2993" end="3015" title="Pietro de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Pietro de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3055" end="3074" title="Bernardino Antinori" label="Bernardino Antinori"/>
<link wikidata="Q360436" start="3165" end="3190" title="Emilio de&amp;#x27; Cavalieri" label="Emilio de&amp;#x27; Cavalieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q205519" start="3195" end="3206" title="Jacopo Peri" label="Jacopo Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="3361" end="3379" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="3384" end="3405" title="Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239187" start="3528" end="3536" title="Euridice (Caccini)" label="Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q748501" start="3561" end="3578" title="Euridice (Peri)" label="Peri&amp;#x27;s opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q582093" start="3838" end="3848" title="polychoral" label="polychoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="3867" end="3875" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287001" start="3908" end="3922" title="Santissima Annunziata, Florence" label="St. Annunziata"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4112" end="4118" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q202534" start="4491" end="4501" title="recitative" label="recitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q724321" start="4684" end="4698" title="basso continuo" label="basso continuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828909" start="4732" end="4748" title="Le nuove musiche" label="Le nuove musiche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4940" end="4952" title="Anno Domini#New year" label="stile veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="6363" end="6375" title="figured bass" label="figured bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352148" start="6411" end="6426" title="Seconda pratica" label="Seconda pratica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753264" start="6934" end="6956" title="common practice period" label="common practice period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="6999" end="7004" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q748501" start="7012" end="7020" title="Euridice (Peri)" label="Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996777" start="7041" end="7063" title="Il rapimento di Cefalo" label="Il rapimento di Cefalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239187" start="7147" end="7155" title="Euridice (Caccini)" label="Euridice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205519" start="7231" end="7235" title="Jacopo Peri" label="Peri"/>
<link wikidata="Q827775" start="7566" end="7572" title="monody" label="monody"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797274" start="7577" end="7586" title="art song" label="solo song"/>
<link wikidata="Q349603" start="7587" end="7622" title="Figured bass" label="accompanied by a chordal instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="7642" end="7646" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7753" end="7767" title="madrigal (music)#Transition from the concertato madrigal" label="solo madrigals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828909" start="7787" end="7803" title="Le nuove musiche" label="Le nuove musiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="7820" end="7829" title="new style" label="new style"/>
<link wikidata="Q193217" start="7924" end="7932" title="madrigal" label="madrigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707253" start="8018" end="8026" title="strophic" label="strophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749845" start="8146" end="8155" title="Ave Maria (Vavilov)" label="Ave Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q431041" start="8184" end="8200" title="Vladimir Vavilov (composer)" label="Vladimir Vavilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q504185" start="8297" end="8311" title="Nicolas Achten" label="Nicolas Achten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749845" start="8363" end="8382" title="Ave Maria (Vavilov)" label="Ave Maria (Vavilov)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="8509" end="8556" title="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians" label="The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335317" start="8568" end="8581" title="Stanley Sadie" label="Stanley Sadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q975127" start="8634" end="8647" title="Gustave Reese" label="Gustave Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q65927" start="8728" end="8744" title="Manfred Bukofzer" label="Manfred Bukofzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282455" start="8875" end="8888" title="John Playford" label="John Playford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266266" start="8893" end="8906" title="Oliver Strunk" label="Oliver Strunk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141824" wikidata="Q2549675" url="?curid=1141824" title="Warren Cooper">
<text>Warren Ernest Cooper (born 21 February 1933) is a former New Zealand politician. He was a National Party MP from 1975 to 1996, holding cabinet positions including Minister of Foreign Affairs and Minister of Defence. Cooper also twice served as Mayor of Queenstown, from 1968 to 1975 and 1995 to 2001.

==Early life and career==
Cooper was born in Dunedin in 1933. He received his education at Musselburgh School and King&#x27;s High School. He later moved to Queenstown after leaving school at 15. He worked as a retailer, a painting, decorating and signwriting contractor, and a motel manager. He then became a real estate agent and was a leading member of the Jaycees, being awarded with life membership.

==Political career==



Cooper was Mayor of Queenstown Borough from 1968 to 1975. As mayor Cooper successfully lobbied the then Minister of Finance Robert Muldoon to allow the Queenstown Borough Council to sell land in the Queenstown Hill Commonage in order to fund new water and sewerage schemes. He joined the National Party and was elected a member of the party&#x27;s dominion council in 1973.

He was first elected to Parliament in the 1975 election as MP for Otago Central, defeating the newly elected Ian Quigley of the Labour Party. In the , he successfully contested the replacement electorate .

Just after the 1978 election, his ministerial career started. He was Minister of Tourism (1978–1981), Minister of Regional Development (1978–1981), Postmaster-General (1980–1981), and Minister of Broadcasting (1981). When Brian Talboys retired from Parliament in 1981, Cooper was appointed to replace him as Minister of Foreign Affairs; he held this position until the government of Robert Muldoon was defeated in 1984. He got along well with the now Prime Minister Muldoon despite having differing views on policy, Cooper describing Muldoon as a socialist while Muldoon thinking Cooper the caucus&#x27; chief private enterpriser (a label Cooper embraced).

After the governments defeat he was retained on the frontbench by Muldoon and was designated Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and Overseas Trade. He retained those portfolios for most of Jim McLay&#x27;s brief tenure as National leader (1984–86) before being dropped from Foreign Affairs by McLay&#x27;s successor Jim Bolger and instead given the Local Government, Regional Development and South Island Development portfolios. Following National&#x27;s defeat in he had another portfolio shift, retaining only Overseas Trade while also gaining Transport. In a reshuffle in early 1990 he swapped the Transport portfolio for Tourism.

Later, in the government of Jim Bolger, Cooper served as Minister of Defence (1990–96), Minister of Local Government (1990-94) and Minister of Internal Affairs (1993–96). Cooper remained in Parliament until the 1996 election, when he stepped aside in favour of Gavan Herlihy.

He transitioned back to local-body politics and was Mayor of Queenstown-Lakes from 1995 to 2001. Still an MP and minister at the time of his election as mayor there was speculation he might resign from cabinet or parliament altogether but stated he would not do so unless asked to by Bolger. He was involved in a public disagreement over development with actor Sam Neill in 2000, over development in Queenstown. Cooper said he enjoyed the stoush with Neill (a known Labour Party supporter) who later gave him a case of &quot;socialist chardonnay&quot;.

==Honours and awards==
In 1977, Cooper was awarded the Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal, and in 1990 he received the New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal. In the 1997 New Year Honours, Cooper was appointed a Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit, for public services.

==Personal life==
Cooper and his wife Lorraine have five children. His future wife had been employed at a hotel in Queenstown owned by his father. They married in Brisbane in 1956.

==Notes==
==References==
*





|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2549675" start="0" end="20" title="Warren Cooper" label="Warren Ernest Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="90" end="104" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="163" end="190" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10330337" start="195" end="214" title="Minister of Defence (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="347" end="354" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410966" start="416" end="439" title="King&amp;#x27;s High School, Dunedin" label="King&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q216212" start="580" end="585" title="motel" label="motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890699" start="662" end="669" title="United States Junior Chamber" label="Jaycees"/>
<link wikidata="Q96611732" start="743" end="770" title="Mayor of Queenstown Borough" label="Mayor of Queenstown Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="856" end="870" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="1020" end="1034" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016153" start="1149" end="1162" title="1975 New Zealand general election" label="1975 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108342" start="1173" end="1186" title="Otago Central" label="Otago Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091980" start="1216" end="1227" title="Ian Quigley" label="Ian Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="1235" end="1247" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48769875" start="1383" end="1402" title="Minister of Tourism (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q461383" start="1536" end="1549" title="Brian Talboys" label="Brian Talboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866148" start="1622" end="1649" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="1697" end="1711" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135999" start="2161" end="2170" title="Jim McLay" label="Jim McLay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="2288" end="2298" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q139785" start="2635" end="2645" title="Jim Bolger" label="Jim Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10330337" start="2664" end="2683" title="Minister of Defence (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785675" start="2695" end="2723" title="Minister of Local Government (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Local Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088927" start="2738" end="2766" title="Minister of Internal Affairs (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="2818" end="2831" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527992" start="2868" end="2881" title="Gavan Herlihy" label="Gavan Herlihy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797797" start="2936" end="2961" title="Mayor of Queenstown-Lakes" label="Mayor of Queenstown-Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="3245" end="3254" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q667229" start="3409" end="3429" title="Champagne socialist" label="socialist chardonnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059227" start="3493" end="3532" title="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal" label="Queen Elizabeth II Silver Jubilee Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933211" start="3562" end="3598" title="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal" label="New Zealand 1990 Commemoration Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727464" start="3607" end="3628" title="1997 New Year Honours (New Zealand)" label="1997 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q94162" start="3653" end="3696" title="New Zealand Order of Merit" label="Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="3883" end="3891" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141825" wikidata="Q2740431" url="?curid=1141825" title="Berlage (crater)">
<text>Berlage is an old lunar impact crater that lies in the southern hemisphere on the far side of the Moon. The smaller crater Bellinsgauzen is attached to its northern rim, and Cabannes is less than one crater diameter to the northwest. To the east-northeast of Berlage is Lemaître.

This formation is unusual for the high density of small impact craters that lie across the interior and along the rim, especially in the northern half. The crater is heavily eroded, and the original features have been worn down with the passage of time. A combination of three small craters lie across the northern rim, at the eastern edge of the rim where Berlage is joined to Bellinsgauzen.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Berlage.
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2740431" start="0" end="7" title="Berlage (crater)" label="Berlage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="18" end="23" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="24" end="37" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="64" end="74" title="sphere" label="hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="82" end="90" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="98" end="102" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739654" start="123" end="136" title="Bellinsgauzen (crater)" label="Bellinsgauzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024732" start="174" end="182" title="Cabannes (crater)" label="Cabannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965505" start="270" end="278" title="Lemaître (crater)" label="Lemaître"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141832" wikidata="Q122307727" url="?curid=1141832" title="Roman Catholic bishop of Argyll and the Isles">
<text>The Bishop of Argyll and the Isles is the ordinary of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Argyll and the Isles in the Province of Saint Andrews and Edinburgh, Scotland.

The Scottish hierarchy was restored by Pope Leo XIII on 15 March 1878 and the ancient bishoprics of Argyll and the Isles were re-established and united under one bishop. The diocese covers an area of and comprises most of Argyll and Bute, the southern part of the Highland council area, the Outer Hebrides, and the Isle of Arran. The Episcopal see is in the town of Oban where the bishop&#x27;s seat is located at the Cathedral Church of St. Columba.

On 28 December 2015 Pope Francis appointed Monsignor Brian McGee as bishop.

==List of the Roman Catholic Bishops of Argyll and the Isles==
==See also==
* Bishop of Argyll
* Bishop of the Isles
* Roman Catholicism in Scotland
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122307727" start="4" end="34" title="Roman Catholic bishop of Argyll and the Isles" label="Bishop of Argyll and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638918" start="42" end="50" title="Ordinary (Catholic Church)" label="ordinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q866912" start="58" end="104" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Argyll and the Isles" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Argyll and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315710" start="112" end="151" title="Province of Saint Andrews and Edinburgh" label="Province of Saint Andrews and Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="153" end="161" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316222" start="168" end="199" title="Restoration of the Scottish hierarchy" label="Scottish hierarchy was restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="203" end="216" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146498" start="264" end="270" title="Bishop of Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592963" start="275" end="284" title="Bishop of the Isles" label="the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="386" end="401" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q208279" start="428" end="449" title="Highland (council area)" label="Highland council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="455" end="469" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Outer Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q211873" start="479" end="492" title="Isle of Arran" label="Isle of Arran"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="498" end="511" title="Episcopal see" label="Episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q935702" start="530" end="534" title="Oban" label="Oban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="545" end="563" title="cathedra" label="bishop&amp;#x27;s seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q723359" start="582" end="613" title="St. Columba&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Cathedral Church of St. Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="636" end="648" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q854905" start="659" end="668" title="Monsignor" label="Monsignor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857817" start="669" end="680" title="Brian McGee (bishop)" label="Brian McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146498" start="771" end="787" title="Bishop of Argyll" label="Bishop of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592963" start="790" end="809" title="Bishop of the Isles" label="Bishop of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="812" end="841" title="Roman Catholicism in Scotland" label="Roman Catholicism in Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141835" wikidata="Q16266490" url="?curid=1141835" title="System's Twilight">
<text>System&#x27;s Twilight: An Abstract Fairy Tale is a graphical interactive fiction computer game created by Andrew Plotkin and released in 1994.

== Summary ==
The game is a combination of puzzle and story, combining several different kinds of logic puzzles and word puzzles. The puzzles include variations of Set, Black Box, and Sokoban, as well as many others. The overarching story is an allegory in which the player and other characters are programs in a broken, dysfunctional computer environment.

Originally, Plotkin released System&#x27;s Twilight as shareware. Since 2000, it has been re-released as binary-only freeware. It runs only on the Mac OS Classic environment, but can be run in emulation on other platforms.

==Reception==
&quot;MacAddict&quot; commented that &quot;System&#x27;s Twilight&quot; felt similar to &quot;3 in Three&quot;, with hard puzzles, quality sound and graphics, and a witty storyline. &quot;Inside Mac Games&quot; rated the game four out of five, and also noted the game&#x27;s similarity to &quot;3 in Three&quot;, saying it took &quot;the genre of Cliff Johnson game [...] to new heights.&quot; &quot;Inside Mac Games&quot; called the game &quot;very well crafted in all aspects&quot;: the story is involved and complex and the puzzles are clever and original. The review also praised the interface, graphics, and sound.

&quot;Adventure Gamers&quot; felt that &quot;System&#x27;s Twilight&quot; improved on &quot;Cliff Johnson’s metapuzzle adventures&quot; by adding &quot;some much-needed nonlinearity as well as a stronger narrative.&quot; The game &quot;synthesizes abstract puzzle-solving into an adventure game to great effect&quot;, with an ending that is rewarding &quot;in terms of both adventuring and puzzle-solving.&quot; 

AllGame rated &quot;System&#x27;s Twilight&quot; three and a half out of five stars, calling it &quot;a very unusual game&quot; with an ending that was &quot;something of a letdown&quot;, and suggesting that it would appeal to people who like hard puzzles. For the AllGame reviewer, the graphics were average while the weird and amusing sounds complemented the gameplay.

==References==
== External links ==
* System&#x27;s Twilight
* System&#x27;s Twilight Hint Guide by Wei-Hwa Huang</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="62" end="81" title="interactive fiction" label="interactive fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="82" end="95" title="computer game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758285" start="107" end="121" title="Andrew Plotkin" label="Andrew Plotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q607738" start="309" end="312" title="Set (game)" label="Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q880104" start="314" end="323" title="Black Box (game)" label="Black Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q605445" start="329" end="336" title="Sokoban" label="Sokoban"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="390" end="398" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="558" end="567" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="620" end="628" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="650" end="664" title="Mac OS Classic" label="Mac OS Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="696" end="705" title="emulator" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161179" start="747" end="756" title="MacAddict" label="MacAddict"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636566" start="835" end="845" title="3 in Three" label="3 in Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097232" start="929" end="945" title="Inside Mac Games" label="Inside Mac Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132643" start="1088" end="1101" title="Cliff Johnson (game designer)" label="Cliff Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="1368" end="1384" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823175" start="1470" end="1480" title="metapuzzle" label="metapuzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118540" start="1776" end="1783" title="AllGame" label="AllGame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567079" start="2248" end="2261" title="Wei-Hwa Huang" label="Wei-Hwa Huang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141838" wikidata="Q1133448" url="?curid=1141838" title="Ellison (crater)">
<text>Ellison is a lunar impact crater that lies on the far side of the Moon from the Earth. It is located just beyond the northwest limb of the Moon, to the southwest of the large walled plain Poczobutt. Due west of Ellison is the crater Coulomb.

The outer rim of Ellison is roughly circular, with an inward protrusion along the southern rim and a slight outward bulge to the wet-northwest. It has a single terrace on the northeastern inner wall, formed from the slumping of material. Instead of a central peak, there is a small crater located at the midpoint. A smaller crater is located just to the west-southwest of this centrally-located formation, but the flat interior floor is otherwise devoid of features of interest.

Ellison lies at the approximate margin of the Coulomb-Sarton Basin, a 530 km wide impact crater of Pre-Nectarian age.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Ellison.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1133448" start="0" end="7" title="Ellison (crater)" label="Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="13" end="18" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="50" end="58" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="66" end="70" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="80" end="85" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618847" start="188" end="197" title="Poczobutt (crater)" label="Poczobutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079920" start="233" end="240" title="Coulomb (crater)" label="Coulomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q24481284" start="769" end="789" title="Coulomb-Sarton Basin" label="Coulomb-Sarton Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q630370" start="822" end="835" title="Pre-Nectarian" label="Pre-Nectarian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141840" wikidata="Q2014458" url="?curid=1141840" title="Dunfermline Palace">
<text>Dunfermline Palace is a ruined former Scottish royal palace and important tourist attraction in Dunfermline, Fife, Scotland. It is currently, along with other buildings of the adjacent Dunfermline Abbey, under the care of Historic Environment Scotland as a scheduled monument.

==Origins==
Dunfermline was a favourite residence of many Scottish monarchs. Documented history of royal residence there begins in the 11th century with Malcolm III who made it his capital. His seat was the nearby Malcolm&#x27;s Tower, a few hundred yards to the west of the later palace. In the medieval period David II and James I of Scotland were both born at Dunfermline.

Dunfermline Palace is attached to the historic Dunfermline Abbey, occupying a site between the abbey and deep gorge to the south. It is connected to the former monastic residential quarters of the abbey via a gatehouse above a pend (or &quot;yett&quot;), one of Dunfermline&#x27;s medieval gates. The building therefore occupies what was originally the guest house of the abbey.

There are few records of building the palace and converting monastic buildings to royal use. Timber was bought for the royal lodgings in 1429. The existing remains largely reflect the form in which the building was remodelled by James IV around 1500 from the monastic Guest House. James IV came to the palaces and gave tips to masons and craftmen in 1507. The building was restored and remodelled later in the century, and William Schaw worked on the building in 1590 preparing it for Anne of Denmark. An account for glazing the palace in 1654 and a description by John Macky are important sources for the lost buildings.

==History==
===James IV===
James IV and his wife Margaret Tudor frequently stayed at the palace. In November 1504 Margaret Tudor was in residence when two people were suspected of having plague. James IV was away in the north of Scotland. The queen left for Edinburgh with her household servants, including African women known as the &quot;More lasses&quot;, who went first to Inverkeithing. This was a false alarm.

James V (1512–1542) and his second wife Mary of Guise also used the palace. On 14 June 1562 after dinner at Dunfermline, Mary, Queen of Scots, produced a gold ring set with a heart shaped diamond and declared she would send it to Queen Elizabeth with some verses she had written herself in Italian. At this time a meeting of the two queens was discussed.

===Anne of Denmark===

James VI stayed at Dunfermline Palace in June 1585 to avoid the plague which raged in Edinburgh. He had a proclamation made to regulate the prices of food, drink, and lodgings for his courtiers in Dunfermline town. In 1589 the palace was given as a wedding present by the king to his bride Anne of Denmark. She gave birth to three of their children in the palace; Elizabeth (1596), She would sometimes travel between Edinburgh and Dunfermline by boat, taking meals at South Queensferry. She improved the palace during the decade.
Anne of Denmark was given the lands formerly belonging to Dunfermline Abbey, and was known in charters of abbey lands as the &quot;Lady of Dunfermline&quot;. In February 1596, Alexander Seton, Lord Urquhart, was appointed as her Bailie and Keeper and Constable of the palace. The palace staff included the keeper John Gibb, the chamberlains of the estates David Seton of Parbroath, William Schaw, and Henry Wardlaw of Pitreavie, the gardener John Lowrie, the plumber James Coupar, who fixed the lead roofs, and Thomas Walwood, foreman of the coal pits. She was entertained by an English musician John Norlie and her fool Tom Durie. Later, a story circulated that Tom Durie had stumbled on the queen holding a secret Mass at the palace.

When George Bruce acquired lands near Dunfermline in 1599, he undertook to carry sand to the building works at the palace. In 1600, Anne of Denmark completed a new building at the palace known as the &quot;Queen&#x27;s House&quot;, or &quot;Queen Anna of Denmark&#x27;s House&quot; or the &quot;Queen&#x27;s Jointure House&quot;. It was demolished in 1797. The new work was cruciform in plan. It was a tall building with a driveway known as a &quot;pend&quot; running through its basement level, replacing an earlier gateway. This feature can be compared with the Queen&#x27;s House at Greenwich which was also built over a roadway. A Latin inscription (now lost) recorded that the &quot;gateway and temple-like superstructure&quot; was reconstructed for Anne. Near the west front of the abbey there were houses for the senior officers of her estates. There was a tennis court in the old abbey cloister.

Charles was born at Dunfermline in 1600, followed by Robert in 1602. Anne of Denmark was attended by her German physician, Martin Schöner, and Margaret Douchall, the wife of Jerome Bowie. The royal nursery at Dunfermline was managed by Margaret Stewart, Mistress of Ochiltree. Isobel Colt was one the nurses. It is said that a local gentlewoman, Margaret MacBeth, widow of Henry Durie of Craigluscar, provided the queen with herbal remedies and attended the royal births. At the time of Charles&#x27; birth in November 1600, a new green velvet and taffeta bed was built for Anne in a room in the palace.
In November 1601 Anne prepared a lodging for her daughter Princess Elizabeth, but the princess remained at Linlithgow Palace on the king&#x27;s orders. There was a steep stairwell outside Anne of Denmark&#x27;s bed chamber, and in March 1602 the English courtier Roger Aston fell down it and was unconscious for three hours. At this time there was a plague scare in Edinburgh, and the Privy Council was anxious that the contagion should not reach the &quot;ordinary place of residence of the Queen, his highness&#x27; dearest spouse, and of their majesties&#x27; bairns&quot;. Ferry crossings to and from Dunfermline were suspended, except for royal councillors and household servants with a clean bill of health.

===Prince Charles at Dunfermline===
After the Union of Crowns in 1603, the removal of the Scottish court to London meant that the building came to be rarely visited by a monarch. Prince Charles, who was a sickly child, stayed at Dunfermline for a year.

His guardians were Alexander Seton and his wife Grissal Leslie. Jean Drummond, later Countess of Roxburghe, looked after him and an older woman, Marion Hepburn, was in charge of rocking his cradle. Hepburn had previously been appointed to rock the cradle of his older sisters Margaret and Elizabeth. The Prince was slow to learn to walk and was provided with an oak stool with wheels to train him, described in the Scots language as a &quot;tymber stule with rynand quheillis to gang in&quot;.

An English courtier, Robert Carey, came to Dunfermline and stayed with Alexander Seton, and wrote that Prince Charles was &quot;a very weak child&quot;. Dr Henry Atkins wrote from Dunfermline in July 1604 to Anna of Denmark, saying that Prince Charles could now walk the length of the &quot;great chamber&quot; or &quot;longest chamber&quot; several times daily without a stick, &quot;like a gallant soldier all alone&quot;. Atkins added that Charles, walking without a staff, was &quot;not so bold as Ajax but as wary as Ulysses&quot;.

Alexander Seton and his wife Grizel Leslie brought Prince Charles to England in September 1604, and he was lodged at Oatlands Palace. Robert Carey and his wife Elizabeth were appointed to look after him. Some of the Prince&#x27;s old servants from Dumfermline went to England and were given pensions, including Marion Hepburn, the seamstress Joan Drummond, the laundress Agnes Fortune, the chamber door keeper George Kirke, and the cook John Lyle.

Ten tapestries from the royal tapestry collection were still at Dunfermline Palace in 1616, left from the time the infant Prince Charles resided at the palace. In 1618 John Taylor, the Water Poet, lodged for a night at the house of the keeper since 1584, John Gibb, which was presumably a part of the palace. Taylor described the site, &quot;the Queenes Palace, a delicate and princely mansion, withall I saw the ruins of an ancient and stately built Abbey, with fair gardens, orchards, meadows, belonging to the Palace.&quot;

When Anne of Denmark died in 1619 ownership of the palace and her lands in Scotland passed to Prince Charles. A new great seal of the lordship was made and the &quot;new great house&quot; built by his mother was repaired. The town was devastated by a fire on 25 May 1624 and Prince Charles sent £500 sterling in aid.

===Charles I and Charles II===
In February 1633 Lord Traquair, the treasurer-depute, inspected Linlithgow Palace, Dunfermline Palace, and Stirling Castle to estimate for repairs in advance of a royal visit. Charles I returned to Scotland in 1633 for his coronation but only made a brief visit to his place of birth. The last monarch to occupy the palace was Charles II who stayed at Dunfermline in 1650 just before the Battle of Pitreavie. Anne Halkett described meeting him there. Soon afterwards, during the Cromwellian occupation of Scotland, the building was abandoned and by 1708 it had been unroofed.

Bishop Pococke was shown the site of the &quot;skaipell&quot; or tennis court in 1760, between the monastic refectory and the abbey tower. The &quot;Queen&#x27;s House&quot; of 1600 was demolished in 1797. Drawings and engraved views shows battlements and stair towers with conical roofs.

All that remains of the palace is the kitchen, its cellars, and the large south wall with a commanding prospect over the Firth of Forth to the south.

==References==
==External links==
* Historic Environment Scotland: Dunfermline Palace and Abbey
* Charles I and Disability at Court in Early Modern England, Andrew Thrush, History of Parliament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2014458" start="0" end="18" title="Dunfermline Palace" label="Dunfermline Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="38" end="46" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="47" end="52" title="Scottish royalty" label="royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="53" end="59" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q211950" start="96" end="107" title="Dunfermline" label="Dunfermline"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="109" end="113" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044924" start="185" end="202" title="Dunfermline Abbey" label="Dunfermline Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21997561" start="222" end="251" title="Historic Environment Scotland" label="Historic Environment Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="257" end="275" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="336" end="353" title="Kings of Scotland" label="Scottish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q68508" start="431" end="442" title="Malcolm III of Scotland" label="Malcolm III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742145" start="492" end="512" title="Malcolm&amp;#x27;s Tower" label="Malcolm&amp;#x27;s Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="590" end="598" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="603" end="622" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044924" start="702" end="719" title="Dunfermline Abbey" label="Dunfermline Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162355" start="882" end="886" title="pend" label="pend"/>
<link wikidata="Q82117" start="945" end="950" title="town gate" label="gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="1264" end="1272" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q113954342" start="1354" end="1381" title="drinksilver" label="tips to masons and craftmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497672" start="1458" end="1471" title="William Schaw" label="William Schaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="1520" end="1535" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246287" start="1600" end="1610" title="John Macky" label="John Macky"/>
<link wikidata="Q523140" start="1707" end="1721" title="Margaret Tudor" label="Margaret Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75194714" start="1965" end="2015" title="Ellen More" label="African women known as the &amp;quot;More lasses&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010422" start="2035" end="2048" title="Inverkeithing" label="Inverkeithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="2075" end="2082" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q229846" start="2115" end="2128" title="Mary of Guise" label="Mary of Guise"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="2196" end="2216" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858307" start="2229" end="2270" title="jewels of Mary, Queen of Scots" label="gold ring set with a heart shaped diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="2305" end="2320" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2454" end="2462" title="James VI" label="James VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q158248" start="2744" end="2759" title="Anne of Denmark" label="Anne of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="2818" end="2827" title="Elizabeth of Bohemia" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q767798" start="2922" end="2939" title="South Queensferry" label="South Queensferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720056" start="3160" end="3190" title="Alexander Seton, 1st Earl of Dunfermline" label="Alexander Seton, Lord Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384567" start="3297" end="3306" title="John Gibb (courtier)" label="John Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q96179987" start="3340" end="3351" title="David Seton of Parbroath" label="David Seton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265402" start="3355" end="3364" title="Parbroath Castle" label="Parbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497672" start="3366" end="3379" title="William Schaw" label="William Schaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q106677056" start="3385" end="3398" title="Henry Wardlaw of Pitreavie" label="Henry Wardlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199034" start="3402" end="3411" title="Pitreavie Castle" label="Pitreavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384605" start="3580" end="3591" title="John Norlie" label="John Norlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65940963" start="3605" end="3614" title="Tom Durie" label="Tom Durie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="3700" end="3704" title="Mass in the Catholic Church" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101439" start="3726" end="3738" title="George Bruce of Carnock" label="George Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q564981" start="4285" end="4303" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424839" start="4307" end="4316" title="Greenwich Palace" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4626" end="4633" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269872" start="4679" end="4685" title="Robert Stuart, Duke of Kintyre" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q66736739" start="4749" end="4763" title="Martin Schöner" label="Martin Schöner"/>
<link wikidata="Q106812019" start="4800" end="4812" title="Jerome Bowie" label="Jerome Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q73507468" start="4862" end="4901" title="Margaret Stewart, Mistress of Ochiltree" label="Margaret Stewart, Mistress of Ochiltree"/>
<link wikidata="Q113659138" start="4903" end="4914" title="Isobel Colt" label="Isobel Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="5288" end="5306" title="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q564868" start="5337" end="5354" title="Linlithgow Palace" label="Linlithgow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203797" start="5493" end="5504" title="Roger Aston" label="Roger Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246348" start="5615" end="5628" title="Privy Council of Scotland" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="5991" end="6006" title="Union of Crowns" label="Union of Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6053" end="6059" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846152" start="6263" end="6305" title="Jean Ker, Countess of Roxburghe" label="Jean Drummond, later Countess of Roxburghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269678" start="6475" end="6483" title="Margaret Stuart (1598–1600)" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="6614" end="6628" title="Scots language" label="Scots language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342750" start="6715" end="6727" title="Robert Carey, 1st Earl of Monmouth" label="Robert Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717498" start="6847" end="6862" title="Henry Atkins (physician)" label="Dr Henry Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="7196" end="7200" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="7216" end="7223" title="Odysseus" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008622" start="7349" end="7364" title="Oatlands Palace" label="Oatlands Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q75488756" start="7392" end="7401" title="Elizabeth Trevannion" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576226" start="7642" end="7654" title="George Kirke" label="George Kirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437966" start="7705" end="7730" title="Scottish royal tapestry collection" label="royal tapestry collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029080" start="7849" end="7860" title="John Taylor (poet)" label="John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384567" start="7936" end="7945" title="John Gibb (courtier)" label="John Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444828" start="8575" end="8588" title="John Stewart, 1st Earl of Traquair" label="Lord Traquair"/>
<link wikidata="Q564868" start="8622" end="8639" title="Linlithgow Palace" label="Linlithgow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="8665" end="8680" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="8781" end="8791" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="8885" end="8895" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887993" start="8946" end="8965" title="Battle of Pitreavie" label="Battle of Pitreavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q565358" start="8967" end="8979" title="Anne Halkett" label="Anne Halkett"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9037" end="9059" title="Oliver Cromwell#Scottish campaign: 1650–51" label="Cromwellian occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291915" start="9135" end="9149" title="Richard Pococke" label="Bishop Pococke"/>
<link wikidata="Q234852" start="9476" end="9483" title="Basement" label="cellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="9546" end="9560" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141844" wikidata="Q31023" url="?curid=1141844" title="Bhai Dooj">
<text>Bhai Dooj, Bhai Tika, Bhaubeej, Bhai Beej, Bhai Phonta or Bhratri Dwitiya is a festival celebrated by Hindus on the second lunar day of the Shukla Paksha (bright fortnight) of Kartika, the eighth month of the Vikram Samvat Hindu calendar or the Shalivahana Shaka calendar. It is celebrated during the Diwali or Tihar festival and Holi festival. The celebrations of this day are similar to the festival of Raksha Bandhan.

In the southern part of India, the day is celebrated as Yama Dwitiya. In the Kayastha community, two Bhai Doojs are celebrated. The more famous one comes on the second day after Diwali. But the lesser-known one is celebrated a day or two after Diwali. In Haryana and Uttar Pradesh a ritual also followed, a dry coconut (named gola in regional language) with tied along its width for worshipping is also used at the time of doing &quot;aarti&quot; of a brother. In Bengal the day is celebrated as Bhai Phota, which comes one day after Kali Puja.

==Regional Variations==
The festival is known as:

*Bhai Dooj () in the entire Northern part of India, observed during the Diwali festival. In Awadh and Purvanchal regions of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, it is also known as Bhaiya Dooj. It is widely celebrated by Maithils in Nepal and Bihar as Bhardutiya and people from various other ethnic groups. The first day of this New Year is observed as Govardhan Pūja.
*Bhai Teeka () in Nepal, where it is the most important festival after Dashain (Vijaya Dashmi / Dussehra). Observed on the fifth day of Tihar festival, it is widely celebrated by Maithils in Nepal as Bhardutiya Bhai Tika followed by the people of various other ethnic groups among Madhesis. While, the Newaris celebrate it as Kija Puja. The sisters put a vertical Tika of seven colours known as Saptarangi Tika in their brother&#x27;s forehead.
*Bhai Phonta () in Bengal and it takes place every year on the second day after Kali Puja. It is mainly observed in West Bengal, Tripura, Bangladesh.
*Bhai Jiuntia () only in western Odisha.
*Bhau Beej, or Bhav Bij () or Bhai Beej amongst the Marathi, Gujarati and Konkani-speaking communities in the states of Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat and Karnataka.
*Another name for the day is Yamadwitheya or Yamadvitiya, after a legendary meeting between Yama the god of Death and his sister Yamuna (the famous river) on Dwitheya (the second day after new moon).
*Other names include Bhatru Dviteeya, or Bhatri Ditya or Bhaghini Hastha Bhojanamu in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

According to Hindu religion, after slaying the evil demon Narakasura, Lord Krishna visited his sister Subhadra who gave him a warm welcome with sweets and flowers. She also affectionately applied &quot;tilaka&quot; on Krishna&#x27;s forehead. Some believe this to be the origin of the festival.

==The ceremony==
On the day of the festival, sisters invite their brothers for a sumptuous meal often including their favourite dishes/sweets. The procedure may be different in Bihar and central India. The whole ceremony signifies the duty of a brother to protect his sister, as well as a sister&#x27;s blessings for her brother.

Carrying forward the ceremony in traditional style, sisters perform &quot;arti&quot; for their brother and apply a red &quot;tika&quot; on the brother&#x27;s forehead. This &quot;tika&quot; ceremony on the occasion of Bhai Bij signifies the sister&#x27;s sincerest prayers for the long and happy life of her brother and treat them with gifts. In return, elder brothers bless their sisters and may treat them also with gifts or cash.

As it is customary in Haryana and Maharashtra to celebrate the auspicious occasion of Bhau-beej, women who do not have a brother worship the Moon Chandra instead. They apply &quot;mehendi&quot; on girls as their tradition. The sister whose brother lives far away from her and can not go to her house, sends her sincerest prayers for the long and happy life of her brother through the moon god. She performs &quot;aarti&quot; for the Moon. This is the reason why children of Hindu parents affectionately call the Moon &quot;Chandamama&quot; (&quot;Chanda&quot; means moon and &quot;mama&quot; means mother&#x27;s brother).

==The celebration==
=== Bhai Phonta ===

Bhai Phonta in West Bengal is celebrated with much splendour. The ceremony is marked with many rituals along with a grand feast arranged for the brothers. It is necessary that, both brother and sister are more than 5 years of age.

=== Bhai Bij ===
The festival of Bhai Bij is popular in Haryana, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Goa and is celebrated with great fervour and gaiety. Brothers and sisters look forward to the occasion with immense enthusiasm. To add charm to the occasion, Bhai Bij gifts are given to brothers from sisters as a token of love and appreciation.

Bhav Bij is a time for family reunions as all brothers and sisters in the family get together. Close relatives and friends are also invited to celebrate the Bhav Bij in many families. Special dishes for the festival include the Maharashtra sweet called &quot;basundi&quot; &quot;poori&quot; or &quot;kheerni poori&quot;.
On this occasion, brothers and sisters exchange gifts. And both of them pray for their long and happy life.

=== Bhai Tika in Nepal ===
Bhai Tika in Nepal is also known as &quot;Bhai Tihar&quot; meaning &quot;Tihar (festival) of brothers&quot;. On this day, sisters pray to Yamraj for a long life and prosperity for their brothers. The ritual involves sisters marking the forehead of their brothers with a seven coloured long tika. The rest of the ritual is similar to that performed by Hindus elsewhere. A special garland of the &quot;Gomphrena globosa&quot; flower is made by the sister as an offering to their brothers.

==Rabindranath Tagore and the Partition of Bengal==
Rachel Fell McDermott, Professor of Asian Studies at Columbia University, describes Rabindranath Tagore&#x27;s &quot;rakhi-bandhan&quot; ceremonies, inspired by the Bhai Dooj ritual, which were organized to protest the 1905 Partition of Bengal In 1905 Rabindranath Tagore extended the symbolism of &quot;Brother&#x27;s Second&quot;, a ritual of bonding between brothers and sisters that is celebrated right after the Pujas have concluded, to evoke friendship between Hindus and Muslims: members of both communities would tie red threads of brotherhood on each other&#x27;s wrists. All throughout the partition period, these rakhi-bandhan ceremonies were regularly announced in the Bengali and English papers. In addition, some landlords, even the British Indian Association, saw that the boycott and emphasis upon swadeshi items were disturbing peace with rural Muslims in their areas, and withdrew their support.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="0" end="9" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhai Dooj"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="11" end="20" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhai Tika"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="22" end="30" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhaubeej"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="32" end="41" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhai Beej"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="43" end="54" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhai Phonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="58" end="73" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Bhratri Dwitiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="102" end="107" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634430" start="140" end="153" title="Paksha" label="Shukla Paksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q475279" start="176" end="183" title="Kartika (month)" label="Kartika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370848" start="209" end="222" title="Vikram Samvat" label="Vikram Samvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="301" end="307" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="311" end="316" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10259" start="330" end="334" title="Holi" label="Holi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10266" start="405" end="419" title="Raksha Bandhan" label="Raksha Bandhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31023" start="478" end="490" title="Bhai Dooj" label="Yama Dwitiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154326" start="857" end="862" title="Arti (Hinduism)" label="aarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="1091" end="1097" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q248705" start="1111" end="1116" title="Awadh" label="Awadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261660" start="1121" end="1131" title="Purvanchal" label="Purvanchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="1143" end="1156" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="1161" end="1166" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737114" start="1228" end="1236" title="Maithils" label="Maithils"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="1240" end="1245" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="1250" end="1255" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588583" start="1361" end="1375" title="Govardhan Puja" label="Govardhan Pūja"/>
<link wikidata="Q10379695" start="1448" end="1455" title="Dashain" label="Dashain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="1513" end="1518" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737114" start="1556" end="1564" title="Maithils" label="Maithils"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="1568" end="1573" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601861" start="1658" end="1665" title="Madhesi people" label="Madhesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q524007" start="1679" end="1685" title="Newar people" label="Newari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349216" start="1902" end="1911" title="Kali Puja" label="Kali Puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="1938" end="1949" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="1951" end="1958" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="1960" end="1970" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="2005" end="2011" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="2065" end="2072" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137" start="2074" end="2082" title="Gujarati language" label="Gujarati"/>
<link wikidata="Q34239" start="2087" end="2094" title="Konkani language" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="2133" end="2144" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="2146" end="2149" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="2151" end="2158" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="2163" end="2172" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="2266" end="2270" title="Yama (Hinduism)" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="2460" end="2474" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="2479" end="2488" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="2504" end="2518" title="Hindu religion" label="Hindu religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q624083" start="2543" end="2548" title="Asura" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181891" start="2549" end="2559" title="Narakasura" label="Narakasura"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="2566" end="2573" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982348" start="2593" end="2601" title="Subhadra" label="Subhadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572426" start="2693" end="2699" title="tilaka" label="tilaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="2974" end="2987" title="central India" label="central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154326" start="3192" end="3196" title="Aarti" label="arti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572426" start="3243" end="3247" title="tilaka" label="tika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="3574" end="3581" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="3586" end="3597" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061795" start="3698" end="3705" title="Chandra" label="Chandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q769843" start="3732" end="3739" title="Mehndi" label="mehendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="4231" end="4242" title="West Bengal, India" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174" start="4504" end="4511" title="Haryana" label="Haryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="4513" end="4520" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="4522" end="4533" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="4538" end="4541" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722375" start="5043" end="5050" title="basundi" label="basundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146928" start="5063" end="5068" title="poori" label="poori"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="5254" end="5259" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15128500" start="5314" end="5330" title="Tihar (festival)" label="Tihar (festival)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="5379" end="5385" title="Yamraj" label="Yamraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200680" start="5641" end="5658" title="Gomphrena globosa" label="Gomphrena globosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="5865" end="5884" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047143" start="6000" end="6024" title="1905 Partition of Bengal" label="1905 Partition of Bengal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141852" wikidata="Q7372089" url="?curid=1141852" title="Rowland (crater)">
<text>Rowland is a large lunar impact crater that is located in the northern part of the Moon, on the far side from the Earth. This is an old, worn formation that is overlain by a number of smaller craters. The most notable of these is Rowland Y, which is attached to the inner wall along the north-northwestern rim. Additional smaller craters are attached to the inner wall along the southeastern and south-southwestern rims, the latter being designated Rowland N. Rowland C forms a double crater with a smaller, bowl-shaped formation in the eastern part of the floor.

The outer wall of Rowland has been rounded by a long history of minor impacts, leaving the edge somewhat irregular and rough. The top of the rim has been worn down until it became almost level with the surrounding terrain, making this a circular depression in the surface. The remains of a can still be discerned in places, particularly along the eastern and southeastern inner wall.

Attached to the exterior of the eastern rim is the huge walled plain Birkhoff, an even older and more worn formation. Due north of Rowland, within one crater diameter, is Sommerfeld. To the west-southwest is the smaller crater Chappell.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Rowland.

The area south of Rowland R is characterised by an extremely high rockfall density by lunar standards.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7372089" start="0" end="7" title="Rowland (crater)" label="Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="19" end="24" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="25" end="38" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="83" end="87" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="96" end="104" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="114" end="119" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369871" start="1019" end="1027" title="Birkhoff (crater)" label="Birkhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560454" start="1121" end="1131" title="Sommerfeld (crater)" label="Sommerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071928" start="1177" end="1185" title="Chappell (crater)" label="Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654036" start="1420" end="1428" title="rockfall" label="rockfall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1141858" wikidata="Q7630130" url="?curid=1141858" title="Störmer (crater)">
<text>Störmer is a lunar impact crater that is located on the far side of the Moon from the Earth, named after Carl Størmer, a Norwegian mathematician and aurora researcher. It lies in the northern part of the lunar surface, to the southeast of the crater Olivier and to the north of van Rhijn.

This is a relatively young formation with features that have not received a significant amount of wear or erosion from subsequent impacts. The edge of the rim is sharply defined, and the inner wall is d along the northwestern side. The interior floor is relatively level, with a double-peak formation at the midpoint.

Störmer P, a satellite crater, is attached to the exterior of the rim of Störmer along the southwest side.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Störmer.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7630130" start="0" end="7" title="Störmer (crater)" label="Störmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="13" end="18" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="56" end="64" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="72" end="76" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="86" end="91" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q858532" start="105" end="117" title="Carl Størmer" label="Carl Størmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="149" end="155" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408977" start="250" end="257" title="Olivier (crater)" label="Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601271" start="278" end="287" title="Van Rhijn (crater)" label="van Rhijn"/>
</links>
</doc>
