<doc id="1139579" wikidata="Q3136750" url="?curid=1139579" title="History of Manchester">
<text>The history of Manchester encompasses its change from a minor Lancastrian township into the pre-eminent industrial metropolis of the United Kingdom and the world. Manchester began expanding &quot;at an astonishing rate&quot; around the turn of the 19th century as part of a process of unplanned urbanisation brought on by a boom in textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution. The transformation took little more than a century.

Having evolved from a Roman castrum in Celtic Britain, in the Victorian era Manchester was a major locus of the Industrial Revolution, and was the site of one of the world&#x27;s first passenger railway stations as well as many scientific achievements of great importance. Manchester also led the political and economic reform of 19th-century Britain as the vanguard of free trade. The mid-20th century saw a decline in Manchester&#x27;s industrial importance, prompting a depression in social and economic conditions. Subsequent investment, gentrification and rebranding from the 1990s onwards changed its fortunes and reinvigorated Manchester as a post-industrial city with multiple sporting, broadcasting and educational institutions.

Manchester has been on a provisional list for UNESCO World Heritage City on numerous occasions. However, since the 1996 bombing, local authorities have persisted on a course of economic evolution rather than prioritising the past. This economic evolution is perhaps best illustrated with the Beetham Tower which instantly &quot;torpedoed&quot; any possibility of World Heritage City status according to one author. Despite this, areas perceived as internationally important in the Industrial Revolution, such as Castlefield and Ancoats, have been sympathetically redeveloped.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Manchester&quot; originates from the Latin name &quot;Mamucium&quot; or its variant &quot;Mancunio&quot;. These names are generally thought to represent a Latinisation of an original Brittonic name. The generally accepted etymology of this name is that it comes from Brittonic *&quot;mamm-&quot; (&quot;breast&quot;, in reference to a &quot;breast-like hill&quot;). However, more recent work suggests that it could come from *&quot;mamma&quot; (&quot;mother&quot;, in reference to a local river goddess). Both usages are preserved in Insular Celtic languages, such as &quot;mam&quot; meaning &quot;breast&quot; in Irish and &quot;mother&quot; in Welsh. The suffix -chester is from Old English &quot;ceaster&quot; (&quot;Roman fortification&quot;, itself a loanword from Latin &quot;castra&quot;, &quot;fort; fortified town&quot;).

The Latin name for Manchester is often given as &quot;Mancuniun&quot;. This is most likely a neologism coined in Victorian times, similar to the widespread Latin name &quot;Cantabrigia&quot; for Cambridge (whose actual name in Roman times was &quot;Duroliponte&quot;).

==Prehistory==

Prehistoric evidence of human activity in the area of Manchester is limited, although scattered stone tools have been found.

There is evidence of Bronze Age activity around Manchester in the form of burial sites. Although some prehistoric artefacts have been discovered in the city centre, these have come from redeposited layers, meaning they do not necessarily originate from where they were found; wider evidence has been found for activity in other parts of the borough. Before the Roman invasion of Britain, the location lay within the territory dominated by the Brigantes and prior to the Roman conquest of the area in the 70s AD, it was part of the territory of the Brigantes, a Celtic tribe, although it may have been under the control of the Setantii, a sub-tribe of the Brigantes.

For the important prehistoric farm site at Oversley Farm, see .

==Roman==
The Roman fort of Mamucium was established c. AD 79 near a crossing point on the River Medlock. The fort was sited on a sandstone bluff near the confluence of the rivers Medlock and Irwell in a naturally defensible position. It was erected as a series of fortifications established by Gnaeus Julius Agricola during his campaign against the Brigantes who were the Celtic tribe in control of most of what would become northern England. It guards the Deva Victrix (Chester) to Eboracum (York) Roman road running east to west, and a road heading north to Bremetennacum (Ribchester). The neighbouring forts were Castleshaw and Northwich. Built first from turf and timber, the fort was demolished around 140. When it was rebuilt around 160, it was again of turf and timber construction. In about 200 the fort underwent another rebuild, this time enhancing the defences by replacing the gatehouse with a stone version and facing the walls with stone. The fort would have been garrisoned by a cohort, about 500 infantry, of auxiliary troops.

Evidence of both pagan and Christian worship has been discovered. Two altars have been discovered and there may be a temple of Mithras associated with Mamucium. A word square was discovered in the 1970s, which may be one of the earliest examples of Christianity in Britain. A civilian settlement (the first in Manchester), or &quot;vicus&quot;, grew in association with the fort, made up of traders and families of the soldiers. An area that has a concentration of furnaces and industrial activity has been described as an industrial estate. The &quot;vicus&quot; was probably abandoned by the mid 3rd century, although a small garrison may have remained at Mamucium into the late 3rd and early 4th centuries. The Castlefield area of Manchester is named after the fort.

==Post-Roman==

Once the Romans left Britain, the focus of settlement in Manchester shifted to the confluence of the rivers Irwell and Irk. During the Early Middle Ages that followed – and persisted until the Norman conquest – the settlement of Manchester was in the territory of several different kingdoms. In the late 6th and early 7th centuries, the kingdom of Northumbria extended as far south as the River Mersey, south of what was then the settlement of Manchester. Etymological evidence indicates that the areas to the north west of Manchester (such as Eccles and Chadderton) were British while the parts of Manchester (such as Clayton, Gorton and Moston) were Anglian, and the south west of Manchester was Danish (including Cheadle Hulme, Davyhulme, Hulme and Levenshulme).

Between the 6th and 10th centuries, the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and Wessex struggled for control over North West England. In 620, Edwin of Northumbria may have sacked Manchester, and the settlement may have been sacked again in 870 by the Danes. According to legend, Nico Ditch – which runs east–west from Ashton-under-Lyne to Stretford and passes through Gorton, Levenshulme, Burnage, Rusholme, Platt Field Park in Fallowfield, Withington and Chorlton-cum-Hardy – is a defence against Viking invaders and was dug in 869–870. Whether this is true is uncertain, but the ditch does date from between the 7th and 9th centuries. The &quot;Anglo Saxon Chronicle&quot; detail that in 919 Edward the Elder sent men &quot;to &quot;Mameceaster&quot;, in Northumbria, to repair and man it&quot;; this probably refers to a burh at Manchester as an advanced post of Mercia. Although it is unsure where the site is, it is possibly a reference to the Roman fort. In 1055, most of what later became Lancashire was under the control of Tostig.

The ancient parish of Manchester covered a wider area than today&#x27;s metropolitan borough (although not including its full extent), and was probably established in the Anglo-Saxon period (there were at that time only two churches in the parish: at Manchester and Ashton-under-Lyne). Forty distinct townships developed in the parish and in medieval times the royal manor of Salford was the most important of these.

==Medieval==


Manchester was administratively part of the Salford Hundred. In 1086 the hundred covered about and had a population of about 3,000. It was given to Roger de Poitou; Roger divided the hundred into fiefdoms and made the Gresle family barons of Manchester. Albert de Gresle was the first baron of Manchester. Although the Gresle family did not reside at the manor, Manchester continued to grow in their absence and stewards represented the lords of the manor.

Manchester&#x27;s entry in the Domesday Book reads &quot;the Church of St Mary and the Church of St Michael hold one carucate of land in Manchester exempt from all customary dues except tax&quot;. St Mary&#x27;s Church was an Anglo-Saxon church on the site of Manchester Cathedral; St Michael&#x27;s Church may have been in Ashton-under-Lyne. The parish of Manchester – of which St Mary&#x27;s Church was a part – was the ecclesiastical centre of the Salford Hundred. It covered about and extended as far as the edges of Flixton and Eccles in the west, the Mersey between Stretford and Stockport in the south, the edge of Ashton-under-Lyne in the east, and the edge of Prestwich in the north. That such a large area was covered by a single parish has been taken as evidence of the area&#x27;s &quot;impoverished and depopulated status&quot;. The only tax the parish was subject to was Danegeld.

There was a castle in Manchester overlooking the rivers Irk and Irwell, where Chetham&#x27;s School of Music stands today. This castle was probably a ringwork and has been described as &quot;of no political or military importance&quot;. By the late 13th century, the Grelleys or Gresles, who were barons of Manchester for two centuries, had replaced the castle with a fortified manor house. They used the house as the administrative centre of the manor. While the town was owned by the lords of the manor, they directly leased land to tenants and created burgage tenements for indirect rent; as well as containing a house, these plots of land could also contain workshops and gardens. The family also owned the only corn mill in the manor which was used by all the tenants of the manor to grind their corn. Medieval Manchester was centred on the manor house and the Church of St Mary mentioned in the Domesday Book. As well as a castle at Manchester, there was also one in Ringway. Ullerwood Castle, a motte-and-bailey, probably dates from the 12th century and was owned by Hamon de Massey who owned several manors in the north east of Cheshire.

The first lord of the manor to actually live in Manchester was Robert Grelley (1174–1230); his presence led to an influx of skilled workers, such as stonemasons and carpenters, associated with the construction of the manor house. In the early 13th century, Manchester for a period was not under the control of the Grelleys. Robert Grelley was one of the barons who made King John sign Magna Carta. Grelley was excommunicated for his role in the rebellion and when King John later ignored the terms of Magna Carta, Grelley forfeited his lands. King John died in 1216 and Hubert de Burgh, 1st Earl of Kent, returned Grelley&#x27;s land to him on behalf of King Henry III In the medieval period Manchester grew into a market town and had a market every Saturday. In 1223, Manchester gained the right to hold an annual fair; the market was held in Acresfield – where St Ann&#x27;s Square is today – on what was then arable land. It was the first fair to be established in the Salford Hundred and the fourth in south Lancashire. Manchester became a market town in 1301 when it received its charter. On 1 November 1315, Manchester was the starting place of a rebellion by Adam Banastre. Banastre, Henry de Lea, and William de Bradshagh rebelled against Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster.

The medieval town&#x27;s defences incorporated the rivers Irk and Irwell on two sides and a long ditch on the others. The ditch, known as Hanging Ditch, was up to wide and deep. It was spanned by Hanging Bridge, the main route in and out of the town. The name may derive from &quot;hangan&quot; meaning hollow, although there is an alternative derivation from the Old English &quot;hen&quot;, meaning wild birds, and the Welsh &quot;gan&quot;, meaning between two hills. It dates to at least 1343 but may be even older.

In the 14th century, Manchester became home to a community of Flemish weavers, who settled in the town to produce wool and linen. This in part helped to develop a tradition of cloth production in the region, which in turn sparked the growth of the city to become Lancashire&#x27;s major industrial centre. The various townships and chapelries of the ancient parish of Manchester became separate civil parishes in 1866.

Thomas de la Warre was a Lord of the Manor and also a priest. He obtained licences from the Pope and King Henry V to enable him to found and endow a collegiate church, dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, St. George and St. Denys or St. Denis, the latter two being the patron saints of England and France respectively. Construction began around 1422, and continued until the first quarter of the 16th century. The &#x27;merchant princes&#x27; of the town endowed a number of chantry chapels, reflecting an increasing prosperity based on wool. This church later became Manchester Cathedral.

Thomas also gave the site of the old manor house as a residence for the priests. It remains as one of the finest examples of a medieval secular religious building in Britain and is now the home of Chetham&#x27;s School of Music.

==Growth of the textile trade==

By the 16th century, the wool trade had made Manchester a flourishing market town. The collegiate church, which is now the cathedral, was finally completed in 1500–1510. The magnificent carved choir stalls date from this period, and in 1513 work began on a chapel endowed by James Stanley, Bishop of Ely, in thanksgiving for the safe return of his kinsman (sometimes said to be his son) John Stanley from the Battle of Flodden.

The English Reformation resulted in the collegiate church being refounded as a Protestant institution. One of the more famous Wardens of this institution at the time was Dr John Dee, known as &quot;Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s Merlin&quot;.

The town&#x27;s growth was given further impetus in 1620 with the start of fustian weaving. In this period Manchester grew heavily due to an influx of Flemish settlers who founded Manchester&#x27;s new weaving industry. In the course of the 17th century, thanks to the development of the textile industry and contacts with the City of London, Manchester became a noted centre of puritanism. Consequently, it sided with Parliament in the quarrel with Charles I. Indeed, it might be said that the English Civil War started here. In 1642, Lord Strange, the Royalist son of the Earl of Derby attempted to seize the militia magazine stored in the old college building. In the ensuing scuffle, Richard Percival, a linen weaver, was killed. He is reckoned by some to be the first casualty in the English Civil War.

Lord Strange returned and attempted to besiege the town, which had no permanent fortifications. With the help of John Rosworm, a German mercenary, the town was vigorously defended. Captain Bradshaw and his musketeers resolutely manned the bridge to Salford. Eventually, Strange realised that his force was ill-prepared, and after hearing that his father had died, withdrew to claim his title.

During the Commonwealth, Manchester was granted a seat in Parliament for the first time. Maj Gen Charles Worsley, scion of an old Lancashire family and one of Cromwell&#x27;s most trusted lieutenants, had been given the Mace at the famous dissolution of Parliament in 1654. Elected Manchester&#x27;s first MP, he did not sit for long before Parliament was again dissolved, leading to the Rule of the Major Generals: effectively martial law. Worsley, given responsibility for Lancashire, Cheshire and Staffordshire, took his duties seriously, turning out alehouses, banning bear baiting and cracking down on the celebration of Christmas. He eventually died in 1656, at a time of the gradual ebbing away of Cromwell&#x27;s authority.

On the English Restoration in 1660, as a reprisal for its defence of the Parliamentarian cause, Manchester was deprived of its recently granted Members of Parliament. No MP was to sit for Manchester until 1832. The consequences of the restoration led to a great deal of soul searching. One clergyman, Henry Newcombe, could not remain in the remodelled Anglican Church, and was instrumental in the establishment of the Cross Street Chapel in 1694. This later passed into Unitarian hands, and a new chapel on the original site can be visited.

Humphrey Chetham purchased the old college buildings after the civil war, and endowed it as a bluecoat school. Chetham&#x27;s Hospital, as it was known, later became Chetham&#x27;s School of Music. The endowment included a collection of books, which in 1653 became Chetham&#x27;s Library, the first free public library in the English-speaking world. As of 2017, it is still open and free to use.

Despite the political setbacks, the town continued to prosper. A number of inhabitants supported the Glorious Revolution in 1688. They became discontented with the Tory clergy at the collegiate church, and a separate church, more to their tastes, was founded by Lady Ann Bland. St Ann&#x27;s Church is a fine example of an early Georgian church, and was consecrated in 1712. The surroundings, what is now St Ann&#x27;s Square but was previously known as Acresfield, were in imitation of a London square.

About this time, Defoe described the place as &quot;the greatest mere village in England&quot;, by which he meant that a place the size of a populous market town had no form of local government to speak of, and was still subject to the whims of a lord of the manor.

In 1745, Charles Edward Stuart and his army entered Manchester en route to London. Despite its previous radicalism, the town offered no resistance and the Jacobites obtained enough recruits to form a &#x27;Manchester Regiment&#x27;. It is suggested that this was because the town had no local government to speak of, and the magistrates, who could have organised resistance, were mostly conservative landowners. Moreover, these Tory landowners had taken to apprenticing their sons to Manchester merchants, so the political complexion of the town&#x27;s elite had changed. The Jacobite army got no further than Derby and then retreated. On their way back through Manchester, the stragglers were pelted by the mob. The luckless &#x27;Manchester Regiment&#x27; were left behind to garrison Carlisle, where they quickly surrendered to the pursuing British Army.

==Industrial Revolution==


Manchester remained a small market town until the late 18th century and the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. The Spinning Jenny in 1764 marked the beginning of the Industrial Revolution and brought with it the first fully mechanised production process. The myriad small valleys in the Pennine Hills to the north and east of the town, combined with the damp climate, proved ideal for the construction of water-powered cotton mills such as Quarry Bank Mill, which industrialised the spinning and weaving of cloth.

Indeed, it was the importing of cotton, which began towards the end of the 18th century, that revolutionised the textile industry in the area. This new commodity was imported through the port of Liverpool, which was connected with Manchester by the Mersey and Irwell Navigation—the two rivers had been made navigable from the 1720s onwards.

Manchester now developed as the natural distribution centre for raw cotton and spun yarn, and a marketplace and distribution centre for the products of this growing textile industry. Richard Arkwright is credited as the first to erect a cotton mill in the city. His first experiment, installing a Newcomen steam engine to pump water for a waterwheel failed, but he next adapted a Watt steam engine to directly operate the machinery. The result was the rapid spread of cotton mills throughout Manchester itself and in the surrounding towns. To these must be added bleach works, textile print works, and the engineering workshops and foundries, all serving the cotton industry. During the mid-19th century Manchester grew to become the centre of Lancashire&#x27;s cotton industry and was dubbed &quot;Cottonopolis&quot;, and a branch of the Bank of England was established in 1826.

The city had one of the first telephone exchanges in Europe (possibly the first in the UK) when in 1879 one was opened on Faulkner Street in the city centre using the Bell patent system. By 1881 it had 420 subscribers—just 7 years later a new exchange had the capacity for 10 times that number. Manchester Central exchange was still the largest outside the capital in Edwardian times when it employed 200 operators and the city had several other important roles in the history of telephony.

==Transport==
The growth of the city was matched by the expansion of its transport links. The growth of steam power meant that demand for coal rocketed. To meet this demand, the first canal of the industrial era, the Duke&#x27;s Canal, often referred to as the Bridgewater Canal, was opened in 1761, linking Manchester to the coal mines at Worsley. This was soon extended to the Mersey Estuary. Soon an extensive network of canals was constructed, linking Manchester to all parts of England.

One of the world&#x27;s first public omnibus services began in 1824; it ran from Market Street in Manchester to Pendleton and Salford.

===The world&#x27;s first steam passenger railway===
In 1830, Manchester was again at the forefront of transport technology with the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the world&#x27;s first steam passenger railway. This provided faster transport of raw materials and finished goods between the port of Liverpool and mills of Manchester. By 1838, Manchester was connected by rail with Birmingham and London, and by 1841 with Hull. The existing horse-drawn omnibus services were all acquired by the Manchester Carriage Company, Ltd in 1865. Horse-drawn trams began in Salford (1877) and Manchester (1880–81), were succeeded by electric trams in 1901–03 and by 1930 Manchester Corporation Tramways were running the third largest system in the UK.

==Population==
The Industrial Revolution resulted in Manchester&#x27;s population exploding as people moved from other parts of the British Isles into the city seeking new opportunities.

Particularly large numbers came from Ireland, with one area of the city centre becoming known as Little Ireland between 1827 and 1847. Numbers of Irish immigrants increased further after the Great Famine of the 1840s. In 1851, it was estimated that 15% of the population of Manchester were Irish born. The first Irish community in the city was said to date back to 1798 and with further waves of immigration from Ireland coming after the second World War. The Irish influence continues to this day and, every March Manchester plays host to a large St Patrick&#x27;s Day parade. It is estimated that about 35% of the population of Manchester and Salford has some Irish ancestry.

Scottish migration in to Manchester can be traced back to before 1745 when the Jacobites marched through the city but the population of Scottish born residents peaked at almost 2% of the city&#x27;s total population in 1871. Many of the city&#x27;s machine making firms which powered the Industrial Revolution had their roots in emigrant Scottish engineers.

A Welsh community has existed in Manchester since the 16th century. In 1892 there was 80,000 Welsh born residents in the North West of England with particularly high concentrations in Manchester and Liverpool. David Lloyd George was born in the city and Welsh socialist Robert Jones Derfel spent much of his life in the city.

Large numbers of (mostly Jewish) immigrants later came to Manchester from Central and Eastern Europe. The area, including Broughton, Prestwich and Whitefield today has a Jewish population of about 40,000. This is the largest Jewish community outside London by quite some way. To these groups may be added (in later years) Levantines (involved in the Egyptian cotton trade), Germans and Italians. The German influence can be seen in the city&#x27;s Halle Orchestra and the Ancoats area of the city was known as Little Italy. By the beginning of the 20th century, Manchester was a very cosmopolitan place and had additionally received immigrants from France, Greece, Armenia, Lithuania, Poland and Ukraine. The opening of the Manchester Ship Canal in 1894 lead to influx of workers from Africa, Asia, Middle East and Scandinavia.

There has been a presence of Black people in Manchester since the 1700s. There are records of black people being buried at Manchester Cathedral from 1757. The abolitionist Thomas Clarkson noted during a speech in Manchester in 1787 &quot;&#x27;I was surprised also to find a great crowd of black people standing round the pulpit. There might be forty or fifty of them.&#x27;

From the 1940s onwards further waves of immigration brought Cypriots and Hungarians fleeing conflict but in the largest numbers came people re-settling from the British Colonies of the Indian subcontinent, Caribbean and Hong Kong. There has been a Chinese community in the city since the early 20th century. Chinatown, Manchester is said to be the second largest in the United Kingdom and the third largest in Europe.

From the 1990s onwards Kosovans, Afghans, Iraqis and Congolese have settled in the area.

It has been suggested as a result of the last two hundred years that Manchester having been involved in all these periods of immigration is the most polyglot of all British cities aside from London

==Intellectual life==
The unconventional background of such a diverse population stimulated intellectual and artistic life. The &quot;Manchester Academy&quot;, for example, opened in Mosley Street in 1786, having enjoyed an earlier incarnation as the Warrington Academy. It was originally run by Presbyterians being one of the few dissenting academies that provided religious nonconformists, who were excluded from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, with higher education. It taught classics, radical theology, science, modern languages, language and history. In the arts, the Hallé Orchestra, was patronised in its early years, by the German community and attracted a loyal following.

Manchester&#x27;s rapid growth into a significant industrial centre meant the pace of change was fast and frightening. At that time, it seemed a place in which anything could happen—new industrial processes, new ways of thinking (the so-called &#x27;Manchester School&#x27;, promoting free trade and laissez-faire), new classes or groups in society, new religious sects and new forms of labour organisation. Such radicalism culminated in the opening of the Free Trade Hall which had several incarnations until its current building was occupied in 1856. It attracted educated visitors from all parts of Britain and Europe. &quot;What Manchester does today,&quot; it was said, &quot;the rest of the world does tomorrow.&quot; Benjamin Disraeli, at that time a young novelist, had one of his characters express such sentiments. &quot;The age of ruins is past ... Have you seen Manchester? Manchester is as great a human exploit as Athens ...&quot;.

==Reform==

At the beginning of the 19th century, Manchester was still governed by a court leet on the medieval model, and a Boroughreeve was responsible for law and order during the daylight hours. The Manchester and Salford Police Act 1792 (32 Geo. 3. c. 69) created police commissioners, whose job was to provide a night-watch. The commissioners were also given responsibility for road-building, street cleaning, street lighting and the maintenance of fire engines.

The end of the 18th century saw the first serious recession in the textile trade. There were food riots in 1797, and soup kitchens were established in 1799. Manchester was the scene of the Blanketeer agitation in 1817. Popular unrest was paralleled by discontent with Manchester&#x27;s lack of representation at Westminster, and the town quickly became a centre of radical agitation.

The protest turned to bloodshed in the summer of 1819. A meeting was held in St Peter&#x27;s Field on 16 August to demonstrate for parliamentary reform. It was addressed by Henry Hunt, a powerful speaker known as Orator Hunt. Local magistrates, fearful of the large crowd estimated at 60,000–80,000, ordered volunteer cavalry from the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry to clear a way through the crowd to arrest Hunt and the platform party. The Yeomanry were armed with sabres and some reports say that many of them were drunk. They lost control and started to strike out at members of the crowd. The magistrates, believing that the Yeomanry were under attack, then ordered the 15th Hussars to disperse the crowd, which they did by charging into the mass of men, women and children, sabres drawn. These events resulted in the deaths of fifteen people and over six hundred injured. The name &quot;Peterloo&quot; was coined immediately by the radical &quot;Manchester Observer&quot;, combining the name of the meeting place, St Peter&#x27;s Field, with the Battle of Waterloo fought four years earlier. One of those who later died from his wounds had been present at Waterloo, and told a friend shortly before his death that he had never been in such danger as at Peterloo: &quot;At Waterloo there was man to man but there it was downright murder.&quot;

The &quot;Manchester Guardian&quot;, a newspaper with a radical agenda, was established shortly afterwards. In 1832, following the Great Reform Act, Manchester elected its first MPs since the election of 1656. Five candidates, including William Cobbett, stood and Liberals Charles Poulett Thomson and Mark Philips were elected. The Great Reform Act led to conditions favourable to municipal incorporation. Manchester became a municipal borough in 1838, and what remained of the manorial rights were later purchased by the town council.

==Industrial and cultural growth==
The prosperity from the textile industry led to an expansion of Manchester and the surrounding conurbation. Many institutions were established including Belle Vue Zoological Gardens (founded by John Jennison in 1836), the Manchester Athenaeum (1836–37), the Corn Exchange (1837) and the Royal Victoria Gallery of Practical Science (1840–42).

This wealth fuelled the development of science and education in Manchester. The Manchester Academy had moved to York in 1803 and, though it returned in 1840, in 1853 it moved again to London, eventually becoming Harris Manchester College, Oxford. However, a Mechanics&#x27; Institute, later to become UMIST, was founded in 1824 by among others, John Dalton the &quot;father of atomic theory&quot;. In 1851 Owens College was founded by the trustees of John Owens, a textile merchant who had left a bequest for that purpose. Owens College was to become the first constituent college of the Victoria University which was granted its Royal Charter in 1880. This flowering of radicalism and reform took place within the context of ferment in Manchester&#x27;s cultural and intellectual life. John Dalton lectured on his atomic theory at the Literary and Philosophical Society in 1803. The establishment of the Portico Library in 1806, the Royal Manchester Institution (later the Art Gallery) in 1823, and the Manchester Botanical and Horticultural Society in 1827 are evidence of this.

The growth of city government continued with Manchester finally being incorporated as a borough in 1838, covering the township of Manchester (the area which is now the city centre), along with Ardwick, Beswick, Cheetham, Chorlton-on-Medlock and Hulme.

In 1841, Robert Angus Smith took up work as an analytical chemist at the Royal Manchester Institution and started to research the unprecedented environmental problems. Smith went on to become the first director of the Alkali Inspectorate and to characterise, and coin the term, &quot;acid rain&quot;.

Manchester continued to be a nexus of political radicalism. From 1842 to 1844, the German social philosopher Friedrich Engels lived there and wrote his influential book &quot;Condition of the Working Class in England&quot; (1845). He habitually met Karl Marx in an alcove at Chetham&#x27;s Library.

In 1846 the Borough bought the manorial rights from the Mosley family and the granting of city status followed in 1853.

In 1847 the Manchester diocese of the Church of England was established.

In 1851, the Borough became the first local authority to seek water supplies beyond its boundaries.

By 1853, the number of cotton mills in Manchester had reached its peak of 108. Warehouses became commonplace in what now makes up the city centre. These 19th-century Mancunian warehouses were often decorative and ornate for a building of such simple function. The most notable 19th-century warehouse is Watts Warehouse on Portland Street.

The Cooperative Wholesale Society was formed in 1863. Manchester is now home to the Co-operative Group, the largest mutual business in the world with over six million members. The group remained based on their listed estate in Manchester city centre.

The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 saw an immediate shortage of cotton and the ensuing cotton famine brought enormous distress to the area until the war ended in 1865.

The first Trades Union Congress was held in Manchester (at the Mechanics&#x27; Institute, David Street), from 2 to 6 June 1868. Manchester was the subject of Friedrich Engels&#x27; &quot;The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844&quot;, Engels himself spending much of his life in and around Manchester. Manchester was also an important cradle of the Labour Party and the Suffragette Movement.

Manchester&#x27;s golden age was perhaps the last quarter of the 19th century. Many of the great public buildings (including the town hall) date from then. The city&#x27;s cosmopolitan atmosphere contributed to a vibrant culture, which included the Hallé Orchestra. In 1889, when county councils were created in England, the municipal borough became a county borough with even greater autonomy.
During the late 19th century, Manchester began to suffer an economic decline, partly exacerbated by its reliance on the Port of Liverpool, which was charging excessive dock usage fees. Championed by local industrialist Daniel Adamson, the Manchester Ship Canal was built as a way to reverse this. It gave the city direct access to the sea allowing it to export its manufactured goods directly. This meant that it no longer had to rely on the railways and Liverpool&#x27;s ports. When completed in 1894 it allowed Manchester to become Britain&#x27;s third busiest port, despite being inland. The Manchester Ship Canal was created by canalising the Rivers Irwell and Mersey for from Salford to the Mersey estuary at the port of Liverpool. This enabled oceangoing ships to sail right into the Port of Manchester (actually in Salford). The docks functioned until the 1970s when their closure led to a large increase in unemployment in the area.

===The world&#x27;s first industrial estate===
Trafford Park in Stretford (outside the city boundaries) was the world&#x27;s first industrial estate and still exists today, though with a significant tourist and recreational presence. Manchester suffered greatly from the inter-war depression and the underlying structural changes that began to supplant the old industries, including textile manufacture.

==Further expansion==
The municipal borough created in 1838 covered the six townships of Ardwick, Beswick, Cheetham, Chorlton-on-Medlock, Hulme and Manchester. The borough became a city in 1853. Expansion of the city limits was constrained westwards, as Salford immediately to the west had been given its own borough charter in 1844. These areas were included in the city limits of Manchester at these dates:-
* 1885: Harpurhey, Bradford-with-Beswick, Rusholme
* 1890: Crumpsall, Blackley and Moston, Newton Heath, Clayton, Openshaw, West Gorton
* 1903: Heaton Park. So far most expansion had been northerly and easterly.
* 1904: Moss Side, Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Withington, Burnage, Didsbury, all to the south.
* 1909: Gorton, Levenshulme.
* 1931: The parishes of Northenden, Baguley and Northen Etchells, beyond the River Mersey, previously in Bucklow Rural District in Cheshire. They later formed the Wythenshawe housing estate. This followed an unsuccessful attempt to annex the same area in 1927.
*1974 (Local Government Act 1972): Ringway, Manchester International Airport.

==20th century==
By 1900, the Manchester city region was the 9th most populous in the world. In the early 20th century, Manchester&#x27;s economy diversified into engineering chemical and electrical industries. The stimulus of the ship canal saw the establishment of Trafford Park, the world&#x27;s first industrial park, in 1910 and the arrival of the Ford Motor Company and Westinghouse Electric Corporation from the USA. The influence is still visible in &quot;Westinghouse Road&quot; and a grid layout of numbered streets and avenues.

Henry Price (1867–1944) was appointed as the first City Architect of Manchester in 1902. He was succeeded in 1932 by George Noel Hill (1893–1985).

In 1931, the population of Manchester reached an all-time peak of 766,311. However, the period from the 1930s onwards saw a continuous decline in population. During this period, textile manufacture, Manchester&#x27;s traditional staple industry went into steep decline, largely due to the Great Depression of the 1930s and foreign competition. During this period the Women&#x27;s Citizens League campaigned for better maternity facilities in the city.

Significant changes in this period were the move of the Manchester Royal Infirmary from Piccadilly in 1908 and the building of a new public library and town hall extension in the 1930s.

===Second World War===

In the Second World War Manchester played a key role as an industrial manufacturing city, including the Avro aircraft factory (now BAE Systems) which built countless aircraft for the RAF, the most famous being the Avro Lancaster bomber. As a consequence of its war efforts, the city suffered heavily from bombing during the Blitz in 1940 to 1941. It was attacked a number of times by the Luftwaffe, particularly in the &quot;Christmas Blitz&quot; of December 1940, which destroyed a large part of the historic city centre and seriously damaged the cathedral, which took 20 years to restore. In total, 589 civilians are recorded to have died as result of enemy action within the Manchester County Borough.

===Post-war===
The Royal Exchange ceased trading in 1968.

The 1950s saw the start of Manchester&#x27;s rise as a football superpower. Despite the Munich air disaster, Manchester United F.C. went on to become one of the world&#x27;s most famous clubs, rising to a dominance of the English game from the early 1990s onwards.

Mancunian Films had been established by John E. Blakeley in the 1930s as a vehicle for northern comedians such as George Formby and Frank Randle. The company opened its own studios, Dickenson Road Studios, in Manchester in 1947 and produced a successful sequence of films until Blakeley&#x27;s retirement six years later. The studio was sold to the BBC in 1954, the same year that saw the advent of commercial television in the UK. The establishment of Granada Television based in the city attracted much of the production talent from the studios and continued Manchester&#x27;s tradition of cultural innovation, often with its trademark social radicalism in its programming.

The same period saw the rise to national celebrity of local stars from the Granada TV soap opera &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, which was first aired on ITV in December 1960 and remains on air more than 60 years later.

The city also attracted international media and public attention for the success of its two senior football clubs—Manchester United and Manchester City.

Manchester United had won two league titles and a FA Cup in the first two decades of the 20th century, but the inter-war years had been blighted by a loss of form on the pitch and ongoing financial problems. The club&#x27;s revival occurred with the appointment of Matt Busby as manager in 1945; he guided the club to an FA Cup triumph in 1948 and a league title in 1952. He then built a highly successful new side consisting of mostly young players (nicknamed the &quot;Busby Babes&quot; by the media) which went on to win two league titles and became the first English club to play in the new European Cup. Then tragedy struck in February 1958; eight of the club&#x27;s players (three of them established England internationals; Roger Byrne, Tommy Taylor and Duncan Edwards) died as a result of the Munich air disaster on the return flight from a European Cup tie in Yugoslavia and two others injured to such an extent that they never played again. Busby, who was seriously injured in the crash, was left to build a new team. His new United side, built around Munich crash survivors including Bill Foulkes and Bobby Charlton, went on to dominate the English game in the 1960s, featuring new stars like Denis Law and George Best, winning two more league titles, a FA Cup and then the European Cup in 1968—the first English club to win the trophy. Busby retired the following year after 24 years in charge. The club was less successful in the 1970s, its only major trophy of the decade being the FA Cup in 1977, and the club even spent a season outside the top division of English football. The 1980s were slightly more successful with a further two FA Cups wins and regular top four league finishes, but the club has enjoyed an unmatched run of success which began after the appointment of Alex Ferguson as manager in 1986. By the time Ferguson retired in 2013 after 27 years as manager, the club had won a further 13 league titles, five FA Cups, four League Cups and two European Cups. High-profile players to have played for the club during Sir Alex Ferguson&#x27;s management (he was knighted in 1999) include Bryan Robson, Mark Hughes, Ryan Giggs, Eric Cantona, David Beckham and Wayne Rooney.

Manchester City entered the Football League in 1899, and won their first major honour with the FA Cup in 1904. Manchester City had been league champions once and FA Cup winners twice by 1939, but enjoyed further success in the post-war years, starting with an FA Cup win in 1956. The club&#x27;s next success came more than a decade later, with a league championship triumph in 1968, an FA Cup triumph in 1969, and a double of the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup and Football League Cup in 1970 under the management of Joe Mercer and Malcolm Allison. Great players of the 1950s and 1960s sides included Don Revie, Bert Trautmann, Francis Lee, Colin Bell and Tony Book. They won the League Cup in 1976 but after  losing the 1981 FA Cup Final, the club went through a period of decline, which eventually saw them relegated as far down as third tier of English football by the end of the 1997–98 season.

They since regained promotion to the top tier in 2001–02 and have remained a fixture in the Premier League since 2002–03. For 80 years until 2003, the club had played at the Maine Road stadium in the Moss Side area of the city, before moving to the City of Manchester Stadium to the east of the city centre, which had been constructed for the previous year&#x27;s Commonwealth Games. In 2008, Manchester City was purchased by Abu Dhabi United Group for £210 million and received considerable financial investment. The club&#x27;s next major trophy was the FA Cup in 2011. The club&#x27;s first top division league title for 44 years followed in 2012, and a League Cup triumph followed in 2014.

The club have now won seven domestic league titles. Under the management of Pep Guardiola they won the Premier League in 2018 becoming the only Premier League team to attain 100 points in a single season. In 2019, they won four trophies, completing an unprecedented sweep of all domestic trophies in England and becoming the first English men&#x27;s team to win the domestic treble. Manchester City&#x27;s revenue was the fifth highest of a football club in the world in the 2017–18 season at €527.7 million. In 2018, Forbes estimated the club was the fifth most valuable in the world at $2.47 billion.

As with many British cities during the period. The 1950s and 1960s saw extensive re-development of the city, with old and overcrowded housing cleared to make way for high-rise blocks of flats. This changed the appearance of Manchester considerably, although the high-rise experiment later proved unpopular and unsuccessful. The city centre also saw major redevelopment, with developments such as the Manchester Arndale.

Manchester&#x27;s key role in the industrial revolution was repeated and the city became a centre of research and development. Manchester made important contributions to the computer revolution. The father of modern computing Alan Turing was based at Manchester University and it was his idea of the stored-program concept that led in 1948 to the Manchester Baby, which was the first electronic stored-program computer to run a programme. This was developed by Frederic C. Williams and Tom Kilburn at the University of Manchester. This was followed by the Manchester Mark 1, in 1949. These inventions were commercialised in the Ferranti Mark 1, one of the first commercially available computers.

In the late 1950s, Manchester was chosen as a testing ground for a new telephone service which formed the foundations of what we now know of as mobile phone technology. The &quot;Post Office South Lancashire Radiophone Service&quot; was controlled from the city&#x27;s Peterloo telephone exchange and enabled customers with the apparatus installed in their vehicle to phone to any UK subscriber.

In 1974, Manchester was split from the county of Lancashire, and the Metropolitan Borough of Manchester was created.

The diversification of the city&#x27;s economy helped to cushion the blow of this decline. However, as with many inner-city areas, the growth of car ownership and commuting meant that many people moved from the inner-city and into surrounding suburbs. By 1971 the population of Manchester had declined to 543,868, and by 2001 422,302.

===IRA bomb and its effects===
During the 1980s, with the demise of many traditional industries under the radical economic restructuring often known as &quot;Thatcherism&quot;, the city and region experienced some decline. The revival started towards the end of the decade, catalysed, not only by wider growing prosperity in the UK but by the creative music industry. New institutions such as Factory Records and Fac 51 Hacienda earned the city the sobriquet &quot;Madchester&quot;.

At 11.20 am on Saturday 15 June 1996, the IRA detonated a large bomb in the city centre, the largest to be detonated on British soil. Fortunately, warnings given in the previous hour had allowed the evacuation of the immediate area, so this bomb caused over 200 injuries but no deaths. The principal damage was to the physical infrastructure of nearby buildings. Since then the city centre has undergone extensive rejuvenation alongside the more general efforts to regenerate previously run-down areas of the wider city (such as Hulme and Salford). This reconstruction spurred a massive regeneration of the city centre, with complexes such as the Printworks and the Triangle creating new city focal points for both shopping and entertainment. The following regeneration took over a decade to complete. The completion of the renovated Manchester Arndale in September 2006 allowed the centre to hold the title of the UK&#x27;s largest city centre shopping mall. The bomb is commemorated by a plaque fixed to a nearby postbox which withstood the blast, which reads &quot;This postbox remained standing almost undamaged on June 15, 1996 when this area was devastated by a bomb. The box was removed during the rebuilding of the city centre and was returned to its original site on November 22nd 1999.&quot;

==21st century==

In 2002, the city hosted the XVII Commonwealth Games very successfully, earning praise from many previously sceptical sources. Manchester has twice failed in its bid to host the Olympic Games, losing to Atlanta in 1996 and Sydney in 2000.

In the 1990s, Manchester earned a reputation for gang-related crime, particularly after a spate of shootings involving young men, and reports of teenagers carrying handguns as &quot;fashion accessories&quot;. A more concerted effort to reduce such crime has focused on prohibiting the availability of firearms, working with the community, deterring young individuals from joining gangs and jailing ringleaders have all helped to reduce gun crime. Consequently, gun crime has plummeted year on year since 2007. Crime figures from 2011 show there were 19.2 firearm crimes per 100,000 population in Greater Manchester—compared to 35.1 in the Metropolitan Police area and City of London, and 34.3 in the West Midlands.

The Canal Street area of the city is well known as the &quot;Gay Village&quot;. Manchester&#x27;s claim to the status of &quot;gay capital of the UK&quot; was strengthened in 2003 when it played host city to the annual Europride festival.

During the 1980s, the Victoria University of Manchester had somewhat complacently exploited its reputation as one of the leading &quot;red brick&quot; universities. During the same period, many of those universities established post-war vigorously pursued policies of growth and innovation. The university consequently saw its standing decline and only in the 1990s did it embark on a &quot;catch-up&quot; programme. In October 2004 the Victoria University of Manchester and UMIST merged to form the University of Manchester, the largest University in the UK with ambitious plans to be one of the world&#x27;s leading research-intensive universities.

Since the regeneration after the 1996 IRA bomb, and aided by the XVII Commonwealth Games, Manchester&#x27;s city centre has changed significantly. Large sections of the city dating from the 1960s have been either demolished and re-developed or modernised with the use of glass and steel; a good example of this transformation is the Manchester Arndale. Many old mills and textile warehouses have been converted into apartments, helping to give the city a much more modern, upmarket look and feel. Some areas, like Hulme (first unsuccessfully regenerated in the 1960s when multi-storey flats replaced Victorian slums), have undergone extensive regeneration programmes and many million-pound lofthouse apartments have since been developed to cater for its growing business community. The 168 metre tall, 47-storey Beetham Tower, completed in 2006, provides the highest residential accommodation in the United Kingdom — the lower 23 floors form the Hilton Hotel, while the upper 24 floors are apartments. The Beetham Tower was originally planned to stand 171 metres in height, but this had to be changed due to local wind conditions.

In January 2007, the independent Casino Advisory Panel awarded Manchester a licence to build the only supercasino in the UK to regenerate the Eastlands area of the city, but in March the House of Lords rejected the decision by three votes rendering previous House of Commons acceptance meaningless. This left the supercasino, and 14 other smaller concessions, in parliamentary limbo until a final decision was made. On 11 July 2007, a source close to the government declared the entire supercasino project &quot;dead in the water&quot;. A member of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce professed himself &quot;amazed and a bit shocked&quot; and that &quot;there has been an awful lot of time and money wasted&quot;. After a meeting with the Prime Minister, Manchester City Council issued a press release on 24 July 2007 stating that &quot;contrary to some reports the door is not closed to a regional casino&quot;. The supercasino was officially declared dead in February 2008 with a compensation package described by the &quot;Manchester Evening News&quot; as &quot;rehashed plans, spin and empty promises&quot;.

Parts of the city centre were affected by rioting by Rangers fans during the 2008 UEFA Cup final riots.

By 2011, Manchester and Salford were on a tentative list for UNESCO World Heritage Site status. The proposal centres on the Bridgewater Canal, regarded as the first true canal which helped create the industrial revolution.

On Tuesday 9 August, the centres of Manchester and Salford were among the many cities and towns affected by the 2011 England riots.

On 22 May 2017, the city suffered its worst postwar tragedy when an Islamic extremist, Libyan immigrant Salaman Abedi, carried out a suicide bombing following a concert by the American singer Ariana Grande at the Manchester Arena. Abedi killed himself and 22 other people, and injured over 800, with many of the casualties being children, teenagers and young adults. It was the deadliest terrorist attack and the first suicide bombing in Britain since the 7 July 2005 London bombings. The attack caused worldwide condemnation and the changing of the UK&#x27;s threat level to &quot;critical&quot; for the first time since 2007. Many of the injured and dead were from the Greater Manchester area and neighbouring parts of Cheshire and Lancashire.

==Civic history==
The town of Manchester (as it was then) was granted a charter in 1301 by Thomas de Grelley, Baron of Manchester, who was also the Lord of the Manor of Manchester, but the borough status it conferred on the town was lost following a court case in 1359.

Until the 19th century, Manchester was one of the many townships in the ancient parish of Manchester which covered a wider area than today&#x27;s metropolitan borough.

In 1792 commissioners, usually known as police commissioners, were established for the improvement of the Township of Manchester.

The Municipal Corporations Act 1835 converted many older boroughs into a new standardised type of borough called municipal boroughs, with elected councils, and included provisions to allow other towns to become municipal boroughs. Manchester took advantage of the new provisions and secured a charter incorporating the town as a municipal borough on 23 October 1838. The borough as created in 1838 covered the six townships of Ardwick, Beswick, Cheetham, Chorlton-on-Medlock, Hulme and Manchester. The municipal borough was slightly smaller than the parliamentary constituency of Manchester which had been created under the Reform Act 1832, which also included Bradford, Harpurhey and Newton. The first election to the borough council (also called the corporation) was held on 14 December 1838. The council held its first meeting on 15 December 1838 at the Manor Court Room on Brown Street, when Thomas Potter was appointed the first Mayor of Manchester and Joseph Heron was appointed the first town clerk, a post he would hold for over forty years.

On 11 December 1840, the Manchester Poor Law Union was formally declared and took responsibility for the administration and funding of the Poor Law in the area.

===City of Manchester===
On 29 March 1853, the borough was elevated to city status. In 1885 further areas were added to the City of Manchester with Bradford, Harpurhey, Rusholme and parts of Moss Side and Withington townships.

By the Local Government Act 1888, the City of Manchester became in 1889 a county borough, although it still kept the city title.

Other areas, which had been under the control of Lancashire County Council, were added to the city between 1890 and 1933:

* 1890: Blackley, Crumpsall, Moston, Openshaw and Newton (incl. Kirkmanshulme) townships, Clayton area (part of Droylsden township) and part of Gorton township.
* 1901: A very small part of Gorton Urban District.
* 1903: Part (Heaton Park area) of Prestwich Urban District.
* 1904: Burnage, Didsbury and Chorlton-cum-Hardy civil parishes and Moss Side and Withington Urban Districts.
* 1909: Levenshulme Urban District and the remaining area of Gorton Urban District.
* 1913: Part of Heaton Norris Urban District.
* 1933: Part of Denton Urban District.
* In addition to these areas, in 1931 the Cheshire civil parishes of Baguley, Northenden, and Northen Etchells were also added to the City of Manchester.

Under the Local Government Act 1972, the City of Manchester, with the addition of the civil parish of Ringway, became on 1 April 1974 one of the ten Metropolitan Boroughs of the newly created Metropolitan county of Greater Manchester.

In 1986 Greater Manchester County Council was abolished by the Local Government Act 1985 and most of its functions were devolved to the ten boroughs, making them effectively unitary authorities. Some of the County Council&#x27;s functions were taken over by joint bodies such as a passenger transport authority, and joint fire, police, and waste disposal authorities.

In one of its most noted acts, Manchester City Council carried a resolution in 1980 to create the UK&#x27;s first Nuclear Free Zone The Peace Gardens were later constructed on a small piece of land in Lincoln Square.

==Greater Manchester==
Before 1974 the area of Greater Manchester was split between Cheshire and Lancashire with numerous parts being independent county boroughs. The area was informally known as &quot;SELNEC&quot;, for &quot;South East Lancashire North East Cheshire&quot;. Also, small parts of the West Riding of Yorkshire (around Saddleworth) and Derbyshire were covered.

SELNEC had been proposed by the Redcliffe-Maud Report of 1969 as a &quot;metropolitan area&quot;. This had roughly the same northern boundary as today&#x27;s Greater Manchester but covered much more territory in north-east Cheshire – including Macclesfield and Warrington. It also covered Glossop in Derbyshire.

In 1969 a SELNEC Passenger Transport Authority was set up, which covered an area smaller than the proposed SELNEC, but different from the eventual Greater Manchester.

Although the Redcliffe-Maud report was rejected by the Conservative Party government after it won the 1970 general election, it was committed to local government reform and accepted the need for a county based on Manchester. Its original proposal was much smaller than the Redcliffe-Maud Report&#x27;s SELNEC, but further fringe areas such as Wilmslow, Warrington and Glossop were trimmed from the edges and included instead in the shire counties. The metropolitan county of Greater Manchester was eventually established in 1974.

Greater Manchester&#x27;s representative county council was abolished in 1986, following the Local Government Act 1985. However, Greater Manchester is still a metropolitan county and ceremonial county.

==See also==

* Beyer, Peacock &amp; Company
* History of England
* List of famous Mancunians
* List of railway stations in Greater Manchester
* Manchester Metropolitan University
* Politics in Manchester
* Stephenson&#x27;s &quot;Rocket&quot;
* Timeline of Manchester history
* Transport in Manchester
* University of Manchester
* University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology
* Victoria University of Manchester
==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===

* Boxen, Jennifer L. &quot; &#x27;A spirit of benevolence&#x27;: Manchester and the origins of modern public health, 1790-1834&quot; (PhD Dissertation, Florida Atlantic University; ProQuest Dissertations &amp; Theses,  2013. 1523407).
*
*
*
*Mosley, Stephen. &quot;The chimney of the world: a history of smoke pollution in Victorian and Edwardian Manchester&quot; (Routledge, 2013)
*
*
*
*
==Further reading==
;Published in the 19th century
* 
* 

;Published in the 20th century
* 
*Shercliff, W. H. (1977) &quot;Manchester: a Short History of its Development&quot;
*Mamchestre Mamchestre pg 36 chap IV

==External links==
*Manchester chronology
*Image of Deansgate in Manchester, with trams, about 1910
*The English Civil War in Manchester
*Our Manchester
*A brief history of Manchestery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3136750" start="4" end="25" title="History of Manchester" label="history of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="62" end="73" title="Lancashire" label="Lancastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="74" end="82" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="115" end="125" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="163" end="173" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="295" end="307" title="urbanisation" label="urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708483" start="332" end="384" title="textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution" label="textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="461" end="466" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="467" end="474" title="castra" label="castrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="478" end="484" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="485" end="492" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="634" end="649" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="809" end="819" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="981" end="995" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="1089" end="1104" title="post-industrial" label="post-industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579461" start="1124" end="1132" title="Sport in Manchester" label="sporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805726" start="1134" end="1146" title="Media in Manchester" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="1151" end="1160" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591514" start="1293" end="1305" title="1996 Manchester bombing" label="1996 bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q814128" start="1470" end="1483" title="Beetham Tower, Manchester" label="Beetham Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1659" end="1680" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308772" start="1690" end="1701" title="Castlefield" label="Castlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845996" start="1706" end="1713" title="Ancoats" label="Ancoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1821" end="1826" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="1939" end="1951" title="Latinization of names" label="Latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1967" end="1976" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25390234" start="1977" end="1981" title="Celtic placenames" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="2087" end="2093" title="breast" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959757" start="2125" end="2141" title="breast-like hill" label="breast-like hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560" start="2235" end="2241" title="mother" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326610" start="2267" end="2278" title="River Medlock" label="local river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="2279" end="2286" title="Celtic mythology" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="2318" end="2342" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="2398" end="2403" title="Irish Gaelic" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="2441" end="2447" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2465" end="2476" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="2709" end="2718" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="2811" end="2820" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166304" start="3180" end="3191" title="Manchester city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="3389" end="3414" title="Roman invasion of Britain" label="Roman invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="3471" end="3480" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="3576" end="3585" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3589" end="3595" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480645" start="3654" end="3662" title="Setantii" label="Setantii"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="3774" end="3784" title="castra" label="Roman fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326610" start="3851" end="3864" title="River Medlock" label="River Medlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47901" start="3952" end="3958" title="River Irwell" label="Irwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="4055" end="4077" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="4110" end="4119" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="4186" end="4202" title="northern England" label="northern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450247" start="4218" end="4230" title="Deva Victrix" label="Deva Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="4232" end="4239" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q958954" start="4244" end="4252" title="Eboracum" label="Eboracum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="4254" end="4258" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="4260" end="4270" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960578" start="4321" end="4334" title="Bremetennacum" label="Bremetennacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083066" start="4336" end="4346" title="Ribchester" label="Ribchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050612" start="4377" end="4387" title="Castleshaw Roman fort" label="Castleshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009813" start="4392" end="4401" title="Northwich" label="Northwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q202167" start="4755" end="4761" title="cohort (military unit)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="4786" end="4795" title="Auxiliaries (Roman military)" label="auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="4932" end="4939" title="Mithraic Mysteries" label="Mithras"/>
<link wikidata="Q41898" start="4968" end="4979" title="sator square" label="word square"/>
<link wikidata="Q763590" start="5137" end="5142" title="Vicus (Rome)" label="vicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="5328" end="5345" title="industrial estate" label="industrial estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308772" start="5519" end="5530" title="Castlefield" label="Castlefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q47901" start="5700" end="5706" title="River Irwell" label="Irwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154474" start="5711" end="5714" title="River Irk" label="Irk"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="5727" end="5744" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="5785" end="5800" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="5940" end="5951" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724" start="5981" end="5993" title="River Mersey" label="River Mersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="6048" end="6060" title="Etymology" label="Etymological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342197" start="6136" end="6142" title="Eccles, Greater Manchester" label="Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199102" start="6147" end="6157" title="Chadderton" label="Chadderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="6164" end="6171" title="Britons (historic)" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130147" start="6211" end="6218" title="Clayton, Greater Manchester" label="Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="6220" end="6226" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916985" start="6231" end="6237" title="Moston, Greater Manchester" label="Moston"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="6244" end="6251" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q877429" start="6290" end="6296" title="Danes (Germanic tribe)" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597496" start="6308" end="6321" title="Cheadle Hulme" label="Cheadle Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242234" start="6323" end="6332" title="Davyhulme" label="Davyhulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051137" start="6334" end="6339" title="Hulme" label="Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237194" start="6344" end="6355" title="Levenshulme" label="Levenshulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="6424" end="6430" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="6435" end="6441" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="6469" end="6487" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="6497" end="6517" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192623" start="6527" end="6533" title="looting" label="sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985923" start="6634" end="6644" title="Nico Ditch" label="Nico Ditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q659803" start="6673" end="6690" title="Ashton-under-Lyne" label="Ashton-under-Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q374458" start="6694" end="6703" title="Stretford" label="Stretford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="6723" end="6729" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237194" start="6731" end="6742" title="Levenshulme" label="Levenshulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736509" start="6744" end="6751" title="Burnage" label="Burnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356650" start="6753" end="6761" title="Rusholme" label="Rusholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q637582" start="6783" end="6794" title="Fallowfield" label="Fallowfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363433" start="6796" end="6806" title="Withington" label="Withington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="6811" end="6829" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton-cum-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="7002" end="7023" title="Anglo Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187114" start="7049" end="7065" title="Edward the Elder" label="Edward the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="7179" end="7183" title="burh" label="burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="7221" end="7227" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="7387" end="7393" title="Tostig" label="Tostig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747250" start="7400" end="7428" title="Manchester (ancient parish)" label="ancient parish of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="7772" end="7779" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226845" start="7873" end="7888" title="Salford (hundred)" label="Salford Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161853" start="7977" end="7992" title="Roger the Poitevin" label="Roger de Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="8025" end="8032" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146758" start="8083" end="8099" title="Albert de Gresle" label="Albert de Gresle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="8318" end="8331" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579483" start="8404" end="8412" title="carucate" label="carucate"/>
<link wikidata="Q971811" start="8547" end="8567" title="Manchester Cathedral" label="Manchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q659803" start="8611" end="8628" title="Ashton-under-Lyne" label="Ashton-under-Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747250" start="8634" end="8654" title="Manchester (ancient parish)" label="parish of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459783" start="8808" end="8815" title="Flixton, Greater Manchester" label="Flixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342197" start="8820" end="8826" title="Eccles, Greater Manchester" label="Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q374458" start="8859" end="8868" title="Stretford" label="Stretford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18655" start="8873" end="8882" title="Stockport" label="Stockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003559" start="8956" end="8965" title="Prestwich" label="Prestwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="9172" end="9180" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280811" start="9195" end="9215" title="Manchester Castle" label="castle in Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577898" start="9261" end="9291" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335033" start="9333" end="9341" title="ringwork" label="ringwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="9551" end="9572" title="fortified manor house" label="fortified manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998508" start="9738" end="9745" title="burgage" label="burgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="9948" end="9955" title="Leasehold estate" label="tenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q257052" start="10156" end="10163" title="Ringway, Greater Manchester" label="Ringway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879164" start="10165" end="10181" title="Ullerwood Castle" label="Ullerwood Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="10185" end="10201" title="motte-and-bailey" label="motte-and-bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645929" start="10257" end="10272" title="Hamon de Massey" label="Hamon de Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="10319" end="10327" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="10700" end="10709" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="10715" end="10726" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="10740" end="10753" title="excommunicate" label="excommunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="10900" end="10933" title="Hubert de Burgh, 1st Earl of Kent" label="Hubert de Burgh, 1st Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="10984" end="10998" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511725" start="11045" end="11056" title="market town" label="market town"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="11145" end="11149" title="fair" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="11415" end="11422" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="11577" end="11606" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647984" start="11805" end="11819" title="Hanging Bridge" label="Hanging Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="11973" end="11984" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="12192" end="12199" title="Flemings" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="12393" end="12403" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747250" start="12480" end="12508" title="Manchester (ancient parish)" label="ancient parish of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="12525" end="12537" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="12575" end="12592" title="Lord of the Manor" label="Lord of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="12604" end="12610" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="12642" end="12646" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="12651" end="12663" title="Henry V of England" label="King Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="12699" end="12716" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="12735" end="12749" title="Blessed Virgin" label="Blessed Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="12751" end="12761" title="St. George" label="St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q244380" start="12766" end="12788" title="Saint Denis of Paris" label="St. Denys or St. Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q575842" start="13021" end="13036" title="Chantry" label="chantry chapels"/>
<link wikidata="Q971811" start="13114" end="13134" title="Manchester Cathedral" label="Manchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="13174" end="13185" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="13487" end="13504" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143499" start="13675" end="13688" title="James Stanley (bishop)" label="James Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q461013" start="13690" end="13703" title="Bishop of Ely" label="Bishop of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="13809" end="13826" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="13833" end="13852" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q971811" start="13869" end="13886" title="Manchester Cathedral" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="13908" end="13918" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q201484" start="14002" end="14010" title="John Dee (mathematician)" label="John Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q603100" start="14140" end="14147" title="fustian" label="fustian"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="14216" end="14223" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="14392" end="14406" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="14444" end="14451" title="puritan" label="puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="14484" end="14494" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="14515" end="14524" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="14560" end="14577" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336721" start="14601" end="14613" title="James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby" label="Lord Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="14619" end="14627" title="Royalist" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032636" start="14639" end="14652" title="William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="14854" end="14871" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255735" start="14987" end="14999" title="John Rosworm" label="John Rosworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="15279" end="15291" title="English Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="15326" end="15336" title="British Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083719" start="15365" end="15380" title="Charles Worsley" label="Charles Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037113" start="15398" end="15415" title="Worsley baronets" label="Lancashire family"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="15427" end="15435" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378973" start="15656" end="15682" title="Rule of the Major Generals" label="Rule of the Major Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="15696" end="15707" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="15743" end="15753" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="15768" end="15781" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041094" start="15841" end="15853" title="bear baiting" label="bear baiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="15894" end="15903" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="16008" end="16027" title="English Restoration" label="English Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="16145" end="16166" title="Member of Parliament" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726294" start="16302" end="16316" title="Henry Newcombe" label="Henry Newcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="16353" end="16368" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188415" start="16419" end="16438" title="Cross Street Chapel" label="Cross Street Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="16471" end="16480" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941334" start="16543" end="16559" title="Humphrey Chetham" label="Humphrey Chetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576531" start="16637" end="16652" title="Charity school" label="bluecoat school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577898" start="16709" end="16739" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901355" start="16808" end="16830" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="17041" end="17060" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="17104" end="17108" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="17123" end="17140" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592459" start="17218" end="17238" title="St Ann&amp;#x27;s Church, Manchester" label="St Ann&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="17462" end="17467" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="17692" end="17709" title="lord of the manor" label="lord of the manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="17721" end="17742" title="Charles Edward Stuart" label="Charles Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="17867" end="17876" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747488" start="17918" end="17937" title="Manchester Regiment (Jacobite)" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="18037" end="18047" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="18140" end="18144" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="18322" end="18327" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="18499" end="18507" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="18556" end="18568" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="18692" end="18713" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49015" start="18719" end="18733" title="Spinning Jenny" label="Spinning Jenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q35647" start="18891" end="18904" title="Pennines" label="Pennine Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="19023" end="19034" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269204" start="19044" end="19060" title="Quarry Bank Mill" label="Quarry Bank Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="19151" end="19157" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="19314" end="19323" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q932837" start="19368" end="19396" title="Mersey and Irwell Navigation" label="Mersey and Irwell Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="19545" end="19549" title="yarn" label="yarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q294153" start="19644" end="19661" title="Richard Arkwright" label="Richard Arkwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504636" start="19698" end="19709" title="Shudehill Mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224989" start="19758" end="19779" title="Newcomen steam engine" label="Newcomen steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="19800" end="19810" title="waterwheel" label="waterwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099902" start="19841" end="19858" title="Watt steam engine" label="Watt steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="19929" end="19941" title="cotton mills" label="cotton mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="20205" end="20215" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175771" start="20260" end="20272" title="Cottonopolis" label="Cottonopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="20300" end="20315" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="20372" end="20390" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100147" start="20464" end="20479" title="Chinatown, Manchester" label="Faulkner Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883277" start="20509" end="20513" title="Bell Telephone Company" label="Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="20710" end="20725" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian times"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492442" start="20811" end="20831" title="Telephony In Greater Manchester" label="history of telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="20972" end="20976" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="21018" end="21023" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913932" start="21095" end="21112" title="Bridgewater Canal" label="Bridgewater Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617033" start="21174" end="21181" title="Worsley" label="Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724" start="21213" end="21227" title="Mersey Estuary" label="Mersey Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="21368" end="21371" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770743" start="21408" end="21421" title="Market Street, Manchester" label="Market Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162457" start="21439" end="21448" title="Pendleton, Greater Manchester" label="Pendleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="21453" end="21460" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="21611" end="21643" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="21780" end="21789" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="21862" end="21872" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="21902" end="21906" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997284" start="22141" end="22172" title="Manchester Corporation Tramways" label="Manchester Corporation Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="22242" end="22263" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="22355" end="22368" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="22448" end="22455" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10567938" start="22508" end="22522" title="Little Ireland" label="Little Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="22602" end="22614" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="22959" end="22980" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="23169" end="23178" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="23451" end="23456" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="23659" end="23677" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346183" start="23719" end="23738" title="Robert Jones Derfel" label="Robert Jones Derfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="23850" end="23857" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="23862" end="23876" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975790" start="23898" end="23907" title="Broughton, Salford" label="Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003559" start="23909" end="23918" title="Prestwich" label="Prestwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615791" start="23923" end="23933" title="Whitefield, Greater Manchester" label="Whitefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="24098" end="24104" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="24224" end="24239" title="Halle Orchestra" label="Halle Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845996" start="24248" end="24255" title="Ancoats" label="Ancoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="24425" end="24431" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="24433" end="24439" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="24441" end="24448" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="24450" end="24459" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="24461" end="24467" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="24472" end="24479" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q935570" start="24500" end="24521" title="Manchester Ship Canal" label="Manchester Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="24561" end="24567" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="24569" end="24573" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="24575" end="24586" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="24591" end="24602" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244280" start="24634" end="24646" title="Black British people" label="Black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q971811" start="24728" end="24748" title="Manchester Cathedral" label="Manchester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032151" start="24777" end="24792" title="Thomas Clarkson" label="Thomas Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="25041" end="25049" title="Greek Cypriots" label="Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="25054" end="25064" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q918240" start="25142" end="25158" title="British Colonies" label="British Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="25166" end="25185" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="25187" end="25196" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="25201" end="25210" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="25229" end="25236" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100147" start="25289" end="25310" title="Chinatown, Manchester" label="Chinatown, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298006" start="25423" end="25431" title="Demographics of Kosovo" label="Kosovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007968" start="25433" end="25440" title="Afghans" label="Afghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567862" start="25442" end="25448" title="Iraqis" label="Iraqis"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="25453" end="25462" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="25681" end="25687" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916381" start="25872" end="25885" title="Mosley Street" label="Mosley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025751" start="25940" end="25958" title="Warrington Academy" label="Warrington Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="25985" end="25998" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="26020" end="26030" title="English Dissenters" label="dissenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="26065" end="26078" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="26124" end="26130" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="26135" end="26144" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="26179" end="26187" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="26189" end="26196" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="26197" end="26205" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="26207" end="26214" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288568" start="26216" end="26232" title="modern languages" label="modern languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="26234" end="26242" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="26247" end="26254" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="26273" end="26288" title="Hallé Orchestra" label="Hallé Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="26332" end="26338" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="26668" end="26678" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="26683" end="26696" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981083" start="26840" end="26855" title="Free Trade Hall" label="Free Trade Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="27107" end="27124" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q10512540" start="27415" end="27425" title="court leet" label="court leet"/>
<link wikidata="Q553041" start="27455" end="27467" title="Reeve (England)" label="Boroughreeve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27533" end="27571" title="Manchester and Salford Police Act 1792" label="Manchester and Salford Police Act 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734620" start="27573" end="27582" title="32 Geo. 3" label="32 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="27850" end="27859" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925180" start="27989" end="27999" title="Blanketeers" label="Blanketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="28112" end="28123" title="Westminster Parliament" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="28165" end="28172" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892167" start="28358" end="28368" title="Henry Hunt (politician)" label="Henry Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747572" start="28520" end="28551" title="Manchester and Salford Yeomanry" label="Manchester and Salford Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551053" start="28861" end="28873" title="15th Hussars" label="15th Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="29238" end="29256" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="29546" end="29565" title="Manchester Guardian" label="Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="29667" end="29683" title="Great Reform Act" label="Great Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141938" start="29773" end="29788" title="William Cobbett" label="William Cobbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="29800" end="29807" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959005" start="29809" end="29832" title="Charles Poulett Thomson" label="Charles Poulett Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769251" start="29837" end="29849" title="Mark Philips (politician)" label="Mark Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="29868" end="29884" title="Great Reform Act" label="Great Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="29917" end="29940" title="municipal incorporation" label="municipal incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="29962" end="29979" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="30014" end="30029" title="manorial rights" label="manorial rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708483" start="30132" end="30148" title="Textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883720" start="30261" end="30289" title="Belle Vue Zoological Gardens" label="Belle Vue Zoological Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747276" start="30330" end="30350" title="Manchester Athenaeum" label="Manchester Athenaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523085" start="30366" end="30379" title="Corn Exchange, Manchester" label="Corn Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374973" start="30395" end="30438" title="Royal Victoria Gallery of Practical Science" label="Royal Victoria Gallery of Practical Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="30563" end="30567" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706726" start="30663" end="30696" title="Harris Manchester College, Oxford" label="Harris Manchester College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804572" start="30709" end="30734" title="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institute" label="Mechanics&amp;#x27; Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="30752" end="30757" title="UMIST" label="UMIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="30796" end="30807" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="30857" end="30870" title="Owens College" label="Owens College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251461" start="30902" end="30912" title="John Owens (merchant)" label="John Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040748" start="31039" end="31058" title="Victoria University (UK)" label="Victoria University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="31238" end="31249" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="31266" end="31279" title="atomic theory" label="atomic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285345" start="31287" end="31321" title="Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society" label="Literary and Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231808" start="31356" end="31371" title="Portico Library" label="Portico Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374443" start="31385" end="31413" title="Royal Manchester Institution" label="Royal Manchester Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="31603" end="31615" title="incorporation (municipal government)" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="31621" end="31628" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747251" start="31651" end="31673" title="Manchester (ancient township)" label="township of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166304" start="31701" end="31712" title="Manchester city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860767" start="31726" end="31733" title="Ardwick" label="Ardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897126" start="31735" end="31742" title="Beswick, Manchester" label="Beswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015708" start="31744" end="31752" title="Cheetham, Manchester" label="Cheetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012082" start="31754" end="31773" title="Chorlton-on-Medlock" label="Chorlton-on-Medlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051137" start="31778" end="31783" title="Hulme" label="Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178493" start="31795" end="31813" title="Robert Angus Smith" label="Robert Angus Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="31833" end="31851" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837353" start="32004" end="32023" title="Alkali Inspectorate" label="Alkali Inspectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="32070" end="32079" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="32185" end="32196" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="32197" end="32213" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="32337" end="32346" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901355" start="32363" end="32385" title="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Chetham&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="32419" end="32434" title="Manorialism" label="manorial rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866123" start="32444" end="32450" title="Mosley (surname)" label="Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="32478" end="32489" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028493" start="32521" end="32539" title="Anglican Diocese of Manchester" label="Manchester diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="32547" end="32564" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="32645" end="32659" title="water supply" label="water supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975044" start="32987" end="33002" title="Watts Warehouse" label="Watts Warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q117202" start="33028" end="33057" title="Cooperative Wholesale Society" label="Cooperative Wholesale Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q117202" start="33104" end="33126" title="the Co-operative Group" label="the Co-operative Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="33296" end="33314" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="33352" end="33358" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q811645" start="33375" end="33388" title="cotton famine" label="cotton famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="33467" end="33488" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244836" start="33547" end="33559" title="Princess Street, Manchester" label="David Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="33615" end="33631" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q339624" start="33644" end="33697" title="The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844" label="The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="33819" end="33831" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435868" start="33840" end="33860" title="Women&amp;#x27;s suffrage in the United Kingdom" label="Suffragette Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="34112" end="34127" title="Hallé Orchestra" label="Hallé Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="34215" end="34229" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="34386" end="34395" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216359" start="34477" end="34491" title="Daniel Adamson" label="Daniel Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q935570" start="34497" end="34518" title="Manchester Ship Canal" label="Manchester Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="34939" end="34946" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747391" start="35056" end="35066" title="Manchester Docks" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q940877" start="35247" end="35260" title="Trafford Park" label="Trafford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="35631" end="35648" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860767" start="35694" end="35701" title="Ardwick" label="Ardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897126" start="35703" end="35710" title="Beswick, Manchester" label="Beswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015708" start="35712" end="35720" title="Cheetham, Manchester" label="Cheetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012082" start="35722" end="35741" title="Chorlton-on-Medlock" label="Chorlton-on-Medlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051137" start="35743" end="35748" title="Hulme" label="Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747251" start="35753" end="35763" title="Manchester (ancient township)" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177620" start="35859" end="35866" title="County Borough of Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496047" start="36023" end="36032" title="Harpurhey" label="Harpurhey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954563" start="36034" end="36055" title="Bradford-with-Beswick" label="Bradford-with-Beswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356650" start="36057" end="36065" title="Rusholme" label="Rusholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341373" start="36074" end="36083" title="Crumpsall" label="Crumpsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923090" start="36085" end="36093" title="Blackley" label="Blackley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916985" start="36098" end="36104" title="Moston, Greater Manchester" label="Moston"/>
<link wikidata="Q176084" start="36106" end="36118" title="Newton Heath" label="Newton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130147" start="36120" end="36127" title="Clayton, Greater Manchester" label="Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096545" start="36129" end="36137" title="Openshaw" label="Openshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="36139" end="36150" title="Gorton" label="West Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081327" start="36159" end="36170" title="Heaton Park" label="Heaton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="36235" end="36244" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="36246" end="36264" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton-cum-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363433" start="36266" end="36276" title="Withington" label="Withington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736509" start="36278" end="36285" title="Burnage" label="Burnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210672" start="36287" end="36295" title="Didsbury" label="Didsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="36323" end="36329" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237194" start="36331" end="36342" title="Levenshulme" label="Levenshulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q669052" start="36368" end="36378" title="Northenden" label="Northenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879240" start="36380" end="36387" title="Baguley" label="Baguley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344201" start="36392" end="36408" title="Northen Etchells" label="Northen Etchells"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724" start="36421" end="36433" title="River Mersey" label="River Mersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983396" start="36449" end="36471" title="Bucklow Rural District" label="Bucklow Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570246" start="36507" end="36518" title="Wythenshawe" label="Wythenshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="36612" end="36637" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q257052" start="36640" end="36647" title="Ringway, Greater Manchester" label="Ringway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="36649" end="36681" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="36847" end="36858" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q940877" start="36951" end="36964" title="Trafford Park" label="Trafford Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="36989" end="37004" title="industrial park" label="industrial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="37037" end="37055" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q632404" start="37060" end="37093" title="Westinghouse Electric Corporation" label="Westinghouse Electric Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727215" start="37224" end="37235" title="Henry Price (architect)" label="Henry Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051941" start="37275" end="37289" title="City Architect" label="City Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q131597794" start="37341" end="37357" title="George Noel Hill" label="George Noel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="37661" end="37677" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285348" start="37881" end="37907" title="Manchester Royal Infirmary" label="Manchester Royal Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285343" start="37958" end="37972" title="Manchester Central Library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="38043" end="38059" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q249190" start="38140" end="38144" title="Avro" label="Avro"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="38167" end="38178" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="38219" end="38222" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="38250" end="38264" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="38356" end="38365" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="38424" end="38433" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285330" start="38461" end="38476" title="Manchester Blitz" label="Christmas Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="38761" end="38775" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="38856" end="38864" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="38889" end="38908" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="38910" end="38932" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6747671" start="39067" end="39082" title="Mancunian Films" label="Mancunian Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230664" start="39107" end="39123" title="John E. Blakeley" label="John E. Blakeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q245068" start="39163" end="39171" title="comedian" label="comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181816" start="39181" end="39194" title="George Formby, Jr." label="George Formby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489147" start="39199" end="39211" title="Frank Randle" label="Frank Randle"/>
<link wikidata="Q112116214" start="39249" end="39271" title="Dickenson Road Studios" label="Dickenson Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="39416" end="39419" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="39466" end="39487" title="ITV (TV network)" label="commercial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="39520" end="39538" title="Granada Television" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="39712" end="39719" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="39830" end="39840" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="39847" end="39864" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="39897" end="39900" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="40078" end="40095" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="40100" end="40115" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="40118" end="40135" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="40168" end="40174" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q206237" start="40383" end="40393" title="Matt Busby" label="Matt Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="40439" end="40445" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q373507" start="40589" end="40600" title="Busby Babes" label="Busby Babes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="40713" end="40725" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="40825" end="40847" title="England national football team" label="England internationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q344862" start="40849" end="40860" title="Roger Byrne" label="Roger Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q219350" start="40862" end="40874" title="Tommy Taylor" label="Tommy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q276310" start="40879" end="40893" title="Duncan Edwards" label="Duncan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="40919" end="40938" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="40987" end="40997" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q462111" start="41213" end="41225" title="Bill Foulkes" label="Bill Foulkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="41230" end="41244" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q233565" start="41322" end="41331" title="Denis Law" label="Denis Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="41336" end="41347" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="41403" end="41415" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="41909" end="41922" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q296583" start="42232" end="42244" title="Bryan Robson" label="Bryan Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214513" start="42246" end="42257" title="Mark Hughes" label="Mark Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10524" start="42259" end="42269" title="Ryan Giggs" label="Ryan Giggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170328" start="42271" end="42283" title="Eric Cantona" label="Eric Cantona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="42285" end="42298" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q266613" start="42303" end="42315" title="Wayne Rooney" label="Wayne Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="42346" end="42361" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="42413" end="42419" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558224" start="42423" end="42427" title="1904 FA Cup Final" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="42429" end="42444" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="42749" end="42779" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="42784" end="42803" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q359668" start="42836" end="42846" title="Joe Mercer" label="Joe Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383862" start="42851" end="42866" title="Malcolm Allison" label="Malcolm Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q350795" start="42920" end="42929" title="Don Revie" label="Don Revie"/>
<link wikidata="Q374982" start="42931" end="42945" title="Bert Trautmann" label="Bert Trautmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q657352" start="42947" end="42958" title="Francis Lee (footballer)" label="Francis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q452563" start="42960" end="42970" title="Colin Bell (footballer, born 1946)" label="Colin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764117" start="42975" end="42984" title="Tony Book" label="Tony Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413332" start="43040" end="43057" title="1981 FA Cup Final" label="1981 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="43128" end="43137" title="Promotion and relegation" label="relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="43153" end="43163" title="EFL League One" label="third tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="43167" end="43183" title="English football league system" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="43393" end="43403" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="43419" end="43428" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q48159" start="43468" end="43494" title="City of Manchester Stadium" label="City of Manchester Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240669" start="43645" end="43667" title="Abu Dhabi United Group" label="Abu Dhabi United Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q532723" start="43942" end="43964" title="List of English football champions" label="domestic league titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164038" start="43990" end="44003" title="Pep Guardiola" label="Pep Guardiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28842253" start="44035" end="44039" title="2017–18 Premier League" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44081" end="44098" title="Premier League records and statistics#Points" label="attain 100 points"/>
<link wikidata="Q54087391" start="44119" end="44126" title="2018–19 Manchester City F.C. season" label="In 2019"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44133" end="44150" title="List of association football teams to have won four or more trophies in one season#Four titles in one season" label="won four trophies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44193" end="44221" title="Football in England#Men&amp;#x27;s Cup competitions" label="domestic trophies in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="44280" end="44295" title="Treble (association football)" label="domestic treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q388971" start="44336" end="44349" title="Deloitte Football Money League" label="fifth highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062163" start="44466" end="44485" title="Forbes&amp;#x27; list of the most valuable football clubs" label="fifth most valuable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="44704" end="44709" title="Tower block" label="flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285332" start="44918" end="44936" title="Manchester Arndale Centre" label="Manchester Arndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="45040" end="45064" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="45113" end="45132" title="computer revolution" label="computer revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="45165" end="45176" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="45190" end="45211" title="Manchester University" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q514818" start="45286" end="45301" title="Manchester Baby" label="Manchester Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="45334" end="45357" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="45400" end="45420" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Frederic C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q92786" start="45425" end="45436" title="Tom Kilburn" label="Tom Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="45444" end="45468" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463814" start="45495" end="45512" title="Manchester Mark 1" label="Manchester Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q675128" start="45567" end="45582" title="Ferranti Mark 1" label="Ferranti Mark 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="45780" end="45792" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492442" start="45905" end="45913" title="Telephony In Greater Manchester" label="Peterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="46082" end="46092" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="46394" end="46400" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q877530" start="46645" end="46656" title="Thatcherism" label="Thatcherism"/>
<link wikidata="Q578943" start="46880" end="46895" title="Factory Records" label="Factory Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390959" start="46900" end="46915" title="Fac 51 Hacienda" label="Fac 51 Hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="46936" end="46945" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q502886" start="46952" end="46962" title="Madchester" label="Madchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="47013" end="47016" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591514" start="47035" end="47058" title="1996 Manchester bombing" label="bomb in the city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051137" start="47500" end="47505" title="Hulme" label="Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="47510" end="47517" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522324" start="47614" end="47628" title="The Printworks (Manchester)" label="the Printworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523085" start="47637" end="47645" title="Corn Exchange, Manchester" label="Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285332" start="47805" end="47823" title="Manchester Arndale" label="Manchester Arndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="48321" end="48344" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="XVII Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="48470" end="48483" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="48495" end="48502" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="49171" end="49190" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094151" start="49200" end="49214" title="City of London Police" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23124" start="49232" end="49245" title="West Midlands (county)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935957" start="49252" end="49264" title="Canal Street, Manchester" label="Canal Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="49309" end="49312" title="homosexuality" label="Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255251" start="49467" end="49476" title="Europride" label="Europride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202123" start="49623" end="49632" title="Red Brick university" label="red brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="49988" end="50012" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116640" start="50205" end="50228" title="2002 Commonwealth Games" label="XVII Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285332" start="50473" end="50491" title="Manchester Arndale" label="Manchester Arndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051137" start="50654" end="50659" title="Hulme" label="Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q814128" start="50952" end="50965" title="Beetham Tower, Manchester" label="Beetham Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q814128" start="51146" end="51159" title="Beetham Tower, Manchester" label="Beetham Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309200" start="51374" end="51385" title="supercasino" label="supercasino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="51459" end="51473" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="51530" end="51546" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070672" start="52298" end="52321" title="Manchester Evening News" label="Manchester Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="52438" end="52445" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952696" start="52462" end="52487" title="2008 UEFA Cup final riots" label="2008 UEFA Cup final riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q47952" start="52514" end="52521" title="Salford, Greater Manchester" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="52551" end="52557" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q913932" start="52614" end="52631" title="Bridgewater Canal" label="Bridgewater Canal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52717" end="52733" title="Timeline of 2011 England riots#Tuesday, 9 August" label="Tuesday 9 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065" start="52826" end="52844" title="2011 England riots" label="2011 England riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082705" start="52915" end="52932" title="Islamic extremist" label="Islamic extremist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="52934" end="52939" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q30015850" start="52978" end="52995" title="Manchester Arena bombing" label="a suicide bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151892" start="53039" end="53052" title="Ariana Grande" label="Ariana Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461465" start="53060" end="53076" title="Manchester Arena" label="Manchester Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="53303" end="53330" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q30093126" start="53350" end="53372" title="Reactions to the Manchester Arena bombing" label="worldwide condemnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864960" start="53397" end="53419" title="UK Threat Levels" label="UK&amp;#x27;s threat level"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="53568" end="53576" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="53581" end="53591" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="53742" end="53759" title="Lord of the Manor" label="Lord of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="53920" end="53928" title="Township (England)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747250" start="53937" end="53965" title="Manchester (ancient parish)" label="ancient parish of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747251" start="54140" end="54162" title="Manchester Township (England)" label="Township of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256081" start="54169" end="54200" title="Municipal Corporations Act 1835" label="Municipal Corporations Act 1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752944" start="54222" end="54230" title="ancient borough" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="54278" end="54295" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="54789" end="54804" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954547" start="54826" end="54834" title="Bradford, Manchester" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496047" start="54836" end="54845" title="Harpurhey" label="Harpurhey"/>
<link wikidata="Q176084" start="54850" end="54856" title="Newton Heath" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793231" start="55061" end="55074" title="Thomas Potter (mayor)" label="Thomas Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858854" start="55099" end="55118" title="List of mayors of Manchester" label="Mayor of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18954421" start="55123" end="55135" title="Joseph Heron" label="Joseph Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397866" start="55252" end="55266" title="Poor Law Union" label="Poor Law Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q681925" start="55355" end="55363" title="English Poor Laws" label="Poor Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="55449" end="55453" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954547" start="55526" end="55534" title="Bradford, Greater Manchester" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496047" start="55536" end="55545" title="Harpurhey" label="Harpurhey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356650" start="55547" end="55555" title="Rusholme" label="Rusholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="55569" end="55578" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363433" start="55583" end="55593" title="Withington" label="Withington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="55613" end="55638" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="Local Government Act 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="55680" end="55694" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386149" start="55785" end="55810" title="Lancashire County Council" label="Lancashire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923090" start="55867" end="55875" title="Blackley" label="Blackley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341373" start="55877" end="55886" title="Crumpsall" label="Crumpsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916985" start="55888" end="55894" title="Moston, Greater Manchester" label="Moston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096545" start="55896" end="55904" title="Openshaw" label="Openshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q176084" start="55909" end="55915" title="Newton Heath" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130147" start="55949" end="55956" title="Clayton, Greater Manchester" label="Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q305076" start="55971" end="55980" title="Droylsden" label="Droylsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="56003" end="56009" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="56049" end="56055" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081327" start="56086" end="56097" title="Heaton Park" label="Heaton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003559" start="56107" end="56116" title="Prestwich" label="Prestwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736509" start="56141" end="56148" title="Burnage" label="Burnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210672" start="56150" end="56158" title="Didsbury" label="Didsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024118" start="56163" end="56181" title="Chorlton-cum-Hardy" label="Chorlton-cum-Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240567" start="56201" end="56210" title="Moss Side" label="Moss Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363433" start="56215" end="56225" title="Withington" label="Withington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237194" start="56251" end="56262" title="Levenshulme" label="Levenshulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586936" start="56304" end="56310" title="Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694426" start="56343" end="56356" title="Heaton Norris" label="Heaton Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023476" start="56389" end="56395" title="Denton, Greater Manchester" label="Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879240" start="56481" end="56488" title="Baguley" label="Baguley"/>
<link wikidata="Q669052" start="56490" end="56500" title="Northenden" label="Northenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344201" start="56506" end="56522" title="Northen Etchells" label="Northen Etchells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="56577" end="56602" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="56653" end="56665" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q257052" start="56669" end="56676" title="Ringway, Greater Manchester" label="Ringway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002812" start="56716" end="56736" title="Metropolitan Borough" label="Metropolitan Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q769628" start="56759" end="56778" title="Metropolitan county" label="Metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="56782" end="56800" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q595906" start="56811" end="56844" title="Greater Manchester County Council" label="Greater Manchester County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664074" start="56866" end="56891" title="Local Government Act 1985" label="Local Government Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="56977" end="56996" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q514989" start="57084" end="57113" title="passenger transport executive" label="passenger transport authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278776" start="57286" end="57303" title="Nuclear Free Zone" label="Nuclear Free Zone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57373" end="57387" title="Albert Square, Manchester#Lincoln Square" label="Lincoln Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="57487" end="57497" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="57536" end="57550" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="57690" end="57714" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880083" start="57723" end="57734" title="Saddleworth" label="Saddleworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="57740" end="57750" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305570" start="57798" end="57819" title="Redcliffe-Maud Report" label="Redcliffe-Maud Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q868637" start="58010" end="58022" title="Macclesfield" label="Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="58027" end="58037" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q383912" start="58055" end="58062" title="Glossop" label="Glossop"/>
<link wikidata="Q514989" start="58096" end="58125" title="passenger transport executive" label="Passenger Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="58302" end="58320" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918442" start="58349" end="58370" title="1970 United Kingdom general election" label="1970 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011497" start="58590" end="58598" title="Wilmslow" label="Wilmslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q769628" start="58699" end="58718" title="metropolitan county" label="metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="58819" end="58833" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664074" start="58871" end="58896" title="Local Government Act 1985" label="Local Government Act 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q769628" start="58937" end="58956" title="metropolitan county" label="metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="58961" end="58978" title="ceremonial county" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q853110" start="58997" end="59025" title="Beyer, Peacock &amp;amp; Company" label="Beyer, Peacock &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="59028" end="59046" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539431" start="59049" end="59074" title="List of famous Mancunians" label="List of famous Mancunians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636032" start="59077" end="59123" title="List of railway stations in Greater Manchester" label="List of railway stations in Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888771" start="59126" end="59160" title="Manchester Metropolitan University" label="Manchester Metropolitan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225192" start="59163" end="59185" title="Politics in Manchester" label="Politics in Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="59188" end="59224" title="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket" label="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406307" start="59227" end="59257" title="Timeline of Manchester history" label="Timeline of Manchester history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835027" start="59260" end="59283" title="Transport in Manchester" label="Transport in Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="59286" end="59310" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272498" start="59313" end="59373" title="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology" label="University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="59376" end="59409" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="Victoria University of Manchester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139580" wikidata="Q204688" url="?curid=1139580" title="19th Division">
<text>19th Division or 19th Infantry Division may refer to:

==Infantry divisions==
* 19th Division (German Empire)
* 19th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)
* 19th Ersatz Division (German Empire)
* 19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Latvian)
* 19th Infantry Division (India)
* 19th Infantry Division Venezia (Kingdom of Italy)
* 19th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)
* 19th Division (North Korea)
* 19th Infantry Division (Ottoman Empire)
* 19th Infantry Division (Poland)
* 19th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)
* 19th (Western) Division (United Kingdom)
* 19th Infantry Division (United States)

==Motorized infantry divisions==
* 19th Mechanized Division (Greece)
* 19th Motor Rifle Division (Soviet Union)

==Armoured divisions==
* 19th Panzer Division (Germany)
* 19th Guards Tank Division (Soviet Army)
* 19th Armored Division (United States)

==Aviation divisions==
* 19th Air Division (United States)

== See also ==
* 19th Corps (disambiguation)
* 19th Brigade (disambiguation)
* 19th Regiment (disambiguation)
* 19th Group (disambiguation)
* 19th Battalion (disambiguation)
* 19th Squadron (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204688" start="0" end="13" title="19th Division" label="19th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q204688" start="17" end="39" title="19th Division" label="19th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q204692" start="80" end="109" title="19th Division (German Empire)" label="19th Division (German Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111796269" start="112" end="147" title="19th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)" label="19th Infantry Division (Bangladesh)"/>
<link wikidata="Q204697" start="150" end="186" title="19th Ersatz Division (German Empire)" label="19th Ersatz Division (German Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205283" start="189" end="243" title="19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Latvian)" label="19th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (2nd Latvian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595769" start="246" end="276" title="19th Infantry Division (India)" label="19th Infantry Division (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597934" start="279" end="309" title="19th Infantry Division Venezia" label="19th Infantry Division Venezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q705591" start="331" end="369" title="19th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)" label="19th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595747" start="372" end="399" title="19th Division (North Korea)" label="19th Division (North Korea)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057155" start="402" end="441" title="19th Infantry Division (Ottoman Empire)" label="19th Infantry Division (Ottoman Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813425" start="444" end="475" title="19th Infantry Division (Poland)" label="19th Infantry Division (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96694250" start="478" end="512" title="19th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="19th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595720" start="515" end="555" title="19th (Western) Division (United Kingdom)" label="19th (Western) Division (United Kingdom)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595748" start="558" end="596" title="19th Infantry Division (United States)" label="19th Infantry Division (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036599" start="633" end="666" title="19th Mechanized Division (Greece)" label="19th Mechanized Division (Greece)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96694250" start="669" end="709" title="19th Motor Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="19th Motor Rifle Division (Soviet Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q562438" start="736" end="766" title="19th Panzer Division (Germany)" label="19th Panzer Division (Germany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="796" end="807" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549406" start="811" end="848" title="19th Armored Division (United States)" label="19th Armored Division (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595721" start="875" end="908" title="19th Air Division (United States)" label="19th Air Division (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231798" start="927" end="954" title="19th Corps (disambiguation)" label="19th Corps (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595741" start="957" end="986" title="19th Brigade (disambiguation)" label="19th Brigade (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029407" start="989" end="1019" title="19th Regiment (disambiguation)" label="19th Regiment (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595760" start="1022" end="1049" title="19th Group (disambiguation)" label="19th Group (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595733" start="1052" end="1083" title="19th Battalion (disambiguation)" label="19th Battalion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595708" start="1086" end="1116" title="19th Squadron (disambiguation)" label="19th Squadron (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139582" wikidata="Q212627" url="?curid=1139582" title="Luz">
<text>Luz may refer to:

==People and fictional characters==
* Luz (name), including a list of people and fictional characters with the given name, nickname or surname, including Spanish and Portuguese
* Luz (cartoonist), pen name of French cartoonist Rénald Luzier (born 1972)

==Places==
* Luz (biblical place), either of two cities mentioned in the Bible
* Luz, Minas Gerais, Brazil, a municipality
** Roman Catholic Diocese of Luz, in the city of Luz in the ecclesiastical province of Belo Horizonte
* Luz (Santa Cruz da Graciosa), Portugal, a civil parish in the Azores
* Luz, a parish of Mourão, Alentejo, Portugal
* Luž, Czech for Lausche, a mountain in the German state of Saxony
* Our Lady of Light Church, Chennai, known as Luz Church

==Arts and entertainment== 

* &quot;Luz&quot; (Djavan album), 1982
* &quot;Luz&quot; (Luz Casal album), 1982
* &quot;Luz&quot; (Cuca Roseta album), 2017
* &quot;Luz&quot; (No Te Va Gustar album), 2021
* &quot;Luz&quot; (2018 film), a German horror film
* &quot;Luz&quot; (2019 film), a Colombian drama film
* &quot;Luz&quot; (2020 film), an American LGBT romantic drama film
* &quot;Luz&quot;, a 2022 song by Fede Vigevani

==Transportation==
* Luz Station, a railway station in São Paulo, Brazil
* Luz (São Paulo Metro), a metro station in São Paulo
* Luz (CPTM), a commuter rail and intercity rail station in São Paulo
* LUZ, IATA airport code for Lublin Airport, Poland

==Other uses==
* Luz (bone), a bone in the spinal column
* Luz (missile), the first missile built in Israel
* Luz (nut), the Aramaic and Arabic name for almond
* BrightSource Energy, formerly Luz II Ltd
* Larger urban zone, or LUZ, a measure of population and expanse of metropolitan areas in Europe
* University of Zulia, known as LUZ, in Venezuela
* luz, ISO 639-3 code for Southern Luri

==See also==

* La Luz (disambiguation)
* De Luz (disambiguation)
* Luz i Madh, Albania
* Luz i Vogël, Albania
* Palácio da Luz, former head office of the government of Ceará state, Brazil</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q212627" start="0" end="3" title="Luz" label="Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727025" start="57" end="67" title="Luz (name)" label="Luz (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268108" start="198" end="214" title="Luz (cartoonist)" label="Luz (cartoonist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706509" start="286" end="306" title="Luz (biblical place)" label="Luz (biblical place)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779998" start="354" end="371" title="Luz, Minas Gerais" label="Luz, Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q871538" start="399" end="428" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Luz" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q975407" start="500" end="528" title="Luz (Santa Cruz da Graciosa)" label="Luz (Santa Cruz da Graciosa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005121" start="588" end="594" title="Mourão" label="Mourão"/>
<link wikidata="Q159671" start="632" end="639" title="Lausche" label="Lausche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116974" start="684" end="717" title="Our Lady of Light Church, Chennai" label="Our Lady of Light Church, Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q10321173" start="771" end="801" title="Luz (Djavan album)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (Djavan album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984984" start="810" end="843" title="Luz (Luz Casal album)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (Luz Casal album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063653" start="852" end="887" title="Luz (Cuca Roseta album)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (Cuca Roseta album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110982405" start="896" end="935" title="Luz (No Te Va Gustar album)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (No Te Va Gustar album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62053904" start="944" end="971" title="Luz (2018 film)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q70651828" start="996" end="1023" title="Luz (2019 film)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (2019 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107104926" start="1050" end="1077" title="Luz (2020 film)" label="&amp;quot;Luz&amp;quot; (2020 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108931836" start="1150" end="1163" title="Fede Vigevani" label="Fede Vigevani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983699" start="1186" end="1197" title="Luz Station" label="Luz Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243160" start="1240" end="1261" title="Luz (São Paulo Metro)" label="Luz (São Paulo Metro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983699" start="1294" end="1304" title="Luz (CPTM)" label="Luz (CPTM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q620446" start="1391" end="1405" title="Lublin Airport" label="Lublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706514" start="1432" end="1442" title="Luz (bone)" label="Luz (bone)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268109" start="1474" end="1487" title="Luz (missile)" label="Luz (missile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="1525" end="1534" title="Luz (nut)" label="Luz (nut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q635942" start="1577" end="1596" title="BrightSource Energy" label="BrightSource Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175539" start="1620" end="1637" title="Larger urban zone" label="Larger urban zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192539" start="1717" end="1736" title="University of Zulia" label="University of Zulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701277" start="1791" end="1804" title="Southern Luri" label="Southern Luri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9018694" start="1822" end="1845" title="La Luz (disambiguation)" label="La Luz (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16774869" start="1848" end="1871" title="De Luz (disambiguation)" label="De Luz (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706548" start="1874" end="1884" title="Luz i Madh" label="Luz i Madh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633832" start="1896" end="1907" title="Luz i Vogël" label="Luz i Vogël"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910931" start="1919" end="1933" title="Palácio da Luz" label="Palácio da Luz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139587" wikidata="Q637919" url="?curid=1139587" title="Your Disco Needs You">
<text>&quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; is a song by Australian singer and songwriter Kylie Minogue, taken from her seventh studio album &quot;Light Years&quot; (2000). The song was written by Minogue, Guy Chambers and Robbie Williams and produced by Chambers and Steve Power. Lyrically, &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; talks about the power of disco music.

The song peaked inside the top forty in Australia, Switzerland and Germany. Hugely popular as an album track, it was never released as a single in the United Kingdom because the song was considered &quot;too gay&quot; and &quot;too camp&quot;, but charted at number 152 on the basis of import sales. Minogue has also performed the song on most of her 2000 and onward tours, including On a Night Like This Tour, , KylieX2008, For You, For Me Tour, Kiss Me Once Tour, and most recently on her Kylie Summer 2015 Tour.

==Background and composition==
The lack of a single release for the track in the United Kingdom caused controversy among fans there, sparking protests outside her UK record company lobbying for this to happen. When considering the fourth single to be released from &quot;Light Years&quot;, Minogue&#x27;s record label chose the Latin-sounding &quot;Please Stay&quot; instead of &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot;, due to the song&#x27;s campness and to avoid Minogue being further stereotyped, although remixers Almighty had remixed the song and this version appeared on the UK CD single of &quot;On a Night Like This&quot;.

According to Harald Peters from German newspaper &quot;Berliner Zeitung&quot;, in the song &quot;she gives a fiery speech. Assuming that the pleasure of dancing in the sense of the French Revolution represents freedom, equality and fraternity, she urges the listeners in French: &#x27;You are never alone! / You know what to do! / Do not abandon your nation / The disco needs you!&#x27;&quot;. Heather Phares from AllMusic described the &quot;German Almighty Radio Edit&quot; song as a &quot;Four-on-the-floor beat&quot; and said that &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; was a surprisingly good &quot;dance-oriented song&quot;. &quot;NME&quot; compared the song to the Pet Shop Boys&#x27; &quot;Go West&quot;.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
&quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; received critical acclaim from most music critics. Heather Phares from AllMusic gave the song a separate review, while giving it 3/5 stars. She described &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; as “glittery charm as well as a fun hidden song that&#x27;s arguably more enjoyable than the title track.” For the album review of &quot;Light Years&quot; (2000), Chris True highlighted the song as an album standout. He said &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; is “probably one of the best dance songs of the &#x27;90s. Arguably one of the best disco records since the &#x27;70s.” Nick Levine from &quot;Digital Spy&quot; said if the song &quot;doesn&#x27;t put a smile on your face you need a new shrink&quot;. The song appeared on a compilation titled &quot;Rainbow Love Boat&quot;, which was reviewed by AllMusic, with Bradley Torreano writing that songs like &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; are “genuinely fun, exciting songs that may not be lyrical triumphs, but that fact is of little importance in the genre.”

===Chart performance===
&quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; had limited success, due to being released in Germany and receiving a limited release in Australia. The song debuted at number twenty on the Australian ARIA singles chart, becoming the second-highest debut of the week, before descending to number forty-five the next week.

==Music video==

The original music video was filmed in 2000 in Los Angeles, featuring the “Casino Radio &amp; Club Remix” of the song. The video begins with visual references to “Suspended in Time” by Olivia Newton-John, and the 1980 film Xanadu, and pays homage to the discothèques of the 1970s. The video features an endless array of identical Minogue clones, with references to the 1934 film &quot;Dames&quot; (with the Busby Berkeley-like formations, and Minogue&#x27;s head popping-through at the end). Throughout the video, the Minogue clones wear a variety of costumes, such as an Uncle Sam, stars and stripes, American-inspired outfit accessorised with a black leather cane and whip. In another look, she wears a black-and-white striped dress with a black leather beret.

An alternate video was filmed and released to the German market, featuring clips of Minogue against a backdrop of balloons and gold streamers while wearing a black-and-gold &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; T-shirt, as seen on the CD single&#x27;s front cover. The alternate version was made due to Minogue&#x27;s dissatisfaction with elements of the original video; however, over time, this video has fallen out-of-favour in comparison to the original.

==Formats and track listings==
* Australian CD single
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; – 3:34
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Almighty radio edit) – 3:30
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Almighty remix) – 8:20
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Casino radio &amp; club mix) – 3:40
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (German album version) – 3:31
# &quot;Password&quot; – 3:49

* European CD single and digital download 1
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Casino radio &amp; club mix) – 3:40
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (UK album version) – 3:31
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Almighty remix) – 8:20
# &quot;Please Stay&quot; (7th District Club Flava mix) – 6:32
* Digital download 2
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; – 3:34
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (German Almighty radio edit) – 3:29
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (Almighty mix) – 8:20
# &quot;Your Disco Needs You&quot; (German version) / &quot;Password&quot; – 8:49
==Charts==
==Sales==
|}

==Release history==
==Cover versions==
Russian-Bulgarian singer Philipp Kirkorov used the music for his song &quot;Моя песня&quot; (&quot;My Song&quot;), but with different lyrics.

In 2008, the Randy Jones cover was released on his album &quot;Ticket to the World&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q637919" start="6" end="26" title="Your Disco Needs You" label="Your Disco Needs You"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="79" end="92" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q206852" start="136" end="147" title="Light Years (Kylie Minogue album)" label="Light Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029010" start="195" end="207" title="Guy Chambers" label="Guy Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q47875" start="212" end="227" title="Robbie Williams" label="Robbie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613648" start="257" end="268" title="Steve Power" label="Steve Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="585" end="589" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902070" start="737" end="762" title="On a Night Like This Tour" label="On a Night Like This Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q576943" start="766" end="776" title="KylieX2008" label="KylieX2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q427170" start="778" end="798" title="For You, for Me" label="For You, For Me Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16138065" start="800" end="817" title="Kiss Me Once Tour" label="Kiss Me Once Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20267683" start="844" end="866" title="Kylie Summer 2015" label="Kylie Summer 2015 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072072" start="1218" end="1229" title="Please Stay (Kylie Minogue song)" label="Please Stay"/>
<link wikidata="Q927941" start="1464" end="1484" title="On a Night Like This" label="On a Night Like This"/>
<link wikidata="Q10185" start="1548" end="1564" title="Berliner Zeitung" label="Berliner Zeitung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1674" end="1691" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="1907" end="1915" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029197" start="1985" end="2002" title="Four on the floor (music)" label="Four-on-the-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="2124" end="2127" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="2159" end="2172" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q701588" start="2185" end="2192" title="Go West (song)" label="Go West"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2343" end="2351" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206852" start="2596" end="2607" title="Light Years (Kylie Minogue album)" label="Light Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111380" start="2860" end="2871" title="Digital Spy" label="Digital Spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275029" start="3484" end="3488" title="ARIA Charts" label="ARIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3670" end="3681" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q777970" start="3846" end="3852" title="Xanadu_(film)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="3877" end="3888" title="discothèque" label="discothèque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440832" start="4008" end="4013" title="Dames (film)" label="Dames"/>
<link wikidata="Q503258" start="4030" end="4044" title="Busby Berkeley" label="Busby Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184689" start="4195" end="4204" title="Uncle Sam" label="Uncle Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="4206" end="4223" title="Flag of the United States" label="stars and stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211718" start="4379" end="4384" title="beret" label="beret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733808" start="4973" end="4981" title="Almighty Records" label="Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072072" start="5472" end="5483" title="Please Stay (Kylie Minogue song)" label="Please Stay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920817" start="5864" end="5881" title="Russians in Bulgaria" label="Russian-Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q494596" start="5889" end="5905" title="Philipp Kirkorov" label="Philipp Kirkorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q516037" start="6020" end="6031" title="Randy Jones (singer)" label="Randy Jones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139588" wikidata="Q41455" url="?curid=1139588" title="Snares Islands">
<text>The Snares Islands (; officially Snares Islands / Tini Heke), known colloquially as The Snares, is a group of uninhabited islands lying about south of New Zealand&#x27;s South Island and to the south-southwest of Stewart Island / Rakiura. The Snares consist of the main North East Island and the smaller Broughton Island and Alert Stack, as well as the Western Chain Islands some to the west-southwest. Collectively, the Snares have a total land area of .

The islands are listed with the New Zealand Outlying Islands. The islands are an immediate part of New Zealand, not part of any region or district, but instead &quot;Area Outside Territorial Authority&quot;, like all the other outlying islands except the Solander Islands.

== History ==

The islands were already known to the Māori, who called one of the larger islands &quot;Te Taniwha&quot; (&quot;The sea-monster&quot;). 
The island group was first sighted by Europeans on 23 November 1791 independently by the two ships HMS &quot;Discovery&quot; under Captain George Vancouver, and HMS &quot;Chatham&quot;, commanded by Lieutenant William R. Broughton, both of the Vancouver Expedition. Vancouver named the islands &quot;The Snares&quot; because he considered them a shipping hazard; an islet east of the Western Chain bears the name Vancouver Rock, and the second largest island is named after Broughton.

In contrast to Vancouver, Broughton proposed the name &quot;Knight&#x27;s Island&quot;. Unlike other subantarctic islands that were greatly affected by the whaling and sealing industry in the 19th century, the Snares remain one of the last pristine areas in New Zealand.

The Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998 officially altered the name to &quot;Snares Islands/Tini Heke&quot; – one of many such changes under the Ngāi Tahu Treaty settlement.

== Geography ==



The main island of the Snares group, North East Island, as its name suggests, lies at the northeastern corner of the group. It has roughly the shape of a triangle, but with two concave edges, this causing both the southern and northwestern coast to be in the form of large irregular bays. Cliffs and reefs are found along the northeastern coast and part of the southern coast, with the island&#x27;s highest point – rising to 130 metres – being located on the long westward-pointing finger which lies between them.

In contrast, the east coast is relatively flat and sloping, and provides the only easy access-point for landing, close to Station Point. Several small bays dot the east coast, among them Punui Bay, Ho Ho Bay, and Mollymawk Bay. The island&#x27;s northernmost and southernmost points are the prosaically named North Promontory and South Promontory. Several small islets, the Daption Rocks, lie off the tip of North Promontory, and are the island group&#x27;s northernmost point.

The group&#x27;s second largest island, Broughton Island, lies to the southeast of South Promontory. Steeply sloping, it is surrounded by cliffs, reefs and small islets on three sides, with only the northern side being relatively accessible.

The long finger on the western coast of the main island has several small islands located close to its tip. The largest of these, Alert Stack, is located to the south of the peninsula and separated from it by a narrow channel. The peninsula points almost directly towards the Western Chain, a line of stacks located some 4 kilometres to the southwest of the main island. These islets are simply named Tahi, Rua, Toru, Wha, and Rima, the Māori words for the numerals one to five. Between this chain and North East island lies the small stack of Vancouver Rock.

=== Islands ===

The following table includes named islands according to Land Information New Zealand.


== Environment ==

All of the Snares islands and their surrounding waters have been recognised as Important Bird Areas (IBAs) by BirdLife International for their significant seabird breeding populations. The eastern islands are notable for their Snares penguins, Buller&#x27;s albatrosses, sooty shearwaters, mottled petrels and common diving petrels, as well as of Snares snipe. The Western Chain hosts colonies of Snares penguins, Salvin&#x27;s, Buller&#x27;s and Chatham albatrosses. The islands also provide a home to the endemic Snares tomtit, as well as to several endemic invertebrates such as &quot;Grypotheca horningae&quot;.

North East Island is forested and is the world&#x27;s premier breeding area for the sooty shearwaters, with up to three million individuals being present during the breeding season (November–April). A dangerous reef (Seal Reef) lies ten kilometres to the south of the group. Megaherb communities grow on the islands.

The islands enjoy a status of high protection and are rated by the New Zealand Department of Conservation as &quot;minimum impact islands&quot;. Landing on the islands is generally prohibited or by special research permit only.

The area is among five subantarctic island groups forming the New Zealand Subantarctic Islands, designated as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

==See also==

* List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands
* List of islands of New Zealand
* List of islands
* Desert island

==References==
==External links==

* Birds Of the Snares Islands - New Zealand
* Info and Map of the Snares Islands - New Zealand Department of Conservation
* Expedition Snares Islands video – Te Papa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41455" start="4" end="18" title="Snares Islands" label="Snares Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41455" start="33" end="59" title="Snares Islands" label="Snares Islands / Tini Heke"/>
<link wikidata="Q41455" start="84" end="94" title="Snares Islands" label="The Snares"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="151" end="162" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="170" end="182" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="213" end="237" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000618" start="270" end="287" title="North East Island, New Zealand" label="North East Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q651068" start="304" end="320" title="Broughton Island, New Zealand" label="Broughton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q85828361" start="325" end="336" title="Alert Stack" label="Alert Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987703" start="353" end="374" title="Western Chain, New Zealand" label="Western Chain Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q851132" start="489" end="517" title="New Zealand Outlying Islands" label="New Zealand Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216712" start="585" end="591" title="Regions of New Zealand" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q941036" start="595" end="603" title="Territorial Authorities of New Zealand" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298216" start="712" end="728" title="Solander Islands" label="Solander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="784" end="789" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564601" start="982" end="1007" title="HMS Discovery (1789)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="1022" end="1038" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631849" start="1044" end="1067" title="HMS Chatham (1788)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Chatham&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333687" start="1093" end="1113" title="William R. Broughton" label="William R. Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="1127" end="1147" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="Vancouver Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q783935" start="1470" end="1490" title="subantarctic islands" label="subantarctic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="1525" end="1532" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="1537" end="1544" title="seal hunting" label="sealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021862" start="1645" end="1681" title="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998" label="Ngāi Tahu Claims Settlement Act 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="1787" end="1796" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837289" start="1797" end="1814" title="Treaty of Waitangi claims and settlements" label="Treaty settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000618" start="1873" end="1890" title="North East Island, New Zealand" label="North East Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q651068" start="2871" end="2887" title="Broughton Island, New Zealand" label="Broughton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q85828361" start="3204" end="3215" title="Alert Stack" label="Alert Stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987703" start="3350" end="3363" title="Western Chain, New Zealand" label="Western Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="3511" end="3516" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801902" start="3708" end="3736" title="Land Information New Zealand" label="Land Information New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="3838" end="3857" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="3869" end="3891" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q753758" start="3986" end="4000" title="Snares penguin" label="Snares penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004361" start="4003" end="4026" title="Buller&amp;#x27;s albatross" label="Buller&amp;#x27;s albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074603" start="4030" end="4046" title="sooty shearwater" label="sooty shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262679" start="4049" end="4063" title="mottled petrel" label="mottled petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q557125" start="4069" end="4089" title="common diving petrel" label="common diving petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261537" start="4106" end="4118" title="Snares snipe" label="Snares snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261360" start="4173" end="4186" title="Salvin&amp;#x27;s albatross" label="Salvin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068196" start="4206" end="4223" title="Chatham albatross" label="Chatham albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="4266" end="4273" title="Endemic (ecology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q139526" start="4274" end="4287" title="Tomtit" label="Snares tomtit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845790" start="4347" end="4367" title="Grypotheca horningae" label="Grypotheca horningae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529292" start="4651" end="4659" title="Megaherb" label="Megaherb"/>
<link wikidata="Q46275" start="4985" end="5017" title="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" label="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="5035" end="5054" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q783935" start="5083" end="5125" title="List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands" label="List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="5128" end="5158" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="List of islands of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="5161" end="5176" title="List of islands" label="List of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="5179" end="5192" title="Desert island" label="Desert island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139590" wikidata="Q1127887" url="?curid=1139590" title="Vivendi">
<text>Vivendi SE (stylized in all lowercase) is a French investment company headquartered in Paris. It currently wholly-owns Gameloft as well as a number of investments in several companies, primarily involved in content, entertainment, media, and telecommunications. In 2000, Vivendi Universal was created from the merger with Groupe Canal+ and Seagram Company Ltd., owner of Universal Pictures. Vivendi sold 80% of Universal to the now-defunct General Electric (GE, owner of NBC) in 2004, forming what is now NBCUniversal. In 2006, it sold off most of the Universal components and its name reverted to Vivendi. GE bought out Vivendi&#x27;s 20% stake in NBCUniversal during Comcast&#x27;s acquisition of the latter. , Vivendi&#x27;s chairman Yannick Bolloré is also CEO of Havas, which was spun off from Vivendi in 2000 but has since become a subsidiary. The company is known for its stake in Universal Music Group, which it partially spun off from 2021. In 2024, Vivendi spun-off its non-investment businesses into three companies: Canal+ (entertainment), Havas (advertising), and Louis Hachette Group (publishing, distribution, and travel retail).

== History ==
=== Origins ===

On 14 December 1853, a water company named Compagnie générale des eaux (CGE) was created by an imperial decree of Napoleon III. In 1854, CGE obtained a concession in order to supply water to the public in Lyon, serving in that capacity for over a hundred years. In 1861, it obtained a 50-year concession with the City of Paris. CGE also supplied water to Nantes, Venice (from 1880), Istanbul (from 1882) and Porto (from 1883).

Following the appointment of Guy Dejouany as CEO in 1976, CGE extended its activities into other sectors with a series of takeovers. Beginning in 1980, CGE began diversifying from water into waste management, energy, transport services, and construction and property. It acquired the &quot;Compagnie générale d&#x27;entreprises automobiles&quot; (CGEA), specialized in industrial vehicles, which was later divided into two branches: Connex (later Veolia Transport) in 1999 and Onyx Environnement (later Veolia Environmental Services) in 1989. CGE then acquired the &quot;Compagnie générale de chauffe&quot;, and the Montenay group, with these companies later becoming the Energy Services division of CGE, and later renamed &quot;Dalkia&quot; in 1998.

In 1983, CGE helped to found Canal+, the first pay-TV channel in France, and in the 1990s began expanding into telecommunications and mass media, especially after Jean-Marie Messier succeeded Guy Dejouany on 27 June 1996, acquiring companies such as the Babelsberg Studio. In 1996, CGE created Neuf Cegetel to take advantage of the 1998 deregulation of the French telecommunications market, accelerating the move into the media sector which would culminate in the 2000 demerger into Vivendi Universal and Vivendi Environnement (Veolia).

=== Creation of &quot;Vivendi&quot; ===
In 1997, Compagnie Générale des Eaux changed its name to &quot;Vivendi&quot; (derived from the Latin &quot;vivendus&quot;), and sold off its property and construction divisions the following year to what would become Vinci SA. Vivendi went on to acquire stakes in or merge with Maroc Telecom, Havas, Cendant Software, Grupo Anaya, and NetHold, a large Continental European pay-TV operator. Beginning in 1998, Vivendi launched digital channels in Italy, Spain, Poland, Scandinavia, Belgium, and the Netherlands.

In June 1999, Vivendi merged with Pathé, and the exchange ratio for the merger was fixed at three Vivendi shares for every two Pathé shares. &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; estimated the value of the deal at US$2.59 billion. Following the completion of the merger, Vivendi retained Pathé&#x27;s interests in British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC and CanalSatellite, a French broadcasting corporation, then sold all remaining assets to Jérôme Seydoux&#x27;s family-owned holding company, &quot;Fornier SA&quot;, which changed its name to Pathé.

==== Vivendi Universal ====
On 9 December 2000, Vivendi acquired Groupe Canal+, the French television network and film production company. On 11 December 2000, Vivendi Universal was created from the merger of Groupe Canal+, Canadian company Seagram Company Ltd (owner of Universal Studios), and Vivendi.

Vivendi Universal acquired MP3.com and the leading American publisher Houghton Mifflin in 2001. To raise the funds, Vivendi Universal sold its trade and medical publishing businesses to a group led by Cinven.

==== Vivendi Environnement ====

Vivendi Environnement was formed in 1999 by Vivendi to consolidate its environmental divisions, which were CGEA Transport, Onyx Environnement (now Veolia Environmental Services), Dalkia and CGE water division. As a result, CGEA Transport was renamed Connex (later Veolia Transport), and CGE&#x27;s water division was renamed Vivendi Water (now Veolia Water). In July 2000, Vivendi Environnement was divested through IPOs in Paris and later New York in October 2001. Initially, Vivendi Universal retained a 70% stake in Vivendi Environnement in 2000, but by December 2002, it was reduced to 20.4%. In 2003, Vivendi Environnement was renamed to Veolia Environnement.

=== Corporate loss ===
Vivendi Universal disclosed a corporate loss of €23.3 billion in its 2002 annual report. It responded with financial reshuffling, trying to shore up media holdings while selling off shares in its spin-off companies. Amid intense media scrutiny, its chairman and CEO, Jean-Marie Messier (who had overseen the most dramatic phase of the company&#x27;s diversification), was subsequently replaced by Jean-René Fourtou. Messier was found guilty of embezzlement in 2011, but not before he was paid over US$20 million as part of his severance package. The company reduced its stake in Vivendi Environnement to 40% and sold its stake in Vinci SA. The company then began reorganizing to stave off bankruptcy, announcing a strategy to sell non-strategic assets. Its largest single shareholder was the family of Edgar Bronfman Jr., who was head of Seagram at the time of the merger. Vivendi sold its stake in Vizzavi to Vodafone, with the exception of Vizzavi France. It also sold 20.4% of Vivendi Environnement&#x27;s capital to a group of investors, and its stake in North American satellite operator EchoStar Communications Corporation. It also sold its European book publishing to Lagardère. It also sold Houghton Mifflin to Thomas H Lee, Blackstone and Bain consortium for US$1.66 billion. Also, in 2002, Vivendi Universal sold the Belgian and Dutch activities of its subsidiary Scoot Europe to Kapitol, the parent company of online directory Infobel.

In 2003, Vivendi Universal sold Canal+ Technologies to Thomson SA; Tele+ to News Corporation and Telecom Italia. It also sold its 26.3% interest in Xfera. Also in 2003, it sold its consumer magazines to Socpresse and its free newspapers to France Antilles. On 1 December, Vivendi Universal closed a deal to sell MP3.com to CNET. Despite predictions that it would be unable to raise the cash needed, Vivendi Universal bought out one of the two minority shareholders in Cegetel, taking its holding to 60 percent, with Vodafone holding the remaining 40 percent. Management viewed the mobile communications firm as a core asset once the bulk of media assets had been sold off.

=== Further acquisitions, mergers and divestments ===
In 2004, 80% of the Vivendi Universal subsidiary Universal Studios was sold to GE, to form NBC Universal, with Vivendi retaining a 20 percent stake. At the same time, it sold a 50% stake in Canal+ and StudioCanal to the new company. Vivendi also sold its interests in Kencell (re-branded Celtel, Kenya), Monaco Telecom and Sportfive (which it held through Canal+ Group), and sold Newsworld International to the business partnership of Joel Hyatt and former Vice-President of the United States Al Gore. Vivendi also sold Babelsberg Studio.

On 16 December 2005, it was announced that Canal Plus would merge with TPS, France&#x27;s second largest pay-TV provider. Vivendi owned 85% of the combined entity.

On 17 January 2006, Vivendi Universal announced it would end its American Depositary Receipt program and its listing on the New York Stock Exchange by the end of the second quarter of 2006, due to lowered trading volume on its shares and high costs. On 20 April, Vivendi in its current form came into existence, following the sale of an 80% stake in the Vivendi Universal unit to General Electric to form NBC Universal (merging GE&#x27;s NBC unit and Vivendi&#x27;s Vivendi Universal unit) and the gradual recovery of the company from its disastrous over-expansion in the late 1990s and the early 2000s. The company announced that shareholders had approved the name change to &quot;Vivendi&quot;. In August, Vivendi signed a deal with Spiralfrog to distribute Vivendi&#x27;s songs online in the United States and Canada.

On 2 December 2007, Vivendi announced that it would be merging its game publishing unit with Activision in a $18.8 billion deal. This will allow the merged company, Activision Blizzard, to rival Electronic Arts, the world&#x27;s biggest video game publisher. The merger closed on 9 July 2008, for $9.8 billion. Vivendi held a 52% majority stake in the new business.

On 8 September 2009, Vivendi announced negotiations to buy the Brazilian phone operator Global Village Telecom (GVT). Vivendi took control of GVT at a cost of 56 reais per share, on 13 November, trumping Telefónica&#x27;s bid. Geneva-based Crédit des Alpes was the investment bank to the transaction, originating the acquisition proposal and advising GVT&#x27;s majority shareholders.

On 3 December 2009, GE announced it would purchase Vivendi&#x27;s stake in NBC Universal, which would become a joint venture between GE and Comcast. Vivendi sold its stake in NBC Universal on 25 January 2011.

On 4 April 2011, Vodafone sold its 44% stake in French mobile service provider SFR to Vivendi for about $11 billion and giving Vivendi full control of its largest unit.

In 2012, Vivendi announced having entered a strategic review of its assets and decided to refocus its activities on media and content activities while maximizing its telecoms assets.

On 25 July 2013, Activision Blizzard announced the buyout of 429 million shares from Vivendi for $5.83 billion, dropping the shareholder from a 63% stake to 11.8% by the end of the deal in September, ending Vivendi&#x27;s majority ownership of Activision Blizzard. In November, Vivendi also sold its 53% stake in Maroc Telecom to Dubai-based Etisalat for around $4.2 billion. Vivendi also confirmed in November 2013 its intention to launch a demerger plan which would result in Vivendi becoming an international media group consisting primarily of Canal+, Universal Music Group, and GVT, while SFR would be listed separately on the stock market. As a result of the foregoing, Vivendi group results for the first semester of 2014 are in a strong growth, witnessing the success of its repositioning strategy. Net income was up 84,8% to €1.9 billion. In August 2014 Vivendi sells GVT to Telefônica Vivo, a subsidiary of Telefónica in Brazil.

The moves allowed Vivendi to pay down debt and increase cash returns to shareholders while leaving it able to do acquisitions of its own. After SFR deal closes, Vivendi was expected to have around €5 billion, leaving it with some room to maneuver even after it pays down debt and returns nearly €5 billion in dividends and share buybacks to shareholders.

In 2014, Vivendi decided to sell mobile companies SFR (France) to Patrick Drahi&#x27;s company, Altice, and GVT (Brazil) to the Brazilian company Telefônica Vivo. On 28 May, Vivendi sold half of its remaining shares (nearly 41.5 million shares) in Activision Blizzard for $850 million, reducing its stake to 6%.

In April 2015, it was announced that a shareholder in the company Bolloré raised its stake from 10.2 percent to 12.01 percent for a total fee of €568 million. In 2015, Vivendi bought 80% share in Dailymotion. According to the Wall Street Journal, the &quot;French media group offered around $273 million for streaming service&quot;. Vivendi was in talks with Orange, to Buy 80% stake in Dailymotion. Also, Vivendi announced extra payouts in compromise with P. Schoenfeld Asset Management shareholder. It was revealed in October 2015 that Vivendi would increase its stake in Telecom Italia to around 19% of the ordinary share capital as part of its aims to increase its influence in the group. As of May 2017, Vivendi owns 24.6% of the company with Vivendi&#x27;s CEO Arnaud de Puyfontaine becoming Executive Chairman of Telecom Italia. In October, Vivendi bought minority stakes in the French video game studios Gameloft and Ubisoft. On 17 December 2015, Vivendi acquired a 64.4% majority stake in Belgian online radio aggregator Radionomy (including its media player platform Winamp and internet radio streaming software Shoutcast). Its shareholders, including its employees and U.S.-based investment firm Union Square Ventures, however, retained their stakes in the company.

In June 2016, after having triggered a mandatory tender offer in February 2016 by reaching 30% ownership, and then becoming its largest shareholder, Vivendi completed a hostile takeover of Gameloft with the acquisition of its founders&#x27; stake. At the same time, Vivendi also further increased its stake in Ubisoft, which had led to concern from the company&#x27;s management that Vivendi was also planning a hostile takeover of Ubisoft, however as of 2018 Vivendi is no longer in the position to do so. Vivendi (once the owner of Blizzard, later Activision Blizzard), searching for a new games publisher property has started investing in both Ubisoft and Gameloft. The brothers in charge of Ubisoft and Gameloft, Yves Guillemot and Michel Guillemot respectively, view the investments as a hostile takeover attempt, and are raising capital from within the family and from Canadian investors to maintain control of the companies. As of 8 June 2016, Vivendi has acquired a controlling stake in Gameloft. In news from 11 September 2016 Yves Guillemot is set to buy an additional 3.5% of Ubisoft shares to raise his stake to 12.5% to attempt to block a takeover from Vivendi. Yves has been attempting to lobby other shareholders to prevent them from selling their shares to Vivendi. As of 20 March 2018, Vivendi has sold all its shares in Ubisoft and Tencent has bought in in their place. In an auction on 6 June, Vivendi won a bid to acquire Flavorus from SFX Entertainment for $4 million. Also that month, it acquired Paddington and Company Limited-owner of Paddington Bear and other properties, and The Copyrights Group. Vivendi declared that it owned 12.3% of Mediaset in December 2016. In September 2020, Vivendi owns 28.8% of Mediaset. In January 2019, Vivendi completed its €900 million acquisition of Editis, one of France&#x27;s major book publishers.

In 2019, Vivendi acquired Nigeria&#x27;s film studio ROK Studios which included its linear channels and VOD service, IROKO+.

At the end of the first quarter of 2020, Vivendi completed a partial sale of Universal Music Group (UMG) to a consortium led by Tencent, a Chinese media conglomerate. The amount of stake of the world&#x27;s largest record label group that has been sold to the consortium is 10% and the valuation of which was $3.3 billion. The Tencent-led consortium retained an option to purchase another 10% at the same valuation until January 2021, which they opted to exercise in December 2020. Pershing Square Holdings later acquired 10% of UMG prior to its IPO on the Euronext Amsterdam stock exchange. The company went public on 21 September 2021, at a valuation of €46 billion. In April, Vivendi bought a 10.6% stake in Lagardère Group, another French media group, the assets of which include the world&#x27;s third-largest book publisher Hachette. By August 2020, Vivendi had doubled its stake in Lagardère to 23.5%, becoming the largest shareholder of the rival group. In October, Vivendi acquired a 12% stake in South Africa&#x27;s media company, MultiChoice. In December, Vivendi announced a deal to buy the French media conglomerate Prisma Media from Bertelsmann. In January 2021, Vivendi bought a 9.9% stake in the Spanish media conglomerate Prisa.

In September 2021, Vivendi distributed 60% of its UMG shares to shareholders and retained 10% of shares in an IPO at Euronext Amsterdam. Amber Capital informed Vivendi of its intention to sell all its shares in Lagardère (17.93 of the share capital) and invited Vivendi to make an acquisition offer. Vivendi has acquired Amber Capital&#x27;s shares for 24.1 euros per share. The transaction will be completed by 15 December 2022, after gaining the approvals required by the current regulations in light of the takeover that could result from the mandatory public offer following this acquisition. In December 2021, Vivendi announced its plan to accelerate the purchase of Amber&#x27;s stake in Lagardère. , Vivendi owns 57.3% of Lagardère following the latter&#x27;s IPO. Vivendi offered to divest the book publisher Editis, as Lagardère already owns Hachette.

In July 2022, Vivendi announced its plan to spin off Editis, anticipating the European competition regulators not to allow Editis and Lagardère Publishing to merge. In June 2023, Vivendi agreed to sell Editis to Czech billionaire Daniel Křetínský&#x27;s Czech Media Invest. In July 2023, Vivendi announced that Prisma Media entered into exclusive negotiations with Groupe Figaro for the sale of Gala magazine. The transactions for Editis and Gala magazine were finalized in November 2023.

===Split of entertainment, publishing, advertising, and investment businesses===
On 13 December 2023, Vivendi announced that it was studying a split project to separate its three businesses, Canal+, Havas and its publishing unit (including its stake in Lagardère and Prisma Media) as well as Gameloft and its investments in other companies (Universal Music Group, TIM, MFE, Banijay, Prisa, Telefonica) into four separate companies. On 30 January 2024, the company&#x27;s supervisory board approved the split project. On 22 July 2024, Vivendi announced that the publishing company post-split would become Louis Hachette Group while Canal+ and Havas would be listed on the London Stock Exchange and Euronext Amsterdam respectively while LHG would trade on Euronext Paris. Canal+ would retain its French corporate status. On 29 October 2024, the company&#x27;s supervisory board approved the split plan. Vivendi would retain its listing on the Euronext Paris and would continue its operations as an investment company. On 9 December 2024, Vivendi&#x27;s shareholders approved the split project. The spin-off companies started trading on 16 December 2024.

== Description and location ==
The official name of the company is Vivendi SE (&quot;société européenne&quot;). The headquarters are located at 42 Avenue Friedland, 75008 Paris.

== Corporate governance ==

As of 31 December 2019, Vivendi ownership is as follows:
* Bolloré (27.06%)
* Société Générale (5.29%)
* Caisse des dépôts et consignations (3.23%)
* Vivendi employees (2.95%)
* DNCA Finance (0,31%)
* Self control (1,18%)
* Other shareholders (59.99%)

=== Supervisory board ===

As of 16 May 2020, the board is comprised as follows:
* Yannick Bolloré (chairman); also CEO of Havas, which was spun off from Vivendi in 2000 but has since become a subsidiary
* Philippe Bénacin, chairman and CEO of Interparfums
* Cyrille Bolloré, former chairman and CEO of Bolloré
* Paulo Cardoso, treasurer of Canal+
* Laurent Dassault, co-managing director of Dassault Group
* Sébastien Bolloré
* Véronique Driot-Argentin, Vivendi HR executive
* Aliza Jabès, chairwoman of NUXE
* Cathia Lawson-Hall, executive at Société Générale
* Sandrine Le Bihan, Vivendi legal executive
* Michèle Reiser, filmmaker and culture commissioner
* Katie Stanton, general partner of Moxxie Ventures
* Athina Vasilogiannaki, legal and business affairs director of Minos EMI

== Business units ==

Vivendi is a company primarily focused on digital entertainment. It currently owns the French video game company Gameloft.

Vivendi&#x27;s president Vincent Bolloré, appointed in June 2014, aims at developing synergies between the company&#x27;s subsidiaries now refocused on media: Gameloft.

=== Gameloft ===
In July 2016, Vivendi completed its takeover of Gameloft, the world&#x27;s largest mobile-games publisher in terms of downloads. Gameloft reported that their games had amassed over 1 billion downloads in 2016.

=== Equity investments ===
== Disinformation ==
In July 2024, Vivendi was alleged by Reporters Without Borders (RWB) to have been involved in a disinformation campaign against RWB. On 13 February 2024, in response to a request lodged by RWB, the Conseil d&#x27;État ordered CNews, part of the Vivendi group, to better respect journalistic standards and diversity. The February order by the Conseil d&#x27;État was followed by an intense disinformation campaign of hate speech against RWB. In July 2024, RWB published the results of its investigation into the disinformation campaign. Its findings included a fake website pretending to be run by RWB hosted on a server hosting &quot;Fan de CNews&quot;, a fansite supporting CNews. The website was run by what RWB states is a disinformation agency called Progressif Media, hosted at Vivendi. The main investigator, Arnaud Froger, stated that Progressif Media used &quot;counterfeiting, concealment, cybersquatting [and] trolling&quot; as disinformation techniques against RWB.

== See also ==

* List of French companies

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="0" end="10" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="44" end="50" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752459" start="51" end="69" title="investment company" label="investment company"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="87" end="92" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="119" end="127" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="271" end="288" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663746" start="322" end="335" title="Canal+ S.A." label="Groupe Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969696" start="340" end="360" title="Seagram" label="Seagram Company Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="371" end="389" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="440" end="456" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="471" end="474" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="505" end="517" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBCUniversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="669" end="676" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151005" start="684" end="709" title="Acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast" label="acquisition of the latter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571729" start="737" end="752" title="Yannick Bolloré" label="Yannick Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q516033" start="768" end="773" title="Havas" label="Havas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="888" end="909" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663746" start="1028" end="1034" title="Canal+ S.A." label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q130745255" start="1077" end="1097" title="Louis Hachette Group" label="Louis Hachette Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1291" end="1303" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1382" end="1386" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="1490" end="1503" title="Paris" label="City of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="1532" end="1538" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1540" end="1546" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="1560" end="1568" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="1585" end="1590" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121717" start="1634" end="1646" title="Guy Dejouany" label="Guy Dejouany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="1846" end="1858" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81481" start="2038" end="2044" title="Veolia Transport" label="Connex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555672" start="2082" end="2100" title="Veolia Environmental Services" label="Onyx Environnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012420" start="2334" end="2340" title="Dalkia" label="Dalkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="2386" end="2392" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="2404" end="2410" title="Pay television" label="pay-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="2491" end="2501" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q331485" start="2520" end="2538" title="Jean-Marie Messier" label="Jean-Marie Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121717" start="2549" end="2561" title="Guy Dejouany" label="Guy Dejouany"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="2611" end="2628" title="Babelsberg Studio" label="Babelsberg Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q504288" start="2651" end="2663" title="Neuf Cegetel" label="Neuf Cegetel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632461" start="2885" end="2891" title="Veolia" label="Veolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="3152" end="3160" title="Vinci SA" label="Vinci SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="3213" end="3226" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q516033" start="3228" end="3233" title="Havas" label="Havas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264873" start="3235" end="3251" title="Cendant Software" label="Cendant Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="3481" end="3486" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="3594" end="3617" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918390" start="3759" end="3793" title="British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC" label="British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663746" start="4058" end="4071" title="Canal+ S.A." label="Groupe Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969696" start="4234" end="4253" title="Seagram" label="Seagram Company Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q101552926" start="4264" end="4281" title="Universal Studios, Inc." label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362039" start="4325" end="4332" title="MP3.com" label="MP3.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q390074" start="4368" end="4384" title="Houghton Mifflin" label="Houghton Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092600" start="4499" end="4505" title="Cinven" label="Cinven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632461" start="4541" end="4562" title="Veolia" label="Vivendi Environnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q81481" start="4648" end="4662" title="Veolia Transport" label="CGEA Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555672" start="4664" end="4682" title="Veolia Environmental Services" label="Onyx Environnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012420" start="4720" end="4726" title="Dalkia" label="Dalkia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682599" start="4885" end="4897" title="Veolia Water" label="Veolia Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="4957" end="4961" title="Initial public offering" label="IPOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="5426" end="5434" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q331485" start="5497" end="5515" title="Jean-Marie Messier" label="Jean-Marie Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632461" start="5809" end="5830" title="Vivendi Environnement" label="Vivendi Environnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="5860" end="5868" title="Vinci SA" label="Vinci SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="5919" end="5929" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q328520" start="6032" end="6050" title="Edgar Bronfman Jr." label="Edgar Bronfman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7939300" start="6129" end="6136" title="Vizzavi" label="Vizzavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="6140" end="6148" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280748" start="6323" end="6358" title="EchoStar Communications Corporation" label="EchoStar Communications Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="6405" end="6414" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère"/>
<link wikidata="Q880942" start="6463" end="6473" title="Blackstone Group" label="Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q803873" start="6478" end="6482" title="Bain Capital" label="Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902505" start="6668" end="6675" title="Infobel" label="Infobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365773" start="6733" end="6743" title="Thomson SA" label="Thomson SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="6754" end="6770" title="News Corporation (1980–2013)" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="6775" end="6789" title="Telecom Italia" label="Telecom Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630989" start="6826" end="6831" title="Xfera" label="Xfera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488751" start="6881" end="6890" title="Socpresse" label="Socpresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380014" start="6918" end="6933" title="Philippe Hersant (newspaper publisher)" label="France Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362039" start="6990" end="6997" title="MP3.com" label="MP3.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="7001" end="7005" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q101552926" start="7455" end="7472" title="Universal Studios, Inc." label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="7485" end="7487" title="General Electric" label="GE"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="7497" end="7510" title="NBCUniversal" label="NBC Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="7596" end="7602" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450848" start="7607" end="7618" title="StudioCanal" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q935874" start="7710" end="7724" title="Monaco Telecom" label="Monaco Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q832450" start="7729" end="7738" title="Sportfive" label="Sportfive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339156" start="7786" end="7809" title="Newsworld International" label="Newsworld International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213604" start="7841" end="7851" title="Joel Hyatt" label="Joel Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="7863" end="7898" title="Vice-President of the United States" label="Vice-President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="7899" end="7906" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q705676" start="7926" end="7943" title="Babelsberg Studio" label="Babelsberg Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994338" start="8017" end="8020" title="Télévision Par Satellite" label="TPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q463881" start="8176" end="8203" title="American Depositary Receipt" label="American Depositary Receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="8235" end="8258" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="New York Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="8491" end="8507" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q724759" start="8516" end="8529" title="NBC Universal" label="NBC Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493542" start="8846" end="8856" title="Spiralfrog" label="Spiralfrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264873" start="8996" end="9020" title="Vivendi Games" label="its game publishing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="9026" end="9036" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="9042" end="9043" title="US dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q344341" start="9098" end="9117" title="Activision Blizzard" label="Activision Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="9128" end="9143" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713910" start="9388" end="9410" title="Global Village Telecom" label="Global Village Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="9504" end="9514" title="Telefónica" label="Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113804" start="9826" end="9833" title="Comcast" label="Comcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q218765" start="9975" end="9978" title="SFR" label="SFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299942" start="10563" end="10576" title="Maroc Telecom" label="Maroc Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="10580" end="10585" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q543449" start="10592" end="10600" title="Etisalat" label="Etisalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059505" start="11134" end="11149" title="Telefônica Vivo" label="Telefônica Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="11167" end="11177" title="Telefónica" label="Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q218765" start="11596" end="11599" title="SFR" label="SFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714038" start="11612" end="11625" title="Patrick Drahi" label="Patrick Drahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944611" start="11642" end="11648" title="Altice (company)" label="Altice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713910" start="11654" end="11657" title="Global Village Telecom" label="GVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q20059505" start="11692" end="11707" title="Telefônica Vivo" label="Telefônica Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q444172" start="11925" end="11932" title="Bolloré" label="Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q769222" start="12055" end="12066" title="Dailymotion" label="Dailymotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q144617" start="12433" end="12447" title="Telecom Italia" label="Telecom Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="12771" end="12779" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q188273" start="12784" end="12791" title="Ubisoft" label="Ubisoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417003" start="12889" end="12898" title="Radionomy" label="Radionomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193493" start="12936" end="12942" title="Winamp" label="Winamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062504" start="12981" end="12990" title="Shoutcast" label="Shoutcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355661" start="13066" end="13087" title="Union Square Ventures" label="Union Square Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245116" start="13186" end="13198" title="tender offer" label="tender offer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416898" start="13306" end="13322" title="hostile takeover" label="hostile takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q178824" start="13671" end="13679" title="Blizzard Entertainment" label="Blizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188273" start="13784" end="13791" title="Ubisoft" label="Ubisoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="13796" end="13804" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q860580" start="14487" end="14494" title="Tencent" label="Tencent"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841887" start="14593" end="14610" title="SFX Entertainment" label="SFX Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="14696" end="14711" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q368151" start="14800" end="14808" title="Mediaset" label="Mediaset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047660" start="14945" end="14951" title="Editis" label="Editis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="15201" end="15222" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q860580" start="15252" end="15259" title="Tencent" label="Tencent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="15339" end="15351" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682229" start="15606" end="15630" title="Pershing Square Holdings" label="Pershing Square Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="15670" end="15673" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q478720" start="15681" end="15699" title="Euronext Amsterdam" label="Euronext Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490400" start="15835" end="15850" title="Lagardère Group" label="Lagardère Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="15954" end="15962" title="Hachette (publisher)" label="Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642635" start="16165" end="16176" title="MultiChoice" label="MultiChoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156913" start="16271" end="16282" title="Bertelsmann" label="Bertelsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466106" start="16363" end="16368" title="Prisa" label="Prisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q478720" start="16488" end="16506" title="Euronext Amsterdam" label="Euronext Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047660" start="17188" end="17194" title="Editis" label="Editis"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="17222" end="17230" title="Hachette (publisher)" label="Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774225" start="17463" end="17479" title="Daniel Křetínský" label="Daniel Křetínský"/>
<link wikidata="Q130745255" start="18327" end="18347" title="Louis Hachette Group" label="Louis Hachette Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="18394" end="18415" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q478720" start="18420" end="18438" title="Euronext Amsterdam" label="Euronext Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q444172" start="19142" end="19149" title="Bolloré" label="Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q270363" start="19161" end="19177" title="Société Générale" label="Société Générale"/>
<link wikidata="Q846484" start="19188" end="19222" title="Caisse des dépôts et consignations" label="Caisse des dépôts et consignations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571729" start="19419" end="19434" title="Yannick Bolloré" label="Yannick Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q516033" start="19459" end="19464" title="Havas" label="Havas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19580" end="19592" title="Interparfums" label="Interparfums"/>
<link wikidata="Q444172" start="19639" end="19646" title="Bolloré" label="Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032540" start="19677" end="19683" title="Canal+ (French TV channel)" label="Canal+"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219157" start="19686" end="19702" title="Laurent Dassault" label="Laurent Dassault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434948" start="19728" end="19742" title="Dassault Group" label="Dassault Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q270363" start="19881" end="19897" title="Société Générale" label="Société Générale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377474" start="19998" end="20011" title="Katie Jacobs Stanton" label="Katie Stanton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20032" end="20047" title="Moxxie Ventures" label="Moxxie Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869316" start="20112" end="20121" title="Minos EMI" label="Minos EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="20258" end="20266" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q721491" start="20294" end="20309" title="Vincent Bolloré" label="Vincent Bolloré"/>
<link wikidata="Q689093" start="20504" end="20512" title="Gameloft" label="Gameloft"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="20752" end="20777" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="20811" end="20825" title="disinformation" label="disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="20913" end="20932" title="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État" label="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083542" start="20941" end="20946" title="CNews" label="CNews"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="21131" end="21142" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860757" start="21711" end="21735" title="List of French companies" label="List of French companies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139592" wikidata="Q1779998" url="?curid=1139592" title="Luz, Minas Gerais">
<text>Luz is a Brazilian municipality located in the West (south of the west) part of the state of Minas Gerais. Luz is located between the city of Araxá and the capital city of the state of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte. The population is 18,257 (2020 est.) in an area of 1172 km2. The city belongs to the Central Mineira region and to the micro-region of Bom Despacho. It became a municipality in 1923.

==Origin of the name==
In the region there was a spring with a dam that supplied water to the small settlement that had grown around a chapel dedicated to Our Lady of the Light, or Nossa Senhora da Luz. The first name of the town was Nossa Senhora da Luz do Aterrado, or Our Lady of the Light of the Dam.

==Geography==
===Location===
The city center of Luz is located at an elevation of 675 meters a short distance south of federal highway BR-262. The São Francisco River lies to the east. Neighboring municipalities are: Estrela do Indaiá and Dores do Indaiá (N), Bom Despacho (NE), Moema and Lagoa da Prata (E), Japaraíba (SE), Arcos and Iguatama (S), Bambuí and Córrego Danta (W). *

Distances
*Belo Horizonte: 188 km on BR-262
*Bom Despacho: 50 km east on BR-262
*Dores do Indaiá: 36 km north on MG-176
*Brasília: 640 km
*Rio de Janeiro: 635 km
*São Paulo: 595 km
===Geographical data===
&quot;Elevation&quot;
*Maximum: 956 m (Serra Deus me Livre)
*Minimum: 680 m (Foz do Ribeirão Jorge Grande)
*Center of the city: 674.96 m

&quot;Temperature&quot;
*Average annual: 22.1 °C
*Average annual maximum: 29.1 °C
*Average annual minimum: 16.7 °C

&quot;Rainfall&quot;
*Average annual rainfall: 1,415.7 mm

&quot;Topography&quot;
*Flat: 40%
*Hilly: 50%
*Mountainous: 10%

&quot;Rivers&quot;
*Ribeirão Jorge Pequeno
*Rio São Francisco
*River basin: Basin of the Rio São Francisco 

==Economic activities==
Services, small industries, and agriculture are the most important economic activities. Charcoal production from eucalyptus plantations is also important. In 2005 there were 78 transformation industries employing 540 workers and 342 retail units employing 926 workers. The GDP in 2005 was approximately R$158 million, with 11 million from taxes, 77 million reais from services, 17 million reais from industry, and 52 million reais from agriculture. There were 651 rural producers on 69,000 hectares of land. 183 farms had tractors (2006). Approximately 1700 persons were occupied in agriculture. The main crops are coffee, rice, beans, and corn. There were 96,000 head of cattle, of which 24,000 were milk cows (2006).

There were 5 banks (2007): Banco Bradesco (Banco Postal, Correios), Banco do Brasil, Banco Itaú, Caixa Econômica Federal, Crediluz (Cooperativa de Crédito dos Produtores Rurais de Luz). There were 3 hotels: Hotel Turista, Hotel Oeste, and Hotel Planalto.

In the vehicle fleet there were 2632 automobiles, 252 trucks, 326 pickup trucks, 19 buses, 43 micro-buses, and 857 motorcycles (2007).

==Health and education==
In the health sector there were 8 public health clinics and 1 private hospital with 56 beds. (2005). Patients with more serious health conditions are transported to Belo Horizonte. Educational needs of 3800 students were met by 10 primary schools, 2 middle schools, and 4 pre-primary schools.

*Municipal Human Development Index: 0.801 (2000)
*State ranking: 35 out of 853 municipalities as of 2000
*National ranking: 537 out of 5,138 municipalities as of 2000
*Literacy rate: 90%
*Life expectancy: 71 (average of males and females)

In 2000 the per capita monthly income of R$369.00 was above the state average of R$276.00 and below the national average of R$297.00. Poços de Caldas had the highest per capita monthly income in 2000 with R$435.00. The lowest was Setubinha with R$73.00.

The highest ranking municipality in Minas Gerais in 2000 was Poços de Caldas with 0.841, while the lowest was Setubinha with 0.568. Nationally the highest was São Caetano do Sul in São Paulo with 0.919, while the lowest was Setubinha. In more recent statistics (considering 5,507 municipalities) Manari in the state of Pernambuco has the lowest rating in the country—0,467—putting it in last place.

==Notable people==

*Vicente Joaquim Zico, former archbishop of Belém do Pará

==See also==
* List of municipalities in Minas Gerais

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1779998" start="0" end="3" title="Luz, Minas Gerais" label="Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="93" end="105" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q586057" start="142" end="147" title="Araxá" label="Araxá"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="185" end="197" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="199" end="213" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="300" end="315" title="Central Mineira" label="Central Mineira"/>
<link wikidata="Q891713" start="350" end="362" title="Bom Despacho, Minas Gerais" label="Bom Despacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q142148" start="852" end="871" title="São Francisco River" label="São Francisco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q942731" start="922" end="939" title="Estrela do Indaiá" label="Estrela do Indaiá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757114" start="944" end="959" title="Dores do Indaiá" label="Dores do Indaiá"/>
<link wikidata="Q891713" start="965" end="977" title="Bom Despacho, Minas Gerais" label="Bom Despacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789780" start="984" end="989" title="Moema, Minas Gerais" label="Moema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749899" start="994" end="1008" title="Lagoa da Prata" label="Lagoa da Prata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755923" start="1014" end="1023" title="Japaraíba" label="Japaraíba"/>
<link wikidata="Q22062794" start="1030" end="1035" title="Arcos, Minas Gerais" label="Arcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755996" start="1040" end="1048" title="Iguatama" label="Iguatama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756027" start="1054" end="1060" title="Bambuí" label="Bambuí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756093" start="1065" end="1078" title="Córrego Danta" label="Córrego Danta"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="1098" end="1112" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q891713" start="1132" end="1144" title="Bom Despacho, Minas Gerais" label="Bom Despacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757114" start="1168" end="1183" title="Dores do Indaiá" label="Dores do Indaiá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="1208" end="1216" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="1226" end="1240" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="1250" end="1259" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="3105" end="3119" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="3245" end="3268" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q817216" start="3608" end="3623" title="Poços de Caldas" label="Poços de Caldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q588111" start="3704" end="3713" title="Setubinha" label="Setubinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q817216" start="3790" end="3805" title="Poços de Caldas" label="Poços de Caldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q588111" start="3839" end="3848" title="Setubinha" label="Setubinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q967648" start="3888" end="3906" title="São Caetano do Sul" label="São Caetano do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895257" start="4025" end="4031" title="Manari, Brazil" label="Manari"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="4048" end="4058" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521979" start="4150" end="4170" title="Vicente Joaquim Zico" label="Vicente Joaquim Zico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840201" start="4223" end="4261" title="List of municipalities in Minas Gerais" label="List of municipalities in Minas Gerais"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139595" wikidata="Q7427002" url="?curid=1139595" title="Sauble River (Ontario)">
<text>The Sauble River is a river in Bruce County and Grey County in southwestern Ontario, Canada that flows from its headwaters in the township of Chatsworth to Lake Huron north of the community of Sauble Beach.

==Etymology==
The river was originally called &quot;Rivière aux Saubles&quot;, or &quot;sandy river&quot;, by the French. It was named the River aux Saubles on maps until 1881, when it became the Sauble River. When first settled, the area included a sawmill and later, a hydro electric plant.

==Course==
The Sauble River begins at an unnamed pond in the township of Chatsworth in Grey County, between the communities of Desboro to the north and Mooresburg to the south. It heads north then west, takes in the left tributary Grimston Creek and right tributary Keady Creek, passes along the border to the municipality of Arran–Elderslie in Bruce County near the community of Grimston, before entering that municipality and reaching the community of Tara, where it takes in the left tributary Tara Creek. The river continues north, takes in the left tributary Arkwright Creek, passes through the community of Allenford, and reaches the municipality of South Bruce Peninsula. It then heads northeast, takes in the right tributary Park Head Creek, and turns west west of the community of Hepworth. The river takes in the right tributaries Spring Creek and Rankin River, passes over the Sauble Falls, and reaches Lake Huron at Sauble Beach.

==Natural history==
Sauble Falls Provincial Park is located at the eponymous waterfalls.

The river hosts fish species such as brown trout, chinook salmon, coho salmon, largemouth bass, northern pike, panfish, rainbow trout and walleye. The south (upper) Sauble River drainage basin has fair (15 to 20%) forest cover and poor (12.5 to 25%) riparian zone forest cover, fair water quality and good benthic species; the north (lower) drainage basin has excellent (greater than 35%) forest cover and fair (25% to 50%) riparian zone forest cover, excellent water chemistry and good benthic species.

==Tributaries==
*Rankin River (right)
*Spring Creek (right)
*Park Head Creek (right)
*Arkwright Creek (left)
*Tara Creek (left)
*Keady Creek (right)
*Grimston Creek (left)

==Communities==
*Sauble Beach
*Allenford
*Tara
*Grimston

==See also==
*List of rivers of Ontario

==References==
==Sources==
* Shows the river course.


==External links==
*Grey Sauble Conservation Authority</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7427002" start="4" end="16" title="Sauble River (Ontario)" label="Sauble River"/>
<link wikidata="Q991601" start="31" end="43" title="Bruce County, Ontario" label="Bruce County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546177" start="48" end="59" title="Grey County, Ontario" label="Grey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="63" end="83" title="southwestern Ontario" label="southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="85" end="91" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087812" start="142" end="152" title="Chatsworth, Ontario" label="Chatsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="156" end="166" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q601160" start="193" end="205" title="Sauble Beach, Ontario" label="Sauble Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="322" end="328" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087812" start="575" end="585" title="Chatsworth, Ontario" label="Chatsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263649" start="629" end="636" title="Desboro, Ontario" label="Desboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087812" start="654" end="664" title="Mooresburg, Ontario" label="Mooresburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795858" start="828" end="843" title="Arran–Elderslie" label="Arran–Elderslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087812" start="882" end="890" title="Grimston, Ontario" label="Grimston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685014" start="956" end="960" title="Tara, Ontario" label="Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492590" start="1158" end="1179" title="South Bruce Peninsula, Ontario" label="South Bruce Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426999" start="1465" end="1493" title="Sauble Falls Provincial Park" label="Sauble Falls Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="1749" end="1761" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="1785" end="1798" title="riparian zone" label="riparian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="1841" end="1848" title="Benthic zone" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839888" start="2285" end="2310" title="List of rivers of Ontario" label="List of rivers of Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139596" wikidata="Q7278027" url="?curid=1139596" title="RVW">
<text>RVW or RvW may refer to:

* Ralph Vaughan Williams (1872–1958), English composer of symphonies, chamber music, opera, choral music, and film scores
* Richard von Weizsäcker (1920–2015), German statesman and President of Germany, 1984–1994
* Ricky van Wolfswinkel (born 1989), Dutch footballer
* &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, a landmark decision by the United States Supreme Court on the issue of abortion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207947" start="28" end="50" title="Ralph Vaughan Williams" label="Ralph Vaughan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567" start="150" end="172" title="Richard von Weizsäcker" label="Richard von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q251966" start="241" end="262" title="Ricky van Wolfswinkel" label="Ricky van Wolfswinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="301" end="312" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139597" wikidata="Q975407" url="?curid=1139597" title="Luz (Santa Cruz da Graciosa)">
<text>Luz is a civil parish in the municipality of Santa Cruz da Graciosa on the island of Graciosa in the Portuguese Azores. The population in 2011 was 683, in an area of 11.70 km2. It contains the localities Alto do Sul, Fajã da Folga, Folga, Carapacho, Luz and Pedras Brancas.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975407" start="0" end="3" title="Luz (Santa Cruz da Graciosa)" label="Luz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="9" end="21" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010463" start="45" end="67" title="Santa Cruz da Graciosa" label="Santa Cruz da Graciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q592315" start="85" end="93" title="Graciosa Island" label="Graciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="101" end="111" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="112" end="118" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139598" wikidata="Q6979160" url="?curid=1139598" title="National Union of Seamen">
<text>The National Union of Seamen (NUS) was the principal trade union of merchant seafarers in the United Kingdom from the late 1880s to 1990. In 1990, the union amalgamated with the National Union of Railwaymen to form the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers (RMT).

== National Amalgamated Sailors&#x27; and Firemen&#x27;s Union (1887–1893) ==

The Seamen&#x27;s Union was founded in Sunderland in 1887 as the National Amalgamated Sailors&#x27; and Firemen&#x27;s Union. Its founder, J. Havelock Wilson became its president. It quickly spread to other ports and had become genuinely national by the end of 1888.

In 1888 and 1889 the union fought a number of successful strikes in Glasgow, Seaham, Liverpool and other major ports. By 1889, it had 45 branches and a nominal membership of 80,000. But from 1890, it began to face determined resistance from shipowners, who formed an association, the Shipping Federation, to co-ordinate their strike-breaking and anti-union activity. The union fought and lost defensive actions in Hull, Bristol, Cardiff and other important centres in 1891–1893. These episodes depleted its funds and led to a large fall in membership. The union also became involved in a large number of expensive legal cases. Although partly due to the actions of shipowners, the difficulties experienced by the union in this period have also been attributed to its officials&#x27; taste for litigation and their inadequate handling of union finances. In 1893, the NASFU went into voluntary liquidation to avoid bankruptcy.

== National Sailors&#x27; and Firemen&#x27;s Union (1894–1926) ==

Relaunched in 1894 as the National Sailors&#x27; and Firemen&#x27;s Union (NSFU), having dropped the word &quot;Amalgamated&quot;, the union continued to experience financial difficulties and low membership. From the summer of 1910 the union worked to promote a national seamen&#x27;s strike to combat the Shipping Federation. This finally took place in the summer of 1911. The union&#x27;s control over the movement was incomplete. In many ports rank and file strike committees and activists played a more important organisational role than the union itself, and the union&#x27;s long-standing programme was over-shadowed by demands for wage increases. Nonetheless, the strike greatly increased both the funds and the membership of the union, allowing it to emerge once again as a significant force. Following the strike-wave, the union gained official recognition from many shipowners.

In 1911/1912 the growth of the NSFU was checked by a breakaway movement in Southampton and Glasgow which led to the formation of the rival British Seafarers&#x27; Union. At a national level, however, the NSFU was able to maintain and increase its supremacy.

Contemporaries often regarded the NSFU as a militant organisation because of the strikes in which it had involved itself in the late 1880s and in 1911. Yet from its inception the union expressed a belief in the possibility of industrial harmony, and announced itself in favour of establishing conciliation procedures. The leadership of the union was not greatly influenced by &#x27;socialism&#x27;. Its founder and president, J. Havelock Wilson, served several terms as a Liberal Party MP, and the union itself did not affiliate to the Labour Party until 1919. Indeed, at the 1918 general election, it sponsored three candidates:

Wilson was primarily sponsored by the Liberal Party, while Bell described himself as a Coalition Labour candidate. Cathery ran in the name of the union.

== World War I ==

After the outbreak of World War I, the union began collaborating closely with the Admiralty and shipowners in support of the war effort. From 1916, Havelock Wilson emerged as one of the most vehement supporters of the war in the labour movement, ostensibly because of Germany&#x27;s conduct of the war at sea, especially the alleged targeting of non-combatant vessels. In 1917 the Union provoked controversy by refusing to convey Arthur Henderson and Ramsay MacDonald to a conference of socialist parties in Stockholm, which had been convened in the wake of the Russian Revolution to discuss the possibility of a peace policy.

A further development in 1917 was the formation of the National Maritime Board as a governing body for the merchant marine. The union&#x27;s involvement in it allowed it to negotiate directly with shipowners over wages and conditions.

==Interwar period==
In 1922, the arrangements were extended by the establishment of the &quot;PC5 system&quot;, which was intended to allow the Shipping Federation and the union to exercise joint control over access to employment in the shipping industry.

In 1921, the National Maritime Board imposed wage reductions, which were supported by the NSFU. The acceptance of cuts in pay provoked considerable resistance from ordinary seafarers and from the rival organisations: the British Seafarers&#x27; Union and the National Union of Ship&#x27;s Stewards. Other sections of the trade union and labour movement were also strongly critical of the NSFU&#x27;s detrimental collusion with employers. That was especially the National Transport Workers&#x27; Federation, which helped to merge the rival organisations referred to above into a new organisation, the Amalgamated Marine Workers&#x27; Union, intended as a viable alternative to the NSFU. Further wage reductions were made in 1923, and 1925, which again outraged members.

Militant resistance to the NSFU was expressed through the Seamen&#x27;s Minority Movement (founded 1924) part of the Transport Workers&#x27; Minority Movement. Criticism of the NSFU became increasingly widespread with its apparent role in the 1925 Special Restriction (Coloured Alien Seamen) Order, which is seen as the first path-breaking attempt to expel non-British-born people; its failure to observe the general strike in 1926; and its support of a &quot;non-political&quot; Miners&#x27; Union in Nottinghamshire. In September 1928, the Union was officially expelled from the Trades Union Congress. However, after the death of Havelock Wilson in 1929, the NUS quickly began to pursue a more mainstream policy and became reconciled with the rest of the trade union movement. It adopted the title &#x27;National Union of Seamen&#x27; in 1926. The term failed to recognise that women were also members; some seawomen had earlier organized in an unsuccessful Guild of Stewardesses.

By 1932, the Seamen&#x27;s Minority Movement was 1,000-strong (less than a hundredth of the maritime workforce). Attempts were made among SMM black activists to combat the notorious postwar racism. Race riots had occurred in seaports such as South Shields, Liverpool and Cardiff. Also, the union itself felt a duty to support its white British-born members first during times of high unemployment. Key SMM figures in the 1920s and 1930s included Barbados-born, London-based Chris Braithwaite (Chris Jones). His connections with many antiracist initiatives including the Colonial Seamen&#x27;s Organisation and the Pan-African Movement widened the SMM&#x27;s links and brought international attention to the NUS&#x27;s failure to back the largest black and minority ethnic workforce in Britain.

== Postwar growth of dissent ==
The NUS&#x27;s almost-closed shop made the union stronger. After the Second World War there were widespread calls for reform of the NUS. Many members felt that the union was too closely associated with the employers and that it had failed to defend its members&#x27; interests. &quot;Rank and File Committees&quot;, building on the earlier Minority Movement, were established in many ports, and unofficial strikes took place in 1947, 1955 and 1960. A &quot;National Seamen&#x27;s Reform Movement&quot; was established in the latter year.

A degree of reform was conceded in 1962, with the decision to allow a system of workplace representation by shop stewards. That belatedly brought the NUS into line with the general practices of the trade union movement. More importantly, it brought greater connection to the union. Seafarers could be away from home for months or years and so &quot;a union man&quot; on board, not far off in the Clapham headquarters, enhanced solidarity.

===Strikes===
On 16 May 1966, the NUS launched its first national strike since 1911. The strike aimed to secure higher wages and to reduce the working week from 56 to 40 hours. It was widely supported by union members and caused great disruption to shipping, especially in London, Liverpool and Southampton.

The political importance of the strike was enormous: the disruption of trade had an adverse effect on the United Kingdom&#x27;s (precarious) balance of payments, provoked a run on the pound and threatened to undermine the government&#x27;s attempts to keep wage increases below 3.5%. The Labour Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, was strongly critical of the strike, alleging that it had been taken over by Communists to bring down his administration. On 23 May, a week after the outbreak of the strike, the Government declared a state of emergency, but emergency powers were not used. The strike finally came to an end on 1 July.

===Election results===
The NUS re-affiliated to the Labour Party in 1931, and sponsored unsuccessful candidates at several general elections; generally in safe Conservative seats, hoping to later sponsor a candidate in a winnable constituency. By 1960, it enjoyed a close relationship with the party and, unusually, every one of its local branches was affiliated to its Constituency Labour Party. In 1970, it finally secured its first sponsored Member of Parliament, John Prescott, who became a prominent national figure.

==Leadership==
===General Secretaries===
:1887: Havelock Wilson
:1894: Edmund Cathery
:1926: William J. Davies
:1927: Edmund Cathery
:1928: William Robert Spence
:1942: Charles Jarman
:1948: Tom Yates
:1961: Jim Scott
:1962: Bill Hogarth
:1974: Jim Slater
:1986: Sam McCluskie

===Presidents===
:1887: Samuel Plimsoll
:1894: Havelock Wilson
:1929: &quot;Post abolished&quot;
:1986: Jim Slater

=== Other prominent officials ===

Prominent figures who have held positions in the NUS include:

*Joe Cotter
*Tom Mann
*Manny Shinwell

==See also==

* Eastcote, Northamptonshire

==References==

* WB Jones, &quot;The Strike and the Split – The NSFU and BSU in Southampton, 1911–1913&quot;
*Arthur Marsh &amp; Victoria Ryan, &quot;The Seamen – a history of the National Union of Seamen&quot; (Oxford, 1989).
*Arthur Marsh &amp; Victoria Ryan, &quot;Historical Directory of Trade Unions:Vol 3&quot; (Aldershot, 1987).
*Ken Coates &amp; Tony Topham, &quot;The Making of the Labour Movement&quot; (Nottingham, 1994), .

==External links==
*Catalogue of the NUS archives, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick
*BBC – Report on 1966 seamen&#x27;s strike
*The Marine Society</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6979160" start="4" end="28" title="National Union of Seamen" label="National Union of Seamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979160" start="30" end="33" title="National Union of Seamen" label="NUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="53" end="64" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="94" end="108" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979152" start="178" end="206" title="National Union of Railwaymen" label="National Union of Railwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979153" start="219" end="273" title="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers" label="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="400" end="410" title="Sunderland, Tyne and Wear" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283847" start="503" end="518" title="Havelock Wilson" label="Havelock Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="697" end="704" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345990" start="706" end="712" title="Seaham" label="Seaham"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="714" end="723" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498072" start="913" end="932" title="Shipping Federation" label="Shipping Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="1043" end="1047" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="1049" end="1056" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="1058" end="1065" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="1542" end="1552" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="2586" end="2597" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971024" start="2650" end="2679" title="British Seafarers&amp;#x27; Union" label="British Seafarers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="3152" end="3161" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="3242" end="3255" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3306" end="3318" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137909" start="3488" end="3504" title="Coalition Labour" label="Coalition Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3596" end="3607" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3842" end="3849" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="4004" end="4020" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="4025" end="4041" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="4082" end="4091" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4136" end="4154" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015107" start="4257" end="4280" title="National Maritime Board" label="National Maritime Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971024" start="4916" end="4945" title="British Seafarers&amp;#x27; Union" label="British Seafarers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979162" start="4954" end="4992" title="National Union of Ship&amp;#x27;s Stewards" label="National Union of Ship&amp;#x27;s Stewards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979015" start="5157" end="5200" title="National Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Federation" label="National Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739355" start="5295" end="5333" title="Amalgamated Marine Workers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Amalgamated Marine Workers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5523" end="5554" title="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Minority Movement" label="Seamen&amp;#x27;s Minority Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5582" end="5623" title="Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Minority Movement" label="Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Minority Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="5874" end="5888" title="UK General Strike 1926" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="6046" end="6067" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105957" start="6923" end="6940" title="Chris Braithwaite" label="Chris Braithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7019" end="7054" title="Colonial Seamen&amp;#x27;s Organisation" label="Colonial Seamen&amp;#x27;s Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="7063" end="7074" title="Pan-African" label="Pan-African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102436" start="7298" end="7309" title="closed shop" label="closed shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7345" end="7361" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518641" start="7923" end="7936" title="shop stewards" label="shop stewards"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8528" end="8534" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="8536" end="8545" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="8550" end="8561" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="8705" end="8724" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="8859" end="8873" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="8875" end="8888" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q592068" start="8967" end="8977" title="Communist Party of Great Britain" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="9090" end="9108" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163958" start="9562" end="9587" title="Constituency Labour Party" label="Constituency Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q332393" start="9659" end="9672" title="John Prescott" label="John Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283847" start="9763" end="9778" title="Havelock Wilson" label="Havelock Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900927" start="9786" end="9800" title="Edmund Cathery" label="Edmund Cathery"/>
<link wikidata="Q66092372" start="9808" end="9825" title="William J. Davies" label="William J. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900927" start="9833" end="9847" title="Edmund Cathery" label="Edmund Cathery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26720301" start="9855" end="9876" title="William Robert Spence" label="William Robert Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566790" start="9884" end="9898" title="Charles Jarman" label="Charles Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642644" start="9906" end="9915" title="Tom Yates (trade unionist)" label="Tom Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647988" start="9923" end="9932" title="Jim Scott (trade unionist)" label="Jim Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909457" start="9940" end="9952" title="Bill Hogarth" label="Bill Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013097" start="9960" end="9970" title="Jim Slater (trade unionist)" label="Jim Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471183" start="9978" end="9991" title="Sam McCluskie" label="Sam McCluskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q333611" start="10017" end="10032" title="Samuel Plimsoll" label="Samuel Plimsoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283847" start="10040" end="10055" title="Havelock Wilson" label="Havelock Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013097" start="10097" end="10107" title="Jim Slater (trade unionist)" label="Jim Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412262" start="10208" end="10218" title="Joe Cotter" label="Joe Cotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852204" start="10220" end="10228" title="Tom Mann" label="Tom Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q333582" start="10230" end="10244" title="Manny Shinwell" label="Manny Shinwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329864" start="10262" end="10288" title="Eastcote, Northamptonshire" label="Eastcote, Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q912999" start="10628" end="10638" title="Ken Coates" label="Ken Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q112376294" start="10645" end="10656" title="Tony Topham" label="Tony Topham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888832" start="10790" end="10834" title="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick" label="Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139599" wikidata="Q5864810" url="?curid=1139599" title="History of Hertfordshire">
<text>Hertfordshire is an English county, founded in the Norse–Saxon wars of the 9th century, and developed through commerce serving London. It is a land-locked county that was several times the seat of Parliament. From origins in brewing and papermaking, through aircraft manufacture, the county has developed a wider range of industry in which pharmaceuticals, financial services and film-making are prominent. Today, with a population slightly over 1 million, Hertfordshire services, industry and commerce dominate the economy, with fewer than 2000 people working in agriculture, forestry and fishing.

Hertfordshire is one of the historic counties of England first recorded in the early 10th century. Its development has been tied with that of London, which lies on its southern border. London is the largest city in Western Europe; it requires an enormous tonnage of supplies each day and Hertfordshire grew wealthy on the proceeds of trade because no less than three of the old Roman roads serving the capital run through it, as do the Grand Union Canal and other watercourses. In the 19th century, rail links sprang up in the county, linking London to the north. Hatfield in Hertfordshire has seen two rail crashes of international importance (in 1870 and 2000).

Though nowadays Hertfordshire tends to be politically conservative, historically it was the site of a number of uprisings against the Crown, particularly in the First Barons&#x27; War, the Peasants&#x27; Revolt, the Wars of the Roses and the English Civil War. The county has a rich intellectual history, and many writers of major importance, from Geoffrey Chaucer to Beatrix Potter, have connections there. Quite a number of prime ministers were born or grew up in Hertfordshire.

The county contains a curiously large number of abandoned settlements, which K. Rutherford Davis attributes to a mixture of poor harvests on soil hard to farm, and the Black Death which ravaged Hertfordshire starting in 1349.

==Early history==
The earliest evidence of human occupation in Hertfordshire come from a gravel pit in Rickmansworth. The finds (of flint tools) date back 350,000 years, long before Britain became an island.

People have probably lived in the land now called Hertfordshire for about 12,000 years, since the Mesolithic period in Ware (making Ware one of the oldest continuously occupied sites in Europe). Settlement continued through the Neolithic period, with evidence of occupation sites, enclosures, long barrows and even an unusual dog cemetery in the region. Although occupied, the area had a relatively low population in the Neolithic and early Bronze Age, perhaps because of its heavy, relatively poorly drained soil. Nevertheless, just south of present-day Ware and Hertford there is some evidence of an increase in the population, with typical round huts and farming activity having been found at a site called Foxholes Farm. There is no evidence of settlement at Hertford itself from this period, although Ware and perhaps Hertford seem to have been occupied during Roman times.

In the Iron Age, a Celtic tribe called the Catuvellauni occupied Hertfordshire. Their main settlement (or oppidum) was Verlamion on the River Ver (near present-day St Albans). Other &quot;oppida&quot; in Hertfordshire include sites at Cow Roast near Tring, Wheathampstead, Welwyn, Braughing, and Baldock. Hertfordshire contains several Iron Age hill forts, including the largest example in Eastern England at Ravensburgh Castle in Hexton.

There is a wealth of Iron Age burial sites in Hertfordshire, making it a place of international importance in Iron Age study. The large number of sites of all types indicates dense and complex settlement patterns immediately prior to the Roman invasion.

===The Roman Invasion of Britain===

In 55 BCE when the Romans first attempted to invade Britain, the Catuvellauni (which is Brythonic for &quot;Expert Warrior&quot;) were the largest British tribe. Caesar&#x27;s report to the Senate said that &quot;Cassivellaun&quot; (Cassivellaunus) was leader of the Britons, and Cassivellaunus&#x27; headquarters were near Wheathampstead in Hertfordshire. On Caesar&#x27;s second invasion attempt in 54 BCE, Cassivellaunus led the British defensive forces. The Romans besieged him at Wheathampstead, and partly because of the defection of the Trinovantes (whose King Cassivellaunus had had murdered), the Catuvellauni were forced to surrender. However, after the siege of Wheathampstead, Caesar returned to Rome without leaving a garrison.

Cunobelinus became king of the Catuvellauni in 9 or 10 CE and ruled for about thirty years, conquering such a large area of Britain that the Roman writer Suetonius called him &quot;Britannorum Rex&quot; ( &quot;King of Britain&quot;). He built Beech Bottom Dyke, a defensive earthwork, at St Albans, which may be related to another Iron Age defensive earthwork, the Devil&#x27;s Dyke, at Cassivellaunus&#x27; headquarters in nearby Wheathampstead. The Romans defeated the Catuvellauni again in July 43 CE and this time, garrisoned Britain. When the Romans took over, their settlement, laid out in 49 CE, became known as Verulamium. Alban, a Roman army officer who became Britain&#x27;s first Christian martyr after his arrest at Chantry Island, died in the 3rd or 4th century and gave his name to the modern town of St Albans. Verulamium became one of Roman Britain&#x27;s major cities, the third-largest and the only to be granted self-governing status. Strong though Verulamium&#x27;s defences may have been, they were not enough to stop Boudica, who burned the city in 61 CE. Verulamium was rebuilt, with defences enclosing a site of some and was occupied into the 5th century.

A number of Roman Roads run through Hertfordshire including Watling Street and Ermine Street. The ancient trackway, the Icknield Way also runs through Hertfordshire. These are three of the &quot;four highways&quot; of medieval England (the other being the Fosse Way, which does not run through Hertfordshire) which were still the main routes through the country more than a thousand years later. The first Roman Road to be built was the Military Way, constructed very early in the Roman conquest to speed the troops&#x27; access north. Later, Ermine Street would be built directly on top of it.

===Hertfordshire in the Early Middle Ages===
After the Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain, the Hertfordshire area formed parts of the Kingdom of Mercia and the Kingdom of Essex. The main early Saxon tribes there seem to have been the &quot;Hicce&quot;, &quot;Brahhingas&quot; and &quot;Wæclingas&quot;. Place names tend to derive from Celtic rather than Saxon, and there is a &quot;singular lack of Early Saxon place names.&quot; The Synod of Hertford, which was the first national Synod of the English Church, took place on 26 September 672–3. It was at this Synod that the &quot;question of Easter&quot; was settled, and the church agreed how to calculate the date of Easter. The Synod also marked the end of the conflict between the Celtic Church and the Romanised church introduced by Saint Augustine.

King Offa of Mercia (died 796) built a church at Hitchin in Hertfordshire, but it burned down in 910 CE and the monks moved to St Albans. Offa defeated Beornred of Mercia at Pirton, near Hitchin and gave his name to the village of Offley (&quot;Offa&#x27;s Lea&quot;). Some sources (including Matthew Paris, who was a monk at St Albans) suggest he died at Offley, though he was buried fifteen miles away in Bedford. One of Offa&#x27;s last acts was to found St Albans Abbey.

===Origins of the county===
The word Hertfordshire (Saxon &quot;Heorotfordscir&quot; or &quot;Heorotfordscír&quot;) is attested from 866. The first reference (as &quot;Heoroford&quot;) in the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; is for 1011, but the county&#x27;s true origins lie in the 10th century, when Edward the Elder established two &quot;burhs&quot; in Hertford in 912 and 913 respectively.
Hertfordshire did not exist in any practical sense in the late 9th century. In the war between Saxon and Norseman, Hertfordshire was on the front line. When, after the Saxon victory in the Battle of Ethandun in 878, the Saxon King Alfred the Great and Norse King Guthrum the Old agreed to partition England between them, the dividing line between their territories split what was to become Hertfordshire almost through the middle, along the line of the River Lea and then along Watling Street. Their agreement survives in the Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum which establishes the Danelaw&#x27;s extent. It seems the land now comprising Hertfordshire was then partly in the Kingdom of Essex (nominally under Norse control, though still populated by Saxons) and partly in the Kingdom of Mercia (which remained Saxon).

Alfred was also responsible for building weirs on the River Lea at Hertford (Saxon &quot;Heorotford&quot;, ford used by deer) and Ware (Saxon &quot;Waras&quot;, weir), presumably to prevent Viking ships coming upriver. King Edgar the Peaceful is credited with making Hertford the capital of the surrounding shire, presumably between 973 and 975 CE.

==Early Middle Ages==
Alfred died in 899, and his son Edward the Elder worked with Alfred&#x27;s son-in-law, Æthelred, and daughter, Æthelflæd, to re-take parts of southern England from the Norse. During these campaigns he built the two &quot;burhs&quot; of Hertford as already noted. Their sites have not been found, and probably lie beneath the streets of Hertford itself. From Hertford, together with Stafford, Tamworth and Witham, Edward and Æthelflæd pushed the Danes back to Northumbria in a series of battles. Anglo-Saxon Hertford is an example of town planning as demonstrated by its organised rectangular grid street pattern.

There is considerable evidence of a mint in Hertford at this period. Edward the Martyr (from 975 to 978), Æthelred the Unready (from 978 to 1016) and Knut the Great (from 1016 to 1035) all had coins struck there. The mint itself has not been found, but many coins exist. Over 90% of these coins were found on the Continent or in Scandinavia, which may suggest they were used for payment of Danegeld.

The St Brice&#x27;s Day massacre of 1002 probably started at Welwyn in Hertfordshire. The massacre was to be a slaughter of the Norse in England, including women and children. One of those executed was Gunhilde, the sister of King Sweyn Forkbeard of Denmark. He invaded England next year in retaliation. Forkbeard&#x27;s assault on England lasted ten years, until 1013, when Æthelred fled to the continent. Forkbeard was crowned King of England on Christmas Day, but only reigned for five weeks before dying. Æthelred returned briefly and unsuccessfully until 1016, at which time he was succeeded by Forkbeard&#x27;s son Knut, who granted the Royal Manor of Hitchin to his second in command, Earl Tovi.

==High Middle Ages==

After the Norman Invasion, Edgar the Ætheling (the successor to Harold Godwinson) surrendered to William the Conqueror at Berkhamsted. William created the manor of Berkhamsted, and bestowed it on Robert, Count of Mortain, who was his half-brother. From Robert&#x27;s son William de Mortain it passed to King Henry I, and is still owned by the royal family. Henry held court there in 1123.

The Domesday Book, completed in 1086, lists 168 settlements in Hertfordshire. Hertfordshire&#x27;s population grew quickly from then until the Black Death reached the county in 1349. The Norman church at St Albans Abbey was finished in 1088.

Hertfordshire had a conflicted relationship with the King during the High Middle Ages. Like most counties in the south-east, most of Hertfordshire was in private (i.e. non-royal) ownership during the High Middle Ages. Royal land comprised about 7% of the county&#x27;s area. The first Earl of Hertford, Gilbert de Clare, was so titled in 1138. He bore one of the first two sets of heraldic arms in England: three gold chevrons on a red shield. His grandson Richard de Clare once offered King John £100 in respect of legal proceedings concerning his inheritance, but then during the First Barons War he sided with the Barons against the King. Richard became one of the twenty-five Barons sworn to enforce Magna Carta, for which he was excommunicated in 1215.

Thomas Becket, who became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1161, held the honour of Berkhamsted Castle from 1155 until 1163. King Henry II celebrated Christmas there in 1163.

Around this time, motte-and-bailey castles were built in Great Wymondley, Pirton and Therfield. Watford was founded in the 12th century, probably as a result of a market and church set up there by the Abbot of St Albans. In 1130, the earliest Pipe Roll shows that King Henry I&#x27;s Queen Consort Adeliza owned property in the county.

The first draft of Magna Carta was written at St Albans Abbey in 1213. It contained significant provisions still in force to this day, including the principle of &quot;habeas corpus&quot; (which was first invoked in court in 1305). Two years later, King John was in St Albans when he learned of the Archbishop of Canterbury&#x27;s suspension. Though John agreed to Magna Carta, he did not adhere to it, and Hertfordshire was the main battlefield in the civil war that followed. On 16 December 1216, during the First Barons&#x27; War, Hertford Castle surrendered after a siege from Dauphin Louis (later Louis VIII of France), whom the English barons had invited to England to replace John as King. Berkhamsted Castle surrendered around the same time.

In winter 1217, royalist forces plundered St Albans, took captives and extorted £100 from the Abbot, who feared the abbey would be burned.

In 1261 King Henry III held parliament in the county. In 1295, another parliament was held in St Albans, and in 1299, King Edward I gave Hertford Castle to his wife Margaret of France on her wedding day.

Hertfordshire is largely on a clay sub-soil, and much of its land, though rich, is &quot;heavy&quot; and not well-suited to crop cultivation with a medieval plough. However, the county did grow good barley which later became important for the brewing trade. Hertfordshire developed more through commerce than through agriculture which drove most of England&#x27;s economy during this period.

In the High Middle Ages, the county was relatively urbanised by medieval standards, but because towns follow roads and Hertfordshire had many small roads rather than a few large ones, there was no large conurbation.

Commerce grew in Hertfordshire from the start of the 12th century; the number of markets and fairs rose steadily from about 1100 until the Black Death. During the 13th century, Hertfordshire&#x27;s commerce grew still further. The county traded in butter and cheese, and to a lesser extent meat, hides and leather. Much of this produce was bound for London. The county also developed its inns and other services for travellers to and from London.

The Knights Templar built Baldock, starting around 1140. In 1185, a survey of the Knights&#x27; holdings showed Baldock had 122 tenants on of land and several skilled craftsmen. King John granted the Knights a fair and market at Baldock in 1199, to be held annually. It began on St Matthew&#x27;s Day and lasted five days in all. At around the same time, the leatherworking trade was prominent in Hitchin.

===An English pope===
Nicholas Breakspear, the only Englishman ever to have been elected Pope, was born on a farm in Bedmond or Abbots Langley in Hertfordshire, probably around 1100. He was baptised in Abbots Langley. Nicholas was refused permission to become a monk at St Albans, but his career does not seem to have suffered for this, and he was unanimously elected Pope on 2 December 1154, taking the papal name Adrian IV. He died in 1159. He was the Pope who placed Rome under an interdict, and is famous for his alleged Donation of Ireland to the English throne.

==Late Middle Ages==
In 1302, King Edward I granted Kings Langley to the Prince of Wales. King Edward II&#x27;s &quot;favourite&quot;, Piers Gaveston, loved the palace at Kings Langley and he was buried there after his death in 1312. Edmund of Langley, the first Duke of York and founder of the House of York, was born in Kings Langley on 5 June 1341 and died there on 1 August 1402.

Richard of Wallingford, the mathematician and astronomer, became Abbot of St Albans in 1326. He is regarded as the father of modern trigonometry.

Hertford Castle was used as a gaol for a series of important captives during the Hundred Years&#x27; War. This was actually a series of separate wars that lasted a total of 116 years, between 1337 and 1453. The Plantagenet kings of England fought the Valois kings of France, almost entirely on French soil. Queen Isabella was imprisoned by her son, the King, in Hertford Castle in 1330, as were King David II of Scotland and his queen in 1346, after the Battle of Neville&#x27;s Cross. King John II of France was imprisoned there in 1359 in considerable luxury.

The Black Death midway through the 14th century massively reduced Hertfordshire&#x27;s population. The number of residents probably fell by 30%–50%, and likely took until the 16th century to recover. This meant many of the settlements in Hertfordshire were abandoned, particularly in the north and east of the county where farm yields were poor. Near Tring, a cluster of deserted medieval villages can still be seen. However, the residents who survived grew richer. The reduced population meant workers could demand higher wages and better conditions, despite laws such as the Ordinance of Labourers of 1349 and the Statute of Labourers of 1351. These changed economic conditions contributed to the Peasants&#x27; Revolt in 1381, in which Hertfordshire&#x27;s people were deeply involved. (Perhaps confusingly, another man called Richard of Wallingford was one of revolt leader Wat Tyler&#x27;s principal allies. This is not the same man as the Abbot of St Albans.)

After Wat Tyler had been caught and executed, King Richard II went to St Albans to quell the rebels. Richard&#x27;s body was buried at Kings Langley church in Hertfordshire in 1400, but he was moved to Westminster Abbey in 1413, next to his wife Anne. That same year, King Henry IV appointed his knight Hugh de Waterton to Berkhamsted Castle to supervise his children John and Philippa.
King Henry IV moved his government temporarily to St Albans early in his reign for fear of public opinion in London. He gave the castle and honour of Hertford to Edmund, Earl of Stafford, and his wife Anne. Edmund was killed at the Battle of Shrewsbury in 1403. King Henry V married Catherine of France on 2 June 1420, and gave Hertford Castle to her.

In 1413, King Henry V kept Easter at Kings Langley. He gave the alm of a groat to the poor. Henry Chichele, the Archbishop of Canterbury, visited Barnet in 1423. No bells rang, and the archbishop took offence at his poor welcome. When he returned in 1426, the church doors were 
sealed against him.

Three important battles of the Wars of the Roses took place in Hertfordshire. At the First Battle of St Albans on 22 May 1455, which was the first major battle of the Wars of the Roses, Richard of York and Neville the Kingmaker defeated the Lancastrians, killed their leader, Edmund Beaufort and captured King Henry VI. The Lancastrians recaptured the King at the Second Battle of St Albans on 12 February 1461. While he was a prisoner of the Yorkists, in 1459, Henry VI kept Easter at St Albans Abbey. He gave his best gown to the prior, but the gift seems to have been regretted and the treasurer later bought it back for fifty marks.

The Battle of Barnet took place on 14 April 1471. Neville the Kingmaker advanced on London. He camped on Hadley Green, and King Edward IV&#x27;s army met him there. After confusion in the early morning mist, in which the Yorkists seem to have ended up fighting each other, the Lancastrians won the battle. The Kingmaker was captured and executed, and Edward&#x27;s authority was never again seriously challenged.

England&#x27;s oldest surviving pub is in Hertfordshire and dates to this period. Ye Olde Fighting Cocks, which is in St Albans, was rebuilt in 1485. Some of the foundation stones are even older, allegedly going back to the 8th century.

;First English paper and printing industry
One of the first three printing presses in England was in St Albans. England&#x27;s first paper mill, which was the property of John Tate, stood in Hertford opposite today&#x27;s County Hospital from 1494; visited by Henry VII twice and producing a star and circle watermark on some versions of the papal bull recognising his right to reign over England.

==Renaissance==
The long Elizabethan peace, and turmoil in Europe, conspired to raise English commercial power during the Renaissance. European refugees also contributed to English wealth. London was the centre of this new power, and Hertfordshire&#x27;s commerce benefited accordingly.

In November 1524, Catherine of Aragon held court at Hertford Castle. On 3 May 1547, King Edward VI granted his sister Mary the manor and castle of Hertford, tolls from the bridge at Ware, and the manor of Hertingfordbury.

Under Mary, who as Queen earned the sobriquet &quot;Bloody Mary&quot;, three &quot;heretics&quot; (that is, Protestants who refused to become catholic) were burnt at the stake in Hertfordshire. William Hale, Thomas Fust, and George Tankerville, were executed at Barnet, Ware, and St Albans respectively. In 1554, Queen Mary granted the town of Hertford its first charter for a fee of thirteen shillings and fourpence, due annually at Michaelmas.

Queen Elizabeth I lived at Hatfield Palace near Hatfield as a girl. When plague ravaged London, she held parliaments at Hertford Castle in 1564 and 1581. The law courts moved to St Albans for the same reason. During her reign, Hertfordshire was specifically commended for its soldiers&#x27; efficiency. In the mobilisation of 1588 for the Anglo-Spanish War, the county sent twenty-five lances and sixty light horse to Brentwood, a thousand infantry to Tilbury, a thousand to Stratford-at-Bow, and five hundred to guard Her Majesty&#x27;s person. The Arms of Hertfordshire were granted next year. In 1602 founder of Hartford (Connecticut), Samuel Stone was born in Fore Street, Hertford.


King James I was often in Hertfordshire and had several works carried out in the county. He built Theobalds Park, enclosing a large tract of southern Hertfordshire in a wall. Parts of the wall still exist. He also had a hand in creating the New River, which was the brainchild of Welsh entrepreneur, Hugh Myddelton: an artificial watercourse that predated the building of England&#x27;s canal network by over a century.

James I, who was a confirmed dog-lover, also built a huge kennel (about long) and dog-yard (over half an acre in size) at Royston. He seems to have loved Royston and spent considerable time there, hunting and feasting and enjoying himself—so much so that his favourite dog, Jowler, returned one evening with a note tied to his collar. The note read: &quot;Good Mr Jowler, we pray you to speak to the King (for he hears you every day and so he doth not us) that it will please His Majesty to go back to London, for else the country will be undone; all our provision is spent already and we are not able to entertain him longer.&quot;

During the civil war, the county was mainly parliamentarian. St Albans was an especially staunch parliamentary stronghold. In the course of this war, deserters and mutineers among the various encamped armies ravaged the Chilterns, plundered Ashridge, rifled Little Gaddesden Church and broke open its tombs. In 1645, a dozen men of Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s New Model Army were hanged for outrages against the people of the county.

In 1647, the parliamentary army, still unpaid after their victory in the First English Civil War, camped on Thriploe Heath near Royston. They wrote to Parliament demanding their pay. This led to a clash between Cromwell&#x27;s army and the Levellers at Cockbush Field, near Ware, on 15 November 1647. Cromwell captured and imprisoned the Levellers&#x27; &quot;agitators&quot; and a number were sentenced to death, though only one was actually executed.

After the Great Fire of London, many children were sent to Hertfordshire: 62 were sent to Ware, and 56 to Hertford. A few years later the mayor and people of Hertford petitioned King Charles II to confirm, amend and expand the town&#x27;s charters. Enquiries were made as to whether
anyone would object, and three prominent men did, but the attorney general dismissed their objections on grounds of malice in 1680. The town henceforth had its own coroner, who doubled as the town clerk, and both the court-day and market-day were changed so as not to coincide with nearby markets at Ware, Hoddesdon or Hatfield.

In 1683, there was a plot to assassinate Charles II and his brother as he passed through Rye House in Hertfordshire. Unfortunately for the plotters, the royal party was early, so the opportunity was missed; when the plot was discovered, it became a pretext for a purge of the Whig leaders.

==Modern era==

In the last two centuries, Hertfordshire&#x27;s population has multiplied tenfold. Around the end of the 18th century, its population was around 95,000. In 1821, it was just under 130,000. In 1881 it was just over 203,000, and by 1921 it was just over 333,000. By the 2001 census, it was 1,033,977. During the 18th century brewing became an important industry in Hertfordshire.

Smallpox broke out in Hertford gaol in 1729, and spread into the town. The next year, smallpox hit Hitchin, killing 158 people. The River Lee Navigation Act 1738 (12 Geo. 2. c. 32) led to the river being improved, becoming navigable as far as Ware. Locks were built in Ware, Broxbourne, and &quot;Stanstead&quot; (presumably Stanstead Abbotts rather than Stansted Mountfitchet, which is not on the Lea). By 1797, the Grand Junction Canal (now called the Grand Union Canal) was being cut. Its highest point is the Tring Summit in Hertfordshire, which was formed in 1799. Because a canal barge can hold so much more than a wagon, the waterways expansions increased the quantity of supplies that could reach London (and the amount of refuse and manure that could be carted away).

Mobilisation for the Seven Years&#x27; War affected Hertfordshire. In 1756, £350 was paid to the inns and public houses of Ware for the troops staying with them. The next year, Pitt&#x27;s army reforms made Hertfordshire liable to provide 560 officers and men.

The county also contributed soldiers to the French Revolutionary Wars. On 7 May 1794, lists opened for the Hertfordshire Yeomanry Cavalry Regiment, which comprised five troops of cavalry. The Loyal Hemel Hempstead Volunteers formed in 1797. Two further troops of volunteers were raised in 1798, at Borehamwood and Sawbridgeworth, and the same year, the Hitchin Volunteers were also raised, but their duty was only to defend land within of Hitchin.

In 1795, a Dr Walker wrote a report on agriculture and forestry in the county. He said &quot;Herts is justly deemed the first and best corn county in the kingdom&quot;, an assessment that may not be free from local bias. It nevertheless shows how more advanced farming techniques and soil improvement programmes had enabled farmers to work Hertfordshire&#x27;s &quot;heavier&quot; soils to better effect since the Saxon–Norse wars.

Thanks to a rapidly increasing population and improved record-keeping practices, the volume of paper records for Hertfordshire in the 19th and 20th centuries is huge. Many of these documents are written or printed on paper made locally, at a time when paper-making joined brewing as another dominant industry in the county.

In 1809, John Dickinson purchased Apsley Mills in Hemel Hempstead for his newly patented paper-making machine. In a dispute with the Society of Paper-Makers in 1821, he dismissed the men involved and trained replacements. By 1825, Apsley and Nash Mills in Hemel Hempstead were using steam power to produce paper. Dickinson patented his silk threadpaper in 1829, which was used, among other things, for Exchequer Bonds, and had to be made under supervision from two excise men. He built Croxley Mills, near Rickmansworth, in 1830 and Abbots Hill, Nash Mills, in 1836.

In 1840, the Uniform Penny Post came in. Dickinson made paper for the stamps, and also for the Mulready envelopes. He built a private gas works at Apsley in 1851. In March 1886, John Dickinson &amp; Co. Ltd. was incorporated with £500,000 in capital and of glass houses. By 1900, the company had of glass houses in the Cheshunt area.

Rothamsted Research, previously known as the Experimental Station and then the Institute of Arable Crops Research, is one of the oldest agricultural research institutions in the world, at its Harpenden site. It was founded by a fertiliser inventor in 1843.
The 19th century was also a busy period for the military. Ten corps of Volunteer Infantry were formed in 1803. In 1804, the clock tower in St Albans signalled news of the Battle of Trafalgar by semaphore. The Duke of Wellington earned the freedom of the borough of St Albans after Napoleon&#x27;s defeat in 1814. The Hertfordshire Regiment became the fourth battalion of the Bedfordshire Regiment in 1891, and in March 1900, the 42nd (Hertfordshire) Company of the Imperial Yeomanry landed at Cape Town. Cecil Rhodes, who founded De Beers and the state of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), was born in South Street, Bishops Stortford, in 1853. The house is still standing, and has been adapted into a museum. He spent much of his youth in South Africa, but returned to Bishops Stortford in 1873.

The first branch railway line in England was the Aylesbury one, which opened in 1839. It had a station in Hertfordshire, at Marston Gate. Another rail line grew out from London towards Cambridge, reaching Broxbourne in 1840, Harlow in 1841, and Bishops Stortford in 1842. A branch to Hertford opened in 1843. The first Hatfield train crash took place on Boxing Day, 1870. The London Underground rail line reached Rickmansworth in 1887.

==Twentieth century==
===Pre World War II===
The two flagship garden cities of Letchworth and Welwyn were central to the development of town planning in England. The first Garden City Company formed in 1903, with £300,000 of capital, and by 1914, Letchworth had a population of around 10,000. Ebenezer Howard bought nearly in 1919, and the first house in Welwyn Garden City was occupied in 1920. The town&#x27;s official date of founding was 29 April.

In the First World War, the Hertfordshire Yeomanry mobilised in September 1914 and were almost immediately deployed to Egypt. The 2nd London Division of the Territorial Force had their headquarters at St Albans, and the North Midland Territorial Division was billeted there as well. The 1/1st Hertfordshire Regiment landed at Le Havre in November, and saw action in the Ypres Salient that month.

The Hertfordshire Volunteer regiment formed on 15 May 1915. On 13 October of that year, a Zeppelin raid hit North Road in Hertford, destroying houses there. In 1916, the Hertfordshire Regiment was transferred to 39th Division and fought at St Julien. Two Victoria Crosses (&quot;VC&quot;) were awarded to Hertfordshire men in 1916: one to Corporal Alfred Alexander Burt and one to Lieutenant William Leefe Robinson, who shot down the first German airship of WWI, a Schutte-Lanz over Cuffley. Second Lieutenant Wulfstan Tempest shot down a Zeppelin on 2 October of that year, and it came down in Potters Bar. The 1st Battalion of the Hertfordshire Regiment fought near Achiet-le-Grant in 1918, and then at the Battle of Havrincourt. It also fought in the advance to Ghissignies. Hertfordshire&#x27;s last VC of the First World War was awarded in December 1918, after the war had finished: a posthumous VC for Lieutenant Frank Young of Hitchin, who was killed on 18 September 1918, aged 23.

With the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, 1st and 2nd Battalions of the Hertfordshire Regiment were mobilised. Together with the 6th Battalion of the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment, they made up 162nd Infantry Brigade of the East Anglian Division. Second Battalion would later be at Ver-sur-Mer in Normandy in support of the D-Day landings.

In May 1940, a public meeting at County Hall, Hertford (which was then newly built, having only opened in 1939) was held to consider forming the Hertfordshire Local Defence Volunteers. Nineteen companies formed at once. They became the Hertfordshire Home Guard in December of that year.

In 1942 the 191st (Hertfordshire and Essex Yeomanry) Field Regiment, Royal Artillery formed for an anticipated campaign in Northern Europe. Hertfordshire was central to aircraft manufacture in the Second World War. De Havilland designed their Mosquito in Hatfield and constructed them at Leavesden, together with Halifax bombers.

Many RAF pilots were trained at Panshanger. From 1940, No. 2 (AC) Squadron was stationed at RAF Sawbridgeworth, with the purpose of mounting tactical reconnaissance sorties over occupied Europe. Initially it operated the Westland Lysander, before re-equipping with the more capable Curtiss Tomahawk and North American Mustang aircraft. About 4000 bombs, 107 V-1 flying bombs, and 47 V-2 rockets fell on Hertfordshire during the Second World War. American Flying Fortresses bombers of the 398th Bombardment Group (Heavy) mounting 195 combat missions against targets on the Continent from RAF Nuthampstead. The United States Army Air Forces used RAF Bovingdon as a training station, while the US VIII Fighter Command Headquarters was at RAF Bushey Hall.

===Post-War===
After the war, Stevenage was the first town to be redeveloped under the New Towns Act 1946. Hatfield remained closely connected with the aircraft industry, and about 10% of the aircraft workers in England worked in Hertfordshire in the 1960s. The de Havilland Comet was developed in the town. The London Government Act 1963 created an enlarged Greater London in 1965 which took Barnet from Hertfordshire, but in exchange, the county gained Potters Bar and South Mimms from Middlesex. The county&#x27;s boundaries were revised in the reforms accompanying the Local Government Act 1972, at which time Royston became fully a part of Hertfordshire. Camfield House, Hatfield, belonged to Barbara Cartland during this period, and Beatrix Potter lived there as well. The county&#x27;s boundaries were revised again in 1993, when Elstree became fully a part of Hertfordshire, gaining some land from Greater London (historically Middlesex).

During the Second World War, sculptor Henry Moore moved to the village of Perry Green in Hertfordshire when his former home was bombed. The Henry Moore Foundation still operates from the village.

The character of Hertfordshire changed in the later part of the 20th century. In 1992, it was resolved to close the aircraft manufacturing site in Hatfield. At the start of the 20th century, 83% of the workforce were involved in agriculture, but by the end, less than 1% remained so. Only one brewery, McMullens, is still open and there are no remaining commercial maltings or mills. Nowadays, Hertfordshire has become a service and administrative centre containing the head offices of several important companies (see here) and a dormitory for London. A growing trend is research and development, notably for Glaxo and at the University of Hertfordshire which, from relatively humble beginnings as Hatfield Polytechnic, now has over 23,000 students.

On 17 October 2000, a major rail crash took place in Hatfield. Criticism of Railtrack after the accident was rife, and the company had to pay over £700 million in compensation. It ceased trading owing to insolvency in 2002.

The fire of 11 December 2005 at Buncefield, Hemel Hempstead, was a major disaster. Hertfordshire&#x27;s Chief Fire Officer, Roy Wilsher, said it was &quot;possibly the largest in peacetime Europe.&quot; About sixty million gallons of petrol burned, the largest of the explosions measured just under 2.5 on the Richter scale, and the smoke darkened skies in neighbouring towns for two days before it could be extinguished.

In a long, gradual decline in agriculture, fishing and forestry, the 2011 census recorded 1,878 Hertfordshire workers employed in this sector.

==Conservation==
Hertfordshire has a larger number of listed buildings and village greens pre-dating 1700 than Greater London, see for example Grade II* listed buildings in Hertfordshire which tend to be in this category. All 10 District (or Borough) Councils have designated conservation areas.

==Crime and criminals==
King Stephen held court at St Albans in 1143. He arrested Geoffrey de Mandeville, who held shrievalty of London, Middlesex and Hertfordshire from the pretender Empress Matilda. De Mandeville surrendered his castles, including the one he had recently built at South Mimms, and went on to become a noted outlaw and bandit.

A seventeenth-century highwaywoman, called the &quot;Wicked Lady&quot;, preyed on travellers on Nomansland Common along Watling Street to the far end of Wales. This may have been Lady Katherine Ferrers of Markyate Cell 1634-1660 who was married to a detached husband Thomas Fanshaw(e) and whose body was carried across the county to be buried at Ware. By the time of an 1840 fire at the large house, a folklore rhyme had arisen:&lt;br&gt;
Near the cell there is a well&lt;br&gt;
Near the well there is a tree&lt;br&gt;
Near the tree the treasure be

In one of the last witch trials recorded, Jane Wenham, of Walkern, was convicted of witchcraft in 1712. The accused was over the age of 70 at the time. Queen Anne pardoned Wenham, who &quot;lived on in a cottage at Gilston&quot;. In 1751, John and Ruth Osborne of Gubblecot, Tring, were accused of witchcraft. A mob dragged them through the village pond until Ruth drowned. One Thomas Colley, a chimney sweep and apparently the ringleader, was hanged; but the people disapproved of the hanging and did not come to watch.

There are records for Hitchin court from the 17th century. William Bogdani wrote in 1744:
 In 1783 the vestry organised a watch to &quot;put a stop to the daring robberies almost nightly committed in or near the town.&quot; The next year Vincenzo Lunardi&#x27;s first balloon flight over Britain landed in Standon Green End where a stone commemorates the achievement.

Also in the late 18th century, Hertford&#x27;s branch of Woolworth&#x27;s (now closed) was formerly an inn called the Maiden Head. From this inn, Walter Clibborn, the &quot;murderous pie man of Hertford&quot;, operated. He pretended to be deaf, so that people would talk freely while he moved among them selling pies, overhearing their destinations and the location of their valuables; and, with his sons who blackened their faces, would ambush them later that night. Clibborn was shot dead in 1782 by one George North on the Datchworth to Branfield road.

In 1823, the murder of William Weare in Radlett became known as the first trial by newspaper. The murderer, who was the Mayor of Norwich&#x27;s son John Thurtell, a notorious gambler, pleaded that the sensational newspaper coverage had prejudiced the court against him. It only took 20 minutes of deliberations for the jury to sentence him to death by hanging. The crowds that gathered for the trial were so large that the judge had trouble getting to the courthouse through the gridlocked streets, and about 15,000 people attended the hanging itself.

The murder of Mercy Nicholls in Railway Street, Hertford, in 1899, ultimately led to a major re-organisation of Hertfordshire&#x27;s police force.

==Authors of Hertfordshire==
Jane Austen (1775–1817) wrote about Hertfordshire. &quot;Pride and Prejudice&quot; is set in a fictionalised Hertfordshire. Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626), writer and Lord Chancellor, lived at Gorhambury near St Albans and is buried at St Michael&#x27;s. J. M. Barrie (1860–1937) based his character Peter Pan on Peter Llewelyn Davies, his friend&#x27;s son, after visiting their family in Berkhamsted. Dame Juliana Berners (1388-?) was the author of the &quot;Boke of St Albans&quot;, a guide to hunting, hawking and heraldry, which was printed by Abbey Press in 1486. John Bunyan (1628–1688) was linked to Hitchin, and although he was gaoled outside the county in Bedford, he was a member of the Baptist Church at Kensworth (at that time in Hertfordshire, though now in Bedfordshire). He preached extensively in Hertfordshire. George Chapman (c. 1559 – 1634), a poet and playwright remembered for his translations of the Iliad and the Odyssey, was born in Hitchin and lived there. Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343 – 1400) was Clerk of the Works at Berkhamsted Castle in 1389.

Sir Henry Chauncy (1632–1719), known for his &quot;Historical Antiquities of Hertfordshire&quot; (pub. 1700), was made first Recorder of Hertford in 1680. Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834) was educated at Christ&#x27;s Hospital, Hitchin. William Cowper (1731–1800), poet, was born and lived in Berkhamsted. He was later institutionalised in an asylum in St Albans. Charles Dickens (1812–1870) was often in Hertfordshire (not least to visit his friend Edward Bulwer Lytton, who is mentioned below), and significant elements of his novels are set there. Sir Richard Fanshawe (1608–1666) was born at Ware Park and his memorial tablet is in Ware. E. M. Forster (1879-?) lived at Rook&#x27;s Nest House between Stevenage and Weston. William Godwin (1756–1836), an anarchist philosopher, was a Chapel Minister in Ware; his feminist wife Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797), author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, gave him a daughter, Mary Shelley (1797–1851), who wrote Frankenstein. Graham Greene (1904–1991) was educated at Berkhamsted Grammar School, where his father was headmaster. Julian Grenfell (1888–1915), the First World War poet, lived in Panshanger. Lady Caroline Lamb (1785–1827) lived at Brocket Hall and wrote &quot;Glenarvon&quot; there after her unhappy love affair with Lord Byron. She is buried in Hatfield.

Nathaniel Lee (c. 1653 – 1692), poet and playwright, was born in Hatfield where his father was rector. Edward Bulwer-Lytton (1803–1873) lived at the family seat of Knebworth House where he often entertained Charles Dickens and Benjamin Disraeli, among others. John Scott, the Quaker poet and writer, moved to Great Amwell in 1740. He gave Amwell its name (after Emma&#x27;s Well, which is nearby and now dry; the well has part of John Scott&#x27;s poem &quot;Emma&quot; inscribed near it.) Nobel prizewinning playwright George Bernard Shaw lived in Hertfordshire until his death in 1950. Anthony Trollope (1815–1882) lived in Waltham Cross. Thomas Walsingham (?-1422), author of the &quot;Historia Anglicana&quot; and chronicler of the Peasants&#x27; Revolt, was a monk in St Albans Abbey in the early 15th century.

==Film-making in Hertfordshire==

Hertfordshire was the home of the pioneering British film maker Arthur Melbourne-Cooper, who was born in St Albans in 1874. He worked in Hertfordshire (but later what became the London Borough of Barnet), and witnessed the birth of the movies as an assistant/cameraman of Birt Acres (1854–1918). Acres, in 1895, co-developed the first British 35 mm moving picture camera under the guidance of British engineer R.W. Paul. Cooper, for the next 20 years, made contributions to the British moving picture industry. In 1908 Cooper set up the first permanent cinema in Hertfordshire, the Alpha Picture House in St Albans, and a cinema operated on this site for 87 years; the 1930s cinema building has recently been restored and re-opened as the Odyssey Cinema.

Elstree Studios nearby has risen to prominence; landmark films and television that have been produced there include the first and second Star Wars films (chronologically, i.e. Episodes IV and V), Indiana Jones, and Superman, The World&#x27;s End and British television shows Dancing on Ice, Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?, and Big Brother. Parts of the Harry Potter film series production took place at Leavesden Film Studios. Wild child was filmed in Balls park, Hertford.

==Nobles and politicians of Hertfordshire==
Æthelgifu was a Christian Saxon noblewoman who lived in the county in the late 980s, and her will is an important document for the study of the country as well as the county. It shows that Æthelgifu had three large estates in Hertfordshire. She left much of her land to the monks of St Albans, and her will shows the importance of Hitchin as a legal and administrative centre. Hitchin likely stayed in royal hands into the 10th century.

Edward Seymour was appointed Earl of Hertford in 1559. He married Lady Catherine Grey, who was Lady Jane Grey&#x27;s sister, in 1560. As Catherine was in line for the throne, she needed Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s permission to wed, and because this was not sought, the marriage was held in secret with Edward&#x27;s sister, Lady Jane Seymour, as the only witness. However, when Catherine became visibly pregnant, she had little option but to reveal her marriage and, at her request, Lord Robert Dudley told the Queen. An angry Elizabeth had the Earl and Countess of Hertford interned in the Tower of London and annulled their marriage.

Sarah Churchill, one of the most influential women in English history, was born as Sarah Jennings in St Albans in 1660. She married the Duke of Marlborough, rose to high favour with Queen Anne, then fell out with the queen and was dismissed, but returned to court after the queen&#x27;s death. She argued with many important people in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, grew very rich, toured the continent and built Blenheim Palace. Winston Churchill and Diana, Princess of Wales, were both descended from her.

A new title, the Earl of St Albans, was created in 1628 with a short and undistinguished history, effectively wiped out in the civil war shortly thereafter. Rather than revive the Earldom, Charles Beauclerk, illegitimate son of King Charles II and Nell Gwyn, was made &quot;Duke&quot; of St Albans in 1684. This peerage is as of 2025 on its fourteenth duke.

Robert Arthur Gascoyne Talbot Cecil, the Marquess of Salisbury, was born at Hatfield House on 3 February 1830. He also died there, 73 years later. In a distinguished political career, he would go on to become the prime minister three times and foreign secretary four times. William Lamb, (Viscount) Melbourne and again prime minister, lived in Hertfordshire and at one stage was its co-member of Parliament. He died at Brocket Hall.

After the Local Government Act 1888, the first county councillors in Hertfordshire were elected on 17 January 1889.

Arthur Balfour, though born in Scotland, was educated in Hertfordshire before going to university at Cambridge. He served as MP for Hertford before being elected as prime minister in 1902. He resigned as prime minister in 1905, at which time he was the first prime minister to own a car. He later served as foreign secretary, when his Balfour Declaration was an important episode in the leadup to the creation of Israel.

==See also==
* List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire

== References ==
;Footnotes
;Citations
;Bibliography

* &quot;Pope Adrian IV&quot;. The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York Encyclopedia Press Inc. 1913
* Bartlett, Robert. &quot;England Under the Norman and Angevin Kings&quot;, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000. 
* Burley, Elliott &amp; Watson. &quot;The Battles of St Albans&quot;, Barnsley: Pen &amp; Sword, 2007. 
* Burne, A.H. &quot;The Battlefields of England&quot;, London: Classic Penguin, 2002. 
* Castleden, Rodney. &quot;Neolithic Britain: new stone age sites of England, Scotland, and Wales&quot;, Routledge, 1992. 
* Cecil, Lady G. &quot;Life of Robert, Marquis of Salisbury&quot;, London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1922.
* Churchill, Winston. &quot;A History of the English Speaking Peoples&quot;, Vol. 1, London: Cassell and Co. 1956. 
* Cunliffe, Barry. &quot;Iron Age communities in Britain&quot;, Abingdon: Routledge 2005 (4th ed). 
* Darville, Timothy, Timby, Jane &amp; Stamper, Paul. &quot;England: an Oxford archaeological guide to sites from earliest times to AD 1600&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
* Dumville, David. &quot;Wessex and England from Alfred to Edgar: Six Essays in Political, Cultural and Ecclesiastical Revival.&quot; Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell &amp; Brewer, 1992. .
* Feiling, Keith. &quot;A History of England from the Coming of the English to 1918&quot;. Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1950. Citations from the 1972 Book Club Associates reprint.
* Jones-Baker, Doris (ed.) &quot;Hertfordshire in History&quot;. Originally published by Hertfordshire Local History Council, 1991; citations from the 2004 edition by the Hatfield: University of Hertfordshire Press. .
* Keynes, Simon in Lapidge, Michael. &quot;The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England.&quot; Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 1999. .
* Kiln, Robert &amp; Partridge, Clive. &quot;Ware and Hertford from Birth to Middle Age&quot;. Hertford: Castlemead Publications, 1994. 
* Lydekker, Richard. &quot;Hertfordshire.&quot; University Press, 1909; citations are from the 2008 scan on Google Books. .
* Page, Dr Frances M. &quot;History of Hertford.&quot; Hertford: Hertford Town Council, 1959; citations from the second edition of 1993. .
* Partington, Angela, ed. &quot;The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations.&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996. .
* Perkins, Thomas. &quot;Bell&#x27;s Cathedrals: The Cathedral Church of Saint Albans&quot;, London: George Bell &amp; Sons.
* Robinson, Gwennah. &quot;Barracuda Guide to County History, Vol III: Hertfordshire.&quot; Chesham: Barracuda Books Ltd., 1978. .
* Rook, Tony. &quot;A History of Hertfordshire.&quot; London: Philmore &amp; Co. Ltd., 1984. .
* Slater, Terry &amp; Goose, Nigel (eds.) &quot;A County of Small Towns.&quot; Hatfield: University of Hertfordshire Press, 1992. .
* Shields, Pamela. &quot;Royal Hertfordshire: Murders and Misdemeanours.&quot; Stroud: Amberley Publishing Plc, 2010. .
* Stenton, Sir Frank. &quot;Anglo-Saxon England&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1971. .
* Thorne, J. O. and Collocott, T. C. &quot;Chambers Biographical Dictionary&quot;. Edinburgh: W &amp; R Chambers Ltd., 1984. .
* Tomkins, Herbert. &quot;Hertfordshire&quot;. London: Methuen &amp; Co. Ltd., 1903, revised 1922; citations are from the scan on Project Gutenberg.
* Tomkins, Malcolm. &quot;So That Was Hertfordshire: Travellers&#x27; Jottings 1322–1887.&quot; Hertford: Hertfordshire Publications, 1998. .
* Turnor, Lewis. &quot;History of the Ancient Town and Borough of Hertford&quot;. Hertford: St Austin and Sons, 1830.
* Whitelock, Dorothy. (ed.) &quot;The Will of Æthelgifu.&quot; Oxford: Roxburghe Club, Oxford, 1968.
* Williamson, Tom. &quot;The Origins of Hertfordshire.&quot; Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2000. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5864810" start="0" end="13" title="History of Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="28" end="34" title="counties of England" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="127" end="133" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="197" end="207" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="457" end="470" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="628" end="656" title="historic counties of England" label="historic counties of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="978" end="989" title="Roman roads" label="Roman roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="1036" end="1053" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="1426" end="1448" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="1454" end="1475" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="1481" end="1498" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="1507" end="1524" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="1613" end="1629" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="1633" end="1647" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="1691" end="1705" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626738" start="1795" end="1816" title="List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire" label="abandoned settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="1915" end="1926" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="2077" end="2090" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2281" end="2291" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="2302" end="2306" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2369" end="2375" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2411" end="2420" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="2481" end="2488" title="tumulus" label="barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3070" end="3078" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3082" end="3088" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051384" start="3106" end="3118" title="Catuvellauni" label="Catuvellauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="3169" end="3176" title="oppidum" label="oppidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19857" start="3182" end="3191" title="Verlamion" label="Verlamion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225721" start="3199" end="3208" title="River Ver" label="River Ver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="3227" end="3236" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179413" start="3298" end="3307" title="Cow Roast" label="Cow Roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="3408" end="3417" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202738" start="3494" end="3500" title="Hexton" label="Hexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051384" start="3860" end="3872" title="Catuvellauni" label="Catuvellauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="3883" end="3892" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="3942" end="3949" title="Britons (historical)" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q363623" start="4028" end="4042" title="Cassivellaunus" label="Cassivellaunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947" start="4119" end="4133" title="Wheathampstead" label="Wheathampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q962760" start="4339" end="4350" title="Trinovantes" label="Trinovantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q437417" start="4537" end="4548" title="Cunobelinus" label="Cunobelinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="4592" end="4594" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="4691" end="4700" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879564" start="4781" end="4798" title="Beech Bottom Dyke" label="Beech Bottom Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11880367" start="4812" end="4821" title="Earthworks (engineering)" label="earthwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267125" start="4903" end="4920" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Dyke, Hertfordshire" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947" start="4969" end="4983" title="Wheathampstead" label="Wheathampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q19861" start="5157" end="5167" title="Verulamium" label="Verulamium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312982" start="5169" end="5174" title="Saint Alban" label="Alban"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072690" start="5266" end="5280" title="Chantry Island, Hertfordshire" label="Chantry Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="5353" end="5362" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184634" start="5577" end="5584" title="Boudica" label="Boudica"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="5731" end="5741" title="Roman Road" label="Roman Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="5779" end="5793" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="5798" end="5811" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656432" start="5839" end="5851" title="Icknield Way" label="Icknield Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="5975" end="5984" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="6370" end="6401" title="Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="6446" end="6463" title="Kingdom of Mercia" label="Kingdom of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110888" start="6472" end="6488" title="Kingdom of Essex" label="Kingdom of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6552" end="6557" title="Hicce" label="Hicce"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511701" start="6571" end="6581" title="Brahhingas" label="Brahhingas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163128" start="6598" end="6607" title="Wæclingas" label="Wæclingas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176418" start="6746" end="6763" title="Council of Hertford" label="Synod of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="6960" end="6988" title="Computus" label="calculate the date of Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="7101" end="7116" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233573" start="7124" end="7138" title="Offa of Mercia" label="Offa of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798" start="7168" end="7175" title="Hitchin" label="Hitchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q793179" start="7271" end="7289" title="Beornred of Mercia" label="Beornred of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198115" start="7293" end="7299" title="Pirton, Hertfordshire" label="Pirton"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="7412" end="7425" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q208257" start="7526" end="7533" title="Bedford" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="7793" end="7814" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187114" start="7899" end="7915" title="Edward the Elder" label="Edward the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q88034" start="7938" end="7942" title="burh" label="burh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9681" start="7953" end="7961" title="Hertford" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="8086" end="8091" title="Saxon" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="8096" end="8104" title="Norsemen" label="Norseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305651" start="8180" end="8198" title="Battle of Ethandun" label="Battle of Ethandun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="8222" end="8238" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q462987" start="8254" end="8269" title="Guthrum the Old" label="Guthrum the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q10675" start="8444" end="8453" title="River Lee (England)" label="River Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849620" start="8517" end="8545" title="Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum" label="Treaty of Alfred and Guthrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="8568" end="8575" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q110888" start="8661" end="8677" title="Kingdom of Essex" label="Kingdom of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="8762" end="8779" title="Mercia" label="Kingdom of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9681" start="8872" end="8880" title="Hertford" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="8935" end="8939" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="9029" end="9047" title="Edgar the Peaceful" label="Edgar the Peaceful"/>
<link wikidata="Q272209" start="9264" end="9272" title="Æthelred, Ealdorman of Mercia" label="Æthelred"/>
<link wikidata="Q235250" start="9288" end="9297" title="Æthelflæd" label="Æthelflæd"/>
<link wikidata="Q826782" start="9559" end="9567" title="Stafford" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q704864" start="9569" end="9577" title="Tamworth, Staffordshire" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861278" start="9582" end="9588" title="Witham" label="Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="9636" end="9647" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="9710" end="9723" title="town planning" label="town planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q192920" start="9860" end="9877" title="Edward the Martyr" label="Edward the Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="9897" end="9917" title="Æthelred the Unready" label="Æthelred the Unready"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="9941" end="9955" title="Knut the Great" label="Knut the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q301742" start="10181" end="10189" title="Danegeld" label="Danegeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q377753" start="10196" end="10224" title="St Brice&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="St Brice&amp;#x27;s Day massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972764" start="10253" end="10259" title="Welwyn" label="Welwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806686" start="10394" end="10402" title="Gunhilde" label="Gunhilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="10423" end="10438" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="10813" end="10817" title="Knut the Great" label="Knut"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="10928" end="10943" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215224" start="10945" end="10963" title="Edgar the Ætheling" label="Edgar the Ætheling"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="10982" end="10998" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="11015" end="11036" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="11040" end="11051" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q724235" start="11114" end="11138" title="Robert, Count of Mortain" label="Robert, Count of Mortain"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="11221" end="11233" title="Henry I of England" label="King Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="11312" end="11325" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="11451" end="11462" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="11495" end="11501" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q334377" start="11512" end="11527" title="St Albans Cathedral" label="St Albans Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647030" start="11836" end="11852" title="Marquess of Hertford" label="Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138270" start="11854" end="11870" title="Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Hertford" label="Gilbert de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="11932" end="11945" title="heraldry" label="heraldic arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151007" start="12008" end="12024" title="Richard de Clare, 3rd Earl of Hertford" label="Richard de Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="12133" end="12149" title="First Barons War" label="First Barons War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="12255" end="12266" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="12310" end="12323" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q614407" start="12724" end="12733" title="Pipe rolls" label="Pipe Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="12745" end="12757" title="Henry I of England" label="King Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q236994" start="12779" end="12786" title="Adeliza of Louvain" label="Adeliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="12837" end="12848" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q334377" start="12864" end="12879" title="St Albans Abbey" label="St Albans Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="12986" end="12999" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="13117" end="13141" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="13328" end="13350" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363520" start="13352" end="13367" title="Hertford Castle" label="Hertford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="13420" end="13440" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="13515" end="13526" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="13717" end="13731" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="13827" end="13840" title="King Edward I" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q235480" start="13874" end="13892" title="Marguerite of France (died 1318)" label="Margaret of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="14071" end="14077" title="plough" label="plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="14113" end="14119" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="14976" end="14991" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q789348" start="14998" end="15005" title="Baldock" label="Baldock"/>
<link wikidata="Q132845" start="15401" end="15420" title="Pope Adrian IV" label="Nicholas Breakspear"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="15468" end="15472" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q19777" start="15507" end="15521" title="Abbots Langley" label="Abbots Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="15863" end="15872" title="interdict" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319101" start="15904" end="15923" title="Laudabiliter" label="Donation of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="15978" end="15991" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19807" start="16000" end="16013" title="Kings Langley" label="Kings Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="16038" end="16052" title="Edward II of England" label="King Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="16083" end="16097" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q305002" start="16182" end="16199" title="Edmund of Langley, 1st Duke of York" label="Edmund of Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q337222" start="16211" end="16223" title="Duke of York" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q105285" start="16243" end="16256" title="House of York" label="House of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066873" start="16333" end="16355" title="Richard of Wallingford" label="Richard of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="16561" end="16584" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q106151" start="16691" end="16702" title="House of Plantagenet" label="Plantagenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="16731" end="16737" title="House of Valois" label="Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q228642" start="16787" end="16801" title="Isabella of France" label="Queen Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="16875" end="16888" title="David II of Scotland" label="King David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204399" start="16934" end="16964" title="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="16971" end="16988" title="John II of France" label="John II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626738" start="17254" end="17294" title="List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire" label="many of the settlements in Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999" start="17394" end="17399" title="Tring" label="Tring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355455" start="17620" end="17642" title="Ordinance of Labourers" label="Ordinance of Labourers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413849" start="17659" end="17687" title="Statute of Labourers 1351" label="Statute of Labourers of 1351"/>
<link wikidata="Q498871" start="17742" end="17763" title="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330244" start="17854" end="17895" title="Richard of Wallingford (constable)" label="another man called Richard of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q311820" start="17921" end="17930" title="Wat Tyler" label="Wat Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="18056" end="18071" title="Richard II of England" label="King Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19807" start="18145" end="18158" title="Kings Langley" label="Kings Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="18212" end="18229" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="18278" end="18291" title="Henry IV of England" label="King Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166961" start="18629" end="18649" title="Battle of Shrewsbury" label="Battle of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="18659" end="18671" title="Henry V of England" label="King Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q229192" start="18680" end="18699" title="Catherine of Valois" label="Catherine of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="18759" end="18771" title="Henry V of England" label="King Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376957" start="18842" end="18856" title="Henry Chichele" label="Henry Chichele"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="18862" end="18886" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="19081" end="19098" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q842796" start="19135" end="19160" title="First Battle of St Albans" label="First Battle of St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q312137" start="19236" end="19251" title="Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York" label="Richard of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q437571" start="19256" end="19277" title="Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick" label="Neville the Kingmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="19291" end="19303" title="House of Lancaster" label="Lancastrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q459947" start="19326" end="19341" title="Edmund Beaufort, 2nd Duke of Somerset" label="Edmund Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="19355" end="19368" title="Henry VI of England" label="King Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q233416" start="19414" end="19440" title="Second Battle of St Albans" label="Second Battle of St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428169" start="19692" end="19708" title="Battle of Barnet" label="Battle of Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="19811" end="19825" title="Edward IV of England" label="King Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050759" start="20184" end="20206" title="Ye Olde Fighting Cocks" label="Ye Olde Fighting Cocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="20600" end="20609" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="20682" end="20692" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="21045" end="21064" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="21111" end="21125" title="Edward VI of England" label="King Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="21145" end="21149" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="21286" end="21295" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="21358" end="21369" title="protestantism" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21392" end="21400" title="catholic church" label="catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621967" start="21458" end="21469" title="Thomas Fust" label="Thomas Fust"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="21520" end="21524" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="21613" end="21620" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="21643" end="21651" title="shilling" label="shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360565" start="21684" end="21694" title="Michaelmas" label="Michaelmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="21697" end="21714" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19813" start="21724" end="21739" title="Hatfield Palace" label="Hatfield Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19788" start="21745" end="21753" title="Hatfield, Hertfordshire" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="21802" end="21812" title="Parliament of England" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q430726" start="22036" end="22053" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1585)" label="Anglo-Spanish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q909993" start="22115" end="22124" title="Brentwood, Essex" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q648432" start="22149" end="22156" title="Tilbury" label="Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q122607" start="22172" end="22188" title="Bow, London" label="Stratford-at-Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="22312" end="22320" title="Hartford" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412710" start="22336" end="22348" title="Samuel Stone" label="Samuel Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="22386" end="22398" title="James I of England" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q512922" start="22484" end="22498" title="Theobalds House" label="Theobalds Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579962" start="22627" end="22636" title="New River (London)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932086" start="22686" end="22700" title="Hugh Myddelton" label="Hugh Myddelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19804" start="22929" end="22936" title="Royston, Hertfordshire" label="Royston"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="23452" end="23461" title="English Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q19849" start="23661" end="23670" title="Chilterns" label="Chilterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="23773" end="23788" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="23796" end="23810" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="23944" end="23967" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="24111" end="24120" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="24335" end="24355" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="24503" end="24518" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302148" start="24959" end="25005" title="Rye House Plot" label="plot to assassinate Charles II and his brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="25214" end="25218" title="Whig (British political party)" label="Whig"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="25624" end="25632" title="Smallpox" label="Smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q24677134" start="25756" end="25785" title="River Lee Navigation Act 1738" label="River Lee Navigation Act 1738"/>
<link wikidata="Q131345198" start="25787" end="25796" title="12 Geo. 2" label="12 Geo. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="25867" end="25871" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="25873" end="25878" title="lock (water transport)" label="Locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19791" start="25899" end="25909" title="Broxbourne" label="Broxbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025612" start="25949" end="25966" title="Stanstead Abbotts" label="Stanstead Abbotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q126579" start="25979" end="26000" title="Stansted Mountfitchet" label="Stansted Mountfitchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="26078" end="26095" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="26423" end="26444" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q249306" start="26478" end="26479" title="£" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="26579" end="26590" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="Pitt&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="26708" end="26733" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="26962" end="26973" title="Borehamwood" label="Borehamwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q591900" start="26978" end="26992" title="Sawbridgeworth" label="Sawbridgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699816" start="27880" end="27894" title="John Dickinson (1782–1869)" label="John Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532" start="27921" end="27936" title="Hemel Hempstead" label="Hemel Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q940807" start="28102" end="28108" title="Apsley, Hertfordshire" label="Apsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966799" start="28113" end="28123" title="Nash Mills" label="Nash Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324820" start="28273" end="28288" title="Government bond" label="Exchequer Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="28377" end="28390" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28404" end="28415" title="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Hill School#Abbot&amp;#x27;s Hill House" label="Abbots Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885061" start="28452" end="28470" title="Uniform Penny Post" label="Uniform Penny Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q19790" start="28758" end="28766" title="Cheshunt" label="Cheshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326711" start="28774" end="28793" title="Rothamsted Research" label="Rothamsted Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826572" start="28910" end="28944" title="agricultural experiment station" label="agricultural research institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19785" start="28966" end="28975" title="Harpenden" label="Harpenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="29202" end="29221" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="29240" end="29258" title="Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="29312" end="29320" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="29524" end="29533" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="29535" end="29547" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="29561" end="29569" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="29587" end="29595" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="29601" end="29609" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19797" start="29638" end="29655" title="Bishops Stortford" label="Bishops Stortford"/>
<link wikidata="Q213474" start="29868" end="29877" title="Aylesbury" label="Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="30004" end="30013" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681415" start="30138" end="30158" title="Hatfield rail crash (1870)" label="Hatfield train crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="30195" end="30213" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="30318" end="30331" title="Garden city movement" label="garden cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801" start="30335" end="30345" title="Letchworth" label="Letchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789" start="30350" end="30356" title="Welwyn Garden City" label="Welwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766" start="30549" end="30564" title="Ebenezer Howard" label="Ebenezer Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="30716" end="30731" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744805" start="30737" end="30759" title="Hertfordshire Yeomanry" label="Hertfordshire Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="30828" end="30833" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638515" start="30839" end="30858" title="47th (1/2nd London) Division" label="2nd London Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="30866" end="30883" title="Territorial Army (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744794" start="30996" end="31024" title="Hertfordshire Regiment" label="1/1st Hertfordshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="31035" end="31043" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q191413" start="31196" end="31204" title="Zeppelin" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="31361" end="31375" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722212" start="31454" end="31475" title="Alfred Alexander Burt" label="Alfred Alexander Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579717" start="31498" end="31520" title="Leefe Robinson" label="William Leefe Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968915" start="31589" end="31596" title="Cuffley" label="Cuffley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19775" start="31701" end="31712" title="Potters Bar" label="Potters Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320675" start="31815" end="31836" title="Battle of Havrincourt" label="Battle of Havrincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q781704" start="31871" end="31882" title="Ghissignies" label="Ghissignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486425" start="32025" end="32036" title="Frank Edward Young (VC)" label="Frank Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32121" end="32137" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879246" start="32265" end="32304" title="Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment" label="Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q762471" start="32407" end="32418" title="Ver-sur-Mer" label="Ver-sur-Mer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="32422" end="32430" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="32449" end="32463" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q919431" start="32625" end="32649" title="Home Guard (United Kingdom)" label="Local Defence Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="32823" end="32838" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32951" end="32967" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="32969" end="32981" title="De Havilland" label="De Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="32997" end="33005" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129526" start="33042" end="33051" title="Leavesden, Hertfordshire" label="Leavesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="33067" end="33082" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Halifax bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="33090" end="33093" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043346" start="33140" end="33159" title="No. 2 Squadron RAF" label="No. 2 (AC) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275552" start="33177" end="33195" title="RAF Sawbridgeworth" label="RAF Sawbridgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206409" start="33367" end="33383" title="Curtiss P-40 Warhawk" label="Curtiss Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="33388" end="33410" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="North American Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="33443" end="33458" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="33468" end="33478" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2 rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="33540" end="33557" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="Flying Fortresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636096" start="33573" end="33604" title="398th Air Expeditionary Group" label="398th Bombardment Group (Heavy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275507" start="33672" end="33688" title="RAF Nuthampstead" label="RAF Nuthampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="33694" end="33723" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275193" start="33729" end="33742" title="RAF Bovingdon" label="RAF Bovingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907003" start="33779" end="33799" title="VIII Fighter Command" label="VIII Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275210" start="33820" end="33835" title="RAF Bushey Hall" label="RAF Bushey Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795" start="33868" end="33877" title="Stevenage" label="Stevenage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012153" start="33925" end="33943" title="New Towns Act 1946" label="New Towns Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="34100" end="34118" title="de Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670449" start="34150" end="34176" title="London Government Act 1963" label="London Government Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="34197" end="34211" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884709" start="34231" end="34237" title="Chipping Barnet" label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19775" start="34293" end="34304" title="Potters Bar" label="Potters Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551418" start="34309" end="34320" title="South Mimms" label="South Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="34411" end="34436" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q235965" start="34536" end="34552" title="Barbara Cartland" label="Barbara Cartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="34577" end="34591" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19931" start="34675" end="34682" title="Elstree" label="Elstree"/>
<link wikidata="Q151097" start="34824" end="34835" title="Henry Moore" label="Henry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60240" start="34860" end="34871" title="Perry Green, Hertfordshire" label="Perry Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281943" start="34926" end="34948" title="Henry Moore Foundation" label="Henry Moore Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802411" start="35285" end="35294" title="McMullens Brewery" label="McMullens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35502" end="35506" title="Hertfordshire#Economy" label="here"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="35593" end="35598" title="Glaxo" label="Glaxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745633" start="35610" end="35637" title="University of Hertfordshire" label="University of Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822729" start="35763" end="35773" title="Hatfield rail crash" label="rail crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="35811" end="35820" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q19184" start="35964" end="35988" title="Buncefield fire" label="fire of 11 December 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="36452" end="36463" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151078" start="36670" end="36713" title="Grade II* listed buildings in Hertfordshire" label="Grade II* listed buildings in Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="36803" end="36820" title="conservation area" label="conservation area"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="36848" end="36860" title="Stephen of England" label="King Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q936911" start="36906" end="36928" title="Geoffrey de Mandeville, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Geoffrey de Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="36939" end="36949" title="Sheriff" label="shrievalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="37008" end="37023" title="Empress Matilda" label="Empress Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551418" start="37107" end="37118" title="South Mimms" label="South Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048468" start="37266" end="37283" title="Nomansland, Hertfordshire" label="Nomansland Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872917" start="37290" end="37304" title="A5 road" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="37323" end="37328" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470296" start="37349" end="37371" title="Lady Katherine Ferrers" label="Lady Katherine Ferrers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17542598" start="37375" end="37388" title="Markyate Cell" label="Markyate Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="37516" end="37520" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="37572" end="37580" title="English folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14900310" start="37707" end="37715" title="Treasure Act 1996" label="treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206712" start="37762" end="37773" title="Jane Wenham (alleged witch)" label="Jane Wenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="37872" end="37882" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307274" start="38480" end="38496" title="Vincenzo Lunardi" label="Vincenzo Lunardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q958479" start="38668" end="38684" title="Woolworths Group (United Kingdom)" label="Woolworth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281433" start="39181" end="39204" title="Radlett murder" label="murder of William Weare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269491" start="39242" end="39260" title="Trial by media" label="trial by newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q18527691" start="39316" end="39329" title="John Thurtell" label="John Thurtell"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="39898" end="39909" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170583" start="39955" end="39974" title="Pride and Prejudice" label="Pride and Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="40026" end="40039" title="Francis Bacon" label="Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="40152" end="40164" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="40197" end="40206" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123085" start="40305" end="40320" title="Juliana Berners" label="Juliana Berners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057626" start="40358" end="40375" title="Book of St. Albans" label="Boke of St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="40467" end="40478" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q342720" start="40726" end="40740" title="George Chapman" label="George Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="40880" end="40896" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719352" start="40973" end="40986" title="Henry Chauncy" label="Henry Chauncy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="41124" end="41147" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q315537" start="41209" end="41223" title="William Cowper" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="41336" end="41351" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q947693" start="41527" end="41543" title="Sir Richard Fanshawe, 1st Baronet" label="Richard Fanshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="41614" end="41627" title="E. M. Forster" label="E. M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q188569" start="41699" end="41713" title="William Godwin" label="William Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101638" start="41802" end="41821" title="Mary Wollstonecraft" label="Mary Wollstonecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q300646" start="41845" end="41881" title="A Vindication of the Rights of Woman" label="A Vindication of the Rights of Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47152" start="41904" end="41916" title="Mary Shelley" label="Mary Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="41940" end="41952" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="41954" end="41967" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307214" start="42057" end="42072" title="Julian Grenfell" label="Julian Grenfell"/>
<link wikidata="Q235665" start="42133" end="42151" title="Lady Caroline Lamb" label="Lady Caroline Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771960" start="42202" end="42211" title="Glenarvon" label="Glenarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="42259" end="42269" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q595602" start="42299" end="42312" title="Nathaniel Lee" label="Nathaniel Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="42402" end="42422" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Edward Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257118" start="42559" end="42569" title="John Scott of Amwell" label="John Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="42575" end="42581" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749041" start="42608" end="42620" title="Great Amwell" label="Great Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="42819" end="42838" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q318399" start="42887" end="42903" title="Anthony Trollope" label="Anthony Trollope"/>
<link wikidata="Q968959" start="42925" end="42938" title="Waltham Cross" label="Waltham Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525652" start="42940" end="42957" title="Thomas Walsingham" label="Thomas Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q710601" start="43214" end="43237" title="Arthur Melbourne-Cooper" label="Arthur Melbourne-Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q151048" start="43328" end="43352" title="London Borough of Barnet" label="London Borough of Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q748549" start="43422" end="43432" title="Birt Acres" label="Birt Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q41794584" start="43889" end="43903" title="Odyssey Cinema, St Albans" label="Odyssey Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501089" start="43906" end="43921" title="Elstree Studios" label="Elstree Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="44043" end="44052" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="44102" end="44115" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="44121" end="44129" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q722379" start="44131" end="44151" title="The World&amp;#x27;s End (film)" label="The World&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274015" start="44181" end="44195" title="Dancing on Ice (UK)" label="Dancing on Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997397" start="44197" end="44227" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? (UK game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?"/>
<link wikidata="Q127173" start="44233" end="44244" title="Big Brother (TV series)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="44259" end="44271" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19835" start="44309" end="44331" title="Leavesden Film Studios" label="Leavesden Film Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q590352" start="44333" end="44343" title="Wild Child (film)" label="Wild child"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851940" start="44358" end="44368" title="Balls Park" label="Balls park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9681" start="44370" end="44378" title="Hertford" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="44518" end="44522" title="will (law)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798" start="44756" end="44763" title="Hitchin" label="Hitchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q336618" start="44863" end="44877" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford" label="Edward Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q242291" start="44929" end="44948" title="Lady Catherine Grey" label="Lady Catherine Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162356" start="44958" end="44972" title="Lady Jane Grey" label="Lady Jane Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647254" start="45183" end="45200" title="Lady Jane Seymour" label="Lady Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="45342" end="45360" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Lord Robert Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="45450" end="45465" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q19176" start="45496" end="45511" title="Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough" label="Sarah Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="45632" end="45651" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="45678" end="45688" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="45918" end="45933" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="45935" end="45952" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="45957" end="45981" title="Diana, Princess of Wales" label="Diana, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326373" start="46031" end="46048" title="Earl of St Albans" label="Earl of St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q135152" start="46203" end="46220" title="Charles Beauclerk, 1st Duke of St Albans" label="Charles Beauclerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="46242" end="46257" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q234163" start="46262" end="46271" title="Nell Gwyn" label="Nell Gwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939122" start="46355" end="46370" title="Murray Beauclerk, 14th Duke of St Albans" label="fourteenth duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="46373" end="46408" title="Robert Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Robert Arthur Gascoyne Talbot Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="46586" end="46600" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="46617" end="46634" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="foreign secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="46647" end="46659" title="William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne" label="William Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663758" start="46792" end="46804" title="Brocket Hall" label="Brocket Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="46817" end="46842" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="Local Government Act 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="46854" end="46871" title="County Councillor" label="county councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="46924" end="46938" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="47259" end="47278" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="47325" end="47343" title="Declaration of Independence (Israel)" label="creation of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626738" start="47361" end="47402" title="List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire" label="List of lost settlements in Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156495" start="47555" end="47571" title="Robert Bartlett (historian)" label="Bartlett, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722389" start="47767" end="47778" title="Burne, A.H." label="Burne, A.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="48080" end="48098" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill, Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q164566" start="48196" end="48211" title="Barry Cunliffe" label="Cunliffe, Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q920306" start="48483" end="48498" title="David Dumville" label="Dumville, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442730" start="48668" end="48682" title="Keith Feiling" label="Feiling, Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308616" start="50319" end="50337" title="Frank Stenton" label="Stenton, Sir Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298683" start="50951" end="50969" title="Dorothy Whitelock" label="Whitelock, Dorothy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139600" wikidata="Q6307515" url="?curid=1139600" title="Julian Robertson">
<text>Julian Hart Robertson Jr. (June 25, 1932 – August 23, 2022) was an American hedge fund manager, and philanthropist.

Robertson founded Tiger Management, one of the first hedge funds, in 1980. From its inception in 1980 to its 1998 asset peak, his fund returned 31.7% per year after fees, compared to a 12.7% annual return from the S&amp;P 500 over the same period. However, a sharp decline thereafter led to the fund closing in March 2000. Tiger showed losses in only four of its 21 years. Robertson later mentored and provided seed funding to many notable hedge fund managers, known as the &quot;Tiger cubs&quot;, including Ole Andreas Halvorsen, Stephen Mandel of Lone Pine Capital, Lee Ainslie of Maverick Capital, Bill Hwang, and Chase Coleman III.

During his lifetime, Robertson contributed more than US$2 billion to charity. He was also a signatory to The Giving Pledge. At the time of his death, his net worth was estimated at $4.8 billion.

==Early life==
Robertson was born on June 25, 1932, in Salisbury, North Carolina, as the son of Julian Hart Robertson Sr., a textile company executive, and Blanche Spencer, a local activist. He claimed that his father was a descendant of Pocahontas. Robertson first became interested in stocks at age 6.

He graduated from Episcopal High School in 1951 and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1955. While at Chapel Hill, he was admitted to Zeta Psi fraternity and was a member of the Reserve Officers&#x27; Training Corps. He then served as an officer in the U.S. Navy, traveling the world aboard a munitions ship until 1957.

After leaving the navy, Robertson moved to New York City and worked for a time as a stockbroker for Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company. At Kidder, he eventually headed the firm&#x27;s asset management division, Webster Securities. In 1978, he took a sabbatical and moved with his family to New Zealand for a year to write a novel.

==Investment career==

On his return to the United States, in 1980, with $8 million of funding from family, friends, and his own wealth, he founded Tiger Management. The Tiger funds reached a peak of $22 billion in assets in 1998. Robertson&#x27;s Tiger Fund accurately predicted the dot-com bubble, purposely underweighting the technology sector. Tiger&#x27;s largest holding was US Airways; it controlled 25% of the company. Its troubles led to significant losses for the fund. Tiger also realized significant losses in the Japanese Yen. Such missteps ultimately led him to close his investment company in late March 2000, at the peak of the dot-com bubble, and return all outside capital to investors. Revolting employees wanting to invest in the dot-com bubble are also cited as the reason behind closing. 

Robertson said in 2008 that he shorted subprime securities and used credit default swaps to make a 76.7% return on investment in 2007. From the closure of his fund in 2000 until January 2008, his return on his personal fortune was 403%. After closing his fund in 2000, Robertson supported and financed upcoming hedge fund managers in return for a stake in their fund management companies.

Robertson was an investor and developer in New Zealand and owned three lodges: Kauri Cliffs Lodge near Matauri Bay in Northland; Matakauri Lodge Queenstown; and The Farm at Cape Kidnappers, Hawkes Bay, as well as several wineries.

==Personal life==
===Family===
Julian married Josephine Tucker Robertson in 1972. She died in June 2010 from breast cancer. They had three children.

===Politics===
While Robertson was a Republican, he urged the party to support clean energy policies and contributed $500,000 to the ClearPath Foundation in 2016. Robertson supported the Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign, and Romney attended Robertson&#x27;s 80th birthday party in 2012. In January 2012, Robertson donated $1.25 million to Restore Our Future, a Super PAC supporting the Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign. In 2015, Robertson gave $1 million to a Super PAC supporting the Jeb Bush 2016 presidential campaign. Although Robertson did not support Donald Trump in the 2016 election, instead supporting libertarian Gary Johnson, Robertson was a supporter of the presidency of Donald Trump and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. He contributed $100,000 to Donald Trump&#x27;s 2020 presidential campaign. Robertson supported the estate tax.

===Residences===
Robertson owned residences on Central Park South in Manhattan, on Long Island in Nassau County, as well as in Sun Valley, the Hamptons, and in New Zealand. In 2020, Robertson completed construction of three new homes, each approximately 4,000 square feet, for his family in New Zealand.

Robertson kept track of where he spent his time and won a legal case after he proved that he did not spend enough time in New York to be liable for income taxes in the state.

===Death===
Robertson died at his home in Manhattan on August 23, 2022, aged 90.

==Legacy and awards==
In 2008, he was inducted into Institutional Investors Alpha&#x27;s Hedge Fund Manager Hall of Fame. Robertson was appointed an Honorary Knight Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit, for services to business and philanthropy, in the 2010 New Year Honours, and in 2017, he was one of nine people awarded a Carnegie Medal of Philanthropy.

==Legal issues==
On April 1, 1996, &quot;BusinessWeek&quot; carried a cover story written by reporter Gary Weiss, called &quot;Fall of the Wizard&quot;, that was critical of Robertson&#x27;s performance and behavior as founder and manager of Tiger Management. Robertson subsequently sued Weiss and &quot;BusinessWeek&quot; for $1 billion for defamation. The suit was settled with no money changing hands and &quot;BusinessWeek&quot; standing by the substance of its reporting.

==See also==
* List of University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni
* List of Tiger Cubs

==References==
==Further reading==
* Strachman, Daniel A. (2004). &quot;Julian Robertson: A Tiger in the land of Bulls and Bears&quot;. New York: Wiley

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6307515" start="0" end="25" title="Julian Robertson" label="Julian Hart Robertson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q105611" start="76" end="86" title="hedge fund" label="hedge fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801440" start="135" end="151" title="Tiger Management" label="Tiger Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q242345" start="331" end="342" title="S&amp;amp;P 500" label="S&amp;amp;P 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085794" start="625" end="646" title="Ole Andreas Halvorsen" label="Ole Andreas Halvorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609886" start="648" end="662" title="Stephen Mandel (hedge fund manager)" label="Stephen Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023125" start="666" end="683" title="Lone Pine Capital" label="Lone Pine Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512938" start="685" end="696" title="Lee Ainslie" label="Lee Ainslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110445" start="700" end="716" title="Maverick Capital" label="Maverick Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q106261993" start="718" end="728" title="Bill Hwang" label="Bill Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979231" start="734" end="751" title="Chase Coleman III" label="Chase Coleman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q203807" start="859" end="876" title="The Giving Pledge" label="The Giving Pledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028813" start="1005" end="1030" title="Salisbury, North Carolina" label="Salisbury, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="1188" end="1198" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303928" start="1273" end="1294" title="Episcopal High School (Alexandria, Virginia)" label="Episcopal High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="1311" end="1354" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069723" start="1405" end="1413" title="Zeta Psi" label="Zeta Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="1449" end="1486" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1524" end="1533" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109229737" start="1692" end="1721" title="Kidder, Peabody &amp;amp; Company" label="Kidder, Peabody &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141246" start="1837" end="1847" title="sabbatical" label="sabbatical"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="2203" end="2217" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q208046" start="2300" end="2310" title="US Airways" label="US Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8146" start="2445" end="2457" title="Japanese Yen" label="Japanese Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q624028" start="2799" end="2818" title="credit default swap" label="credit default swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786169" start="3224" end="3235" title="Matauri Bay" label="Matauri Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q59596" start="3239" end="3248" title="Northland Region" label="Northland"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="3266" end="3276" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q496590" start="3294" end="3309" title="Cape Kidnappers" label="Cape Kidnappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q251825" start="3311" end="3321" title="Hawke&amp;#x27;s Bay region" label="Hawkes Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="3462" end="3475" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="3582" end="3594" title="clean energy" label="clean energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23130875" start="3636" end="3656" title="ClearPath Foundation" label="ClearPath Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883424" start="3690" end="3728" title="Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign" label="Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316237" start="3848" end="3866" title="Restore Our Future" label="Restore Our Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883424" start="3895" end="3933" title="Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign" label="Mitt Romney 2012 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q20107552" start="4000" end="4035" title="Jeb Bush 2016 presidential campaign" label="Jeb Bush 2016 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4072" end="4084" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="4138" end="4150" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="4185" end="4211" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="presidency of Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955478" start="4220" end="4249" title="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017" label="Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="4278" end="4290" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q28805633" start="4298" end="4324" title="Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign" label="2020 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="4350" end="4360" title="estate tax" label="estate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q245364" start="4410" end="4428" title="Central Park South" label="Central Park South"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="4446" end="4457" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="4461" end="4474" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q955969" start="4490" end="4500" title="Sun Valley, Idaho" label="Sun Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574020" start="4502" end="4514" title="the Hamptons" label="the Hamptons"/>
<link wikidata="Q94162" start="5075" end="5134" title="New Zealand Order of Merit" label="Honorary Knight Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508382" start="5186" end="5207" title="2010 New Year Honours (New Zealand)" label="2010 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162079" start="5258" end="5288" title="Carnegie Medal of Philanthropy" label="Carnegie Medal of Philanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="5332" end="5344" title="BusinessWeek" label="BusinessWeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526133" start="5393" end="5403" title="Gary Weiss" label="Gary Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="5633" end="5643" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="5658" end="5665" title="Settlement (litigation)" label="settled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603171" start="5784" end="5842" title="List of University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni" label="List of University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610921" start="5845" end="5863" title="List of Tiger Cubs (finance)" label="List of Tiger Cubs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139601" wikidata="Q6633740" url="?curid=1139601" title="List of places in Hertfordshire">
<text>This is a list of settlements in Hertfordshire by population based on the results of the 2021 census. The next United Kingdom census will take place in 2031. 


==A==
*Abbots Langley, Adeyfield, Albury, Albury End, Aldbury, Aldenham, Amwell, Ansells End, Anstey, Apsley, Ardeley, Ashridge, Ashwell, Aspenden, Aston End, Astrope, Ayot Green, Ayot St Lawrence, Ayot St Peter

==B==
*Babbs Green, Bakers End, Baldock, Ballingdon Bottom, Barkway, Barley, Barleycroft End, Barkway, Batchworth, Batford, Bayford, Bayfordbury, Beane, Bedmond, Bell Bar, Belsize, Benington, Bennetts End, Berkhamsted, Hertingfordbury, Bishop&#x27;s Stortford, Borehamwood, Bourne End, Bovingdon, Bower Heath, Boxmoor, Bozen Green, Bragbury End, Bramfield, Braughing, Braughing Friars, Brent Pelham, Brickendon, Bricket Wood, Bridens Camp, Great Gaddesden, Brookmans Park, Broxbourne, Buckland, Buntingford, Bury Green, Bushey, Bushey Heath, Bygrave

==C==
*Caldecote, Carpenders Park, Chapmore End, Charlton, Chaulden, Cherry Green, Chipperfield, Chipping, Chiswell Green, Cheshunt, Chorleywood, Codicote, Cold Christmas, Cole Green, Coleman Green, Colliers End, Colney Heath, Colney Street, Cottered, Cow Roast, Cromer Hyde, Croxley Green, Cuffley, Clothall

==D==
*Dane End, Datchworth, Digswell, Dudswell

==E==
*Eastbury, Eastwick, Elstree, Essendon

==F==
*Felden, Fields End, Flamstead, Flaunden, Frithsden, Furneaux Pelham

==G==
*Gadebridge, Garston, Gilston, Goffs Oak, Gosmore, Graveley, Great Amwell, Great Gaddesden, Great Hormead, Great Munden, Great Offley, Great Wymondley, Gubblecote
**Green End: neighbourhoods or green space-buffered localities in Braughing, Hemel Hempstead, Little Munden, Sandon and Weston.

==H==
*Hadham Ford, Little Hadham, Harpenden, Hastoe, Hatfield, Hemel Hempstead, Heronsgate, Hertford, Hertford Heath, Hertingfordbury, Hexton, High Cross, High Wych, Highfield, Hinxworth, Hitchin, Hoddesdon, Holwell, How Wood, Hunsdon, Hunton Bridge

==I==
*Ickleford

==J==
*Jersey Farm, St Albans

==K==
*Kelshall, Kensworth, Kimpton, King&#x27;s Walden, Kings Langley, Kinsbourne Green, Knebworth

==L==
*Labby Green and Letty Green, Hertingfordbury, Langley, Langleybury, Leavesden, Lemsford, Letchmore Heath, Letchworth Garden City, Leverstock Green, Lilley, Little Amwell, Little Berkhamsted, Little Gaddesden, Little Hadham, Little Hormead, Little Munden, Little Offley, Little Wymondley, London Colney, Long Marston, Loudwater

==M==
*Maple Cross, Markyate, Marshalswick, Micklefield Green, Sarratt, Mill End, Sandon, Mill End, Rickmansworth, Moor Park, Much Hadham

==N==
*Napsbury including Napsbury Park, Nash Mills, Nasty, Great Munden, Nettleden, Newgate Street, Newnham, New Mill, Tring, Northaw, Northchurch, North Mymms, Norton, Nuthampstead

==O==
*Oaklands, Offley, Old Hall Green, Old Hatfield, Old Knebworth, Oxhey

==P==
*Park Street, Piccotts End, Pimlico, Bedmond, Pirton, Potten End, Potters Bar, Preston, Puckeridge, Puttenham

==R==
*Radlett, Radwell, Redbourn, Reed, Rickmansworth, Ridge, Ringshall, Roe Green, Royston, Rush Green, Rushden

==S==
*Sacombe, Sacombe Green, St Albans, St Ippolyts, St Paul&#x27;s Walden, St Stephen, Sandon, Sandridge, Sarratt, Sawbridgeworth, Shenley (including Shenleybury), Smallford, South Mimms, South Oxhey, Spellbrook, Staines Green, Hertingfordbury, Standon, Standon Green End, Stanstead Abbotts, Stanstead St Margarets, Stapleford, Stevenage, Stocking Pelham

==T==
*Tewin, Therfield, Thorley, Thundridge, Tonwell, Tring, Tring Station, Trowley Bottom

==W==
*Wadesmill, Walkern, Wallington, Walsworth, Waltham Cross, Ware, Wareside, Warner&#x27;s End, Waterford, Water End, Dacorum, Water End, North Mymms, Waterend, Watford, Watton-at-Stone, Welham Green, Well End, Wellpond Green, Welwyn, Welwyn Garden City, Westmill, Weston, Westwick Row, West Hyde, Wheathampstead, Whempstead, Whitwell, Widford, Wigginton, Willian, Wilstone, Woodhall Farm, Woollensbrook, Woolmer Green, Wormley, Wyddial

==See also==

*List of settlements in Hertfordshire by population
*List of places in England </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6633740" start="10" end="60" title="List of places in Hertfordshire" label="list of settlements in Hertfordshire by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="89" end="100" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058981" start="126" end="132" title="Census in the United Kingdom" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="152" end="156" title="United Kingdom Census 2021" label="2031"/>
<link wikidata="Q19777" start="168" end="182" title="Abbots Langley" label="Abbots Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19922" start="184" end="193" title="Adeyfield" label="Adeyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066687" start="195" end="201" title="Albury, Hertfordshire" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712856" start="203" end="213" title="Albury End" label="Albury End"/>
<link wikidata="Q546163" start="215" end="222" title="Aldbury" label="Aldbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19923" start="224" end="232" title="Aldenham" label="Aldenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947" start="234" end="240" title="Amwell, St Albans" label="Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770593" start="242" end="253" title="Ansells End" label="Ansells End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215624" start="255" end="261" title="Anstey, Hertfordshire" label="Anstey"/>
<link wikidata="Q940807" start="263" end="269" title="Apsley, Hertfordshire" label="Apsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19822" start="271" end="278" title="Ardeley" label="Ardeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q726273" start="280" end="288" title="Ashridge" label="Ashridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q778795" start="290" end="297" title="Ashwell, Hertfordshire" label="Ashwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987354" start="299" end="307" title="Aspenden" label="Aspenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810936" start="309" end="318" title="Aston End" label="Aston End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811696" start="320" end="327" title="Astrope" label="Astrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831581" start="329" end="339" title="Ayot Green" label="Ayot Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q793195" start="341" end="357" title="Ayot St Lawrence" label="Ayot St Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914903" start="359" end="372" title="Ayot St Peter" label="Ayot St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837607" start="381" end="392" title="Babbs Green" label="Babbs Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849263" start="394" end="404" title="Bakers End" label="Bakers End"/>
<link wikidata="Q789348" start="406" end="413" title="Baldock" label="Baldock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851747" start="415" end="432" title="Ballingdon Bottom" label="Ballingdon Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q785229" start="434" end="441" title="Barkway" label="Barkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="443" end="449" title="Barley" label="Barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861178" start="451" end="466" title="Barleycroft End" label="Barleycroft End"/>
<link wikidata="Q785229" start="468" end="475" title="Barkway" label="Barkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19924" start="477" end="487" title="Batchworth" label="Batchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868869" start="489" end="496" title="Batford" label="Batford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874515" start="498" end="505" title="Bayford, Hertfordshire" label="Bayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874516" start="507" end="518" title="Bayfordbury" label="Bayfordbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278875" start="520" end="525" title="Beane, Hertfordshire" label="Beane"/>
<link wikidata="Q19174" start="527" end="534" title="Bedmond" label="Bedmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883114" start="536" end="544" title="Bell Bar" label="Bell Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997101" start="546" end="553" title="Belsize, Hertfordshire" label="Belsize"/>
<link wikidata="Q591902" start="555" end="564" title="Benington, Hertfordshire" label="Benington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889774" start="566" end="578" title="Bennetts End" label="Bennetts End"/>
<link wikidata="Q19784" start="580" end="591" title="Berkhamsted" label="Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744829" start="593" end="608" title="Hertingfordbury" label="Hertingfordbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19797" start="610" end="633" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="635" end="646" title="Borehamwood" label="Borehamwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950238" start="648" end="658" title="Bourne End, Hertfordshire" label="Bourne End"/>
<link wikidata="Q19926" start="660" end="669" title="Bovingdon" label="Bovingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950856" start="671" end="682" title="Bower Heath" label="Bower Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19928" start="684" end="691" title="Boxmoor" label="Boxmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643313" start="693" end="704" title="Bozen Green" label="Bozen Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178671" start="706" end="718" title="Bragbury End" label="Bragbury End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787232" start="720" end="729" title="Bramfield, Hertfordshire" label="Bramfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643914" start="731" end="740" title="Braughing" label="Braughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9179094" start="742" end="758" title="Braughing Friars" label="Braughing Friars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563864" start="760" end="772" title="Brent Pelham" label="Brent Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965996" start="774" end="784" title="Brickendon" label="Brickendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19886" start="786" end="798" title="Bricket Wood" label="Bricket Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599229" start="800" end="829" title="Great Gaddesden" label="Bridens Camp, Great Gaddesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180055" start="831" end="845" title="Brookmans Park" label="Brookmans Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19791" start="847" end="857" title="Broxbourne" label="Broxbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8253296" start="859" end="867" title="Buckland, Hertfordshire" label="Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938551" start="869" end="880" title="Buntingford" label="Buntingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996" start="894" end="900" title="Bushey" label="Bushey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996" start="902" end="914" title="Bushey Heath" label="Bushey Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004092" start="916" end="923" title="Bygrave" label="Bygrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987205" start="932" end="941" title="Caldecote, Hertfordshire" label="Caldecote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660658" start="943" end="958" title="Carpenders Park" label="Carpenders Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073345" start="960" end="972" title="Chapmore End" label="Chapmore End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086273" start="974" end="982" title="Charlton, Hertfordshire" label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088176" start="984" end="992" title="Chaulden" label="Chaulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092349" start="994" end="1006" title="Cherry Green, Hertfordshire" label="Cherry Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q19930" start="1008" end="1020" title="Chipperfield" label="Chipperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q98398412" start="1022" end="1030" title="Chipping, Hertfordshire" label="Chipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102161" start="1032" end="1046" title="Chiswell Green" label="Chiswell Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q19790" start="1048" end="1056" title="Cheshunt" label="Cheshunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335129" start="1058" end="1069" title="Chorleywood" label="Chorleywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140287" start="1071" end="1079" title="Codicote" label="Codicote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142211" start="1081" end="1095" title="Cold Christmas" label="Cold Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142646" start="1097" end="1107" title="Cole Green, Hertfordshire" label="Cole Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q29415479" start="1124" end="1136" title="Colliers End, Hertfordshire" label="Colliers End"/>
<link wikidata="Q610285" start="1138" end="1150" title="Colney Heath" label="Colney Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147789" start="1152" end="1165" title="Colney Street" label="Colney Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048258" start="1167" end="1175" title="Cottered" label="Cottered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179413" start="1177" end="1186" title="Cow Roast" label="Cow Roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9666" start="1201" end="1214" title="Croxley Green" label="Croxley Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968915" start="1216" end="1223" title="Cuffley" label="Cuffley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135549" start="1225" end="1233" title="Clothall" label="Clothall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215805" start="1242" end="1250" title="Dane End" label="Dane End"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227510" start="1252" end="1262" title="Datchworth" label="Datchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q764199" start="1264" end="1272" title="Digswell" label="Digswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312081" start="1274" end="1282" title="Dudswell, Hertfordshire" label="Dudswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329847" start="1291" end="1299" title="Eastbury, Hertfordshire" label="Eastbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q13575068" start="1301" end="1309" title="Eastwick, Hertfordshire" label="Eastwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19931" start="1311" end="1318" title="Elstree" label="Elstree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549752" start="1320" end="1328" title="Essendon, Hertfordshire" label="Essendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441643" start="1337" end="1343" title="Felden" label="Felden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447203" start="1345" end="1355" title="Fields End" label="Fields End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569452" start="1357" end="1366" title="Flamstead" label="Flamstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868353" start="1368" end="1376" title="Flaunden" label="Flaunden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504764" start="1378" end="1387" title="Frithsden" label="Frithsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317162" start="1389" end="1404" title="Furneaux Pelham" label="Furneaux Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516330" start="1413" end="1423" title="Gadebridge" label="Gadebridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524307" start="1425" end="1432" title="Garston, Hertfordshire" label="Garston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867481" start="1434" end="1441" title="Gilston" label="Gilston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19934" start="1443" end="1452" title="Goffs Oak" label="Goffs Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587353" start="1454" end="1461" title="Gosmore" label="Gosmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597849" start="1463" end="1471" title="Graveley, Hertfordshire" label="Graveley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749041" start="1473" end="1485" title="Great Amwell" label="Great Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599229" start="1487" end="1502" title="Great Gaddesden" label="Great Gaddesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599333" start="1504" end="1517" title="Great Hormead" label="Great Hormead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714057" start="1519" end="1531" title="Great Munden" label="Great Munden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776483" start="1533" end="1545" title="Great Offley" label="Great Offley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600276" start="1547" end="1562" title="Great Wymondley" label="Great Wymondley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842358" start="1564" end="1574" title="Gubblecote" label="Gubblecote"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650231" start="1711" end="1737" title="Little Hadham" label="Hadham Ford, Little Hadham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19785" start="1739" end="1748" title="Harpenden" label="Harpenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680502" start="1750" end="1756" title="Hastoe" label="Hastoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19788" start="1758" end="1766" title="Hatfield, Hertfordshire" label="Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532" start="1768" end="1783" title="Hemel Hempstead" label="Hemel Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889674" start="1785" end="1795" title="Heronsgate" label="Heronsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9681" start="1797" end="1805" title="Hertford" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295063" start="1807" end="1821" title="Hertford Heath" label="Hertford Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744829" start="1823" end="1838" title="Hertingfordbury" label="Hertingfordbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202738" start="1840" end="1846" title="Hexton" label="Hexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558072" start="1848" end="1858" title="High Cross, East Hertfordshire" label="High Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104554" start="1860" end="1869" title="High Wych" label="High Wych"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758485" start="1871" end="1880" title="Highfield, Hertfordshire" label="Highfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233534" start="1882" end="1891" title="Hinxworth" label="Hinxworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798" start="1893" end="1900" title="Hitchin" label="Hitchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477061" start="1902" end="1911" title="Hoddesdon" label="Hoddesdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884860" start="1913" end="1920" title="Holwell, Hertfordshire" label="Holwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294234" start="1922" end="1930" title="How Wood, Hertfordshire" label="How Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q641643" start="1932" end="1939" title="Hunsdon" label="Hunsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9295005" start="1941" end="1954" title="Hunton Bridge" label="Hunton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341030" start="1963" end="1972" title="Ickleford" label="Ickleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184854" start="1981" end="2003" title="Jersey Farm" label="Jersey Farm, St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q602057" start="2012" end="2020" title="Kelshall" label="Kelshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520292" start="2022" end="2031" title="Kensworth" label="Kensworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410247" start="2033" end="2040" title="Kimpton, Hertfordshire" label="Kimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997933" start="2042" end="2060" title="King&amp;#x27;s Walden" label="King&amp;#x27;s Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19807" start="2062" end="2075" title="Kings Langley" label="Kings Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414249" start="2077" end="2093" title="Kinsbourne Green" label="Kinsbourne Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q386419" start="2095" end="2104" title="Knebworth" label="Knebworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744829" start="2113" end="2157" title="Hertingfordbury" label="Labby Green and Letty Green, Hertingfordbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219637" start="2159" end="2166" title="Langley, Hertfordshire" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486323" start="2168" end="2179" title="Langleybury" label="Langleybury"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129526" start="2181" end="2190" title="Leavesden, Hertfordshire" label="Leavesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521521" start="2192" end="2200" title="Lemsford" label="Lemsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533185" start="2202" end="2217" title="Letchmore Heath" label="Letchmore Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19801" start="2219" end="2241" title="Letchworth Garden City" label="Letchworth Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19935" start="2243" end="2259" title="Leverstock Green" label="Leverstock Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426293" start="2261" end="2267" title="Lilley, Hertfordshire" label="Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24640646" start="2269" end="2282" title="Little Amwell" label="Little Amwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340823" start="2284" end="2302" title="Little Berkhamsted" label="Little Berkhamsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129826" start="2304" end="2320" title="Little Gaddesden" label="Little Gaddesden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650231" start="2322" end="2335" title="Little Hadham" label="Little Hadham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650354" start="2337" end="2351" title="Little Hormead" label="Little Hormead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908231" start="2353" end="2366" title="Little Munden" label="Little Munden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776483" start="2368" end="2381" title="Little Offley" label="Little Offley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652613" start="2383" end="2399" title="Little Wymondley" label="Little Wymondley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366058" start="2401" end="2414" title="London Colney" label="London Colney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836636" start="2416" end="2428" title="Long Marston, Hertfordshire" label="Long Marston"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762801" start="2430" end="2439" title="Loudwater, Hertfordshire" label="Loudwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q19940" start="2448" end="2459" title="Maple Cross" label="Maple Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337154" start="2461" end="2469" title="Markyate" label="Markyate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773885" start="2471" end="2483" title="Marshalswick" label="Marshalswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q19945" start="2485" end="2511" title="Sarratt" label="Micklefield Green, Sarratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976520" start="2513" end="2529" title="Sandon, Hertfordshire" label="Mill End, Sandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15253399" start="2531" end="2554" title="Mill End, Rickmansworth" label="Mill End, Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862780" start="2556" end="2565" title="Moor Park, Hertfordshire" label="Moor Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065388" start="2567" end="2578" title="Much Hadham" label="Much Hadham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965141" start="2587" end="2619" title="Napsbury" label="Napsbury including Napsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966799" start="2621" end="2631" title="Nash Mills" label="Nash Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967733" start="2633" end="2652" title="Nasty, Hertfordshire" label="Nasty, Great Munden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790739" start="2654" end="2663" title="Nettleden" label="Nettleden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018058" start="2665" end="2679" title="Newgate Street, Hertfordshire" label="Newgate Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790926" start="2681" end="2688" title="Newnham, Hertfordshire" label="Newnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999" start="2690" end="2705" title="Tring" label="New Mill, Tring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057690" start="2707" end="2714" title="Northaw" label="Northaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057738" start="2716" end="2727" title="Northchurch" label="Northchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056168" start="2729" end="2740" title="North Mymms" label="North Mymms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060552" start="2742" end="2748" title="Norton, Hertfordshire" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245807" start="2750" end="2762" title="Nuthampstead" label="Nuthampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074078" start="2771" end="2779" title="Oaklands, Hertfordshire" label="Oaklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776483" start="2781" end="2787" title="Offley" label="Offley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084163" start="2789" end="2803" title="Old Hall Green" label="Old Hall Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084183" start="2805" end="2817" title="Old Hatfield" label="Old Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q386419" start="2819" end="2832" title="Old Knebworth" label="Old Knebworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115613" start="2834" end="2839" title="Oxhey" label="Oxhey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138051" start="2848" end="2859" title="Park Street, Hertfordshire" label="Park Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190601" start="2861" end="2873" title="Piccotts End" label="Piccotts End"/>
<link wikidata="Q19174" start="2875" end="2891" title="Bedmond" label="Pimlico, Bedmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198115" start="2893" end="2899" title="Pirton, Hertfordshire" label="Pirton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062030" start="2901" end="2911" title="Potten End" label="Potten End"/>
<link wikidata="Q19775" start="2913" end="2924" title="Potters Bar" label="Potters Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616487" start="2926" end="2933" title="Preston, Hertfordshire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410528" start="2935" end="2945" title="Puckeridge" label="Puckeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262464" start="2947" end="2956" title="Puttenham, Hertfordshire" label="Puttenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19772" start="2965" end="2972" title="Radlett" label="Radlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646028" start="2974" end="2981" title="Radwell, Hertfordshire" label="Radwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19853" start="2983" end="2991" title="Redbourn" label="Redbourn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848766" start="2993" end="2997" title="Reed, Hertfordshire" label="Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9611" start="2999" end="3012" title="Rickmansworth" label="Rickmansworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332666" start="3014" end="3019" title="Ridge, Hertfordshire" label="Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334982" start="3021" end="3030" title="Ringshall, Berkhamsted" label="Ringshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976520" start="3032" end="3041" title="Sandon, Hertfordshire" label="Roe Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q19804" start="3043" end="3050" title="Royston, Hertfordshire" label="Royston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380702" start="3052" end="3062" title="Rush Green, East Hertfordshire" label="Rush Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493759" start="3064" end="3071" title="Rushden, Hertfordshire" label="Rushden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517435" start="3080" end="3087" title="Sacombe" label="Sacombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396898" start="3089" end="3102" title="Sacombe Green" label="Sacombe Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226" start="3104" end="3113" title="St Albans" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741051" start="3115" end="3126" title="St Ippolyts" label="St Ippolyts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595182" start="3128" end="3149" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Walden" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595487" start="3151" end="3161" title="St Stephen, Hertfordshire" label="St Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976520" start="3163" end="3169" title="Sandon, Hertfordshire" label="Sandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596049" start="3171" end="3180" title="Sandridge" label="Sandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19945" start="3182" end="3189" title="Sarratt" label="Sarratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q591900" start="3191" end="3205" title="Sawbridgeworth" label="Sawbridgeworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490153" start="3207" end="3214" title="Shenley, Hertfordshire" label="Shenley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543669" start="3240" end="3249" title="Smallford" label="Smallford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551418" start="3251" end="3262" title="South Mimms" label="South Mimms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613044" start="3264" end="3275" title="South Oxhey" label="South Oxhey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966486" start="3277" end="3287" title="Spellbrook" label="Spellbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744829" start="3289" end="3319" title="Hertingfordbury" label="Staines Green, Hertingfordbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q280961" start="3321" end="3328" title="Standon, Hertfordshire" label="Standon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598664" start="3330" end="3347" title="Standon Green End" label="Standon Green End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025612" start="3349" end="3366" title="Stanstead Abbotts" label="Stanstead Abbotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347568" start="3368" end="3390" title="Stanstead St Margarets" label="Stanstead St Margarets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278875" start="3392" end="3402" title="Stapleford, Hertfordshire" label="Stapleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19795" start="3404" end="3413" title="Stevenage" label="Stevenage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619007" start="3415" end="3430" title="Stocking Pelham" label="Stocking Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707192" start="3439" end="3444" title="Tewin" label="Tewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679835" start="3446" end="3455" title="Therfield" label="Therfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796260" start="3457" end="3464" title="Thorley, Hertfordshire" label="Thorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799185" start="3466" end="3476" title="Thundridge" label="Thundridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360004" start="3478" end="3485" title="Tonwell" label="Tonwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10999" start="3487" end="3492" title="Tring" label="Tring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620068" start="3494" end="3507" title="Tring railway station" label="Tring Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569452" start="3509" end="3523" title="Trowley Bottom" label="Trowley Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959171" start="3532" end="3541" title="Wadesmill" label="Wadesmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505008" start="3543" end="3550" title="Walkern" label="Walkern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963108" start="3552" end="3562" title="Wallington, Hertfordshire" label="Wallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963879" start="3564" end="3573" title="Walsworth" label="Walsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q968959" start="3575" end="3588" title="Waltham Cross" label="Waltham Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q19792" start="3590" end="3594" title="Ware, Hertfordshire" label="Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110845" start="3596" end="3604" title="Wareside" label="Wareside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969687" start="3606" end="3623" title="Warner&amp;#x27;s End" label="Warner&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973993" start="3625" end="3634" title="Waterford, Hertfordshire" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599229" start="3636" end="3654" title="Water End, Dacorum" label="Water End, Dacorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056168" start="3656" end="3678" title="Water End, Welwyn Hatfield" label="Water End, North Mymms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="3690" end="3697" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016956" start="3699" end="3714" title="Watton-at-Stone" label="Watton-at-Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q642500" start="3716" end="3728" title="Welham Green" label="Welham Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773" start="3730" end="3738" title="Well End, Hertfordshire" label="Well End"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981595" start="3740" end="3754" title="Wellpond Green" label="Wellpond Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972764" start="3756" end="3762" title="Welwyn" label="Welwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789" start="3764" end="3782" title="Welwyn Garden City" label="Welwyn Garden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417864" start="3784" end="3792" title="Westmill" label="Westmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613163" start="3794" end="3800" title="Weston, Hertfordshire" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989824" start="3802" end="3814" title="Westwick Row" label="Westwick Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061521" start="3816" end="3825" title="West Hyde" label="West Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q19947" start="3827" end="3841" title="Wheathampstead" label="Wheathampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992405" start="3843" end="3853" title="Whempstead" label="Whempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996955" start="3855" end="3863" title="Whitwell, Hertfordshire" label="Whitwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q920902" start="3865" end="3872" title="Widford, Hertfordshire" label="Widford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582838" start="3874" end="3883" title="Wigginton, Hertfordshire" label="Wigginton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021338" start="3885" end="3892" title="Willian, Hertfordshire" label="Willian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023331" start="3894" end="3902" title="Wilstone" label="Wilstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032691" start="3904" end="3917" title="Woodhall Farm" label="Woodhall Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033842" start="3919" end="3932" title="Woollensbrook" label="Woollensbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051192" start="3934" end="3947" title="Woolmer Green" label="Woolmer Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036875" start="3949" end="3956" title="Wormley, Hertfordshire" label="Wormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967270" start="3958" end="3965" title="Wyddial" label="Wyddial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638203" start="3982" end="4032" title="List of settlements in Hertfordshire by population" label="List of settlements in Hertfordshire by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858915" start="4034" end="4059" title="List of places in England" label="List of places in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139602" wikidata="Q834878" url="?curid=1139602" title="Rákospalota">
<text>Rákospalota (literally: &quot;Castle [upon] Rákos [brook]&quot;, ) is a neighbourhood in Budapest, Hungary. With Pest-újhely and Új-palota it comprises District XV.

== History ==
In the early Middle Ages there were about six villages in the northern part of the Rákos plain. About 1200 A.D. a church was built on the little hill next to the Szilas brook - the ancestor of the present Catholic chapel. The first name of the village was Nyír (Birch) but later it became known as Palota (Palace) after the castle of the landowner. The little community had very hard times in the 16th-17th centuries when Buda was under Turkish occupation, but it survived thanks to the residents&#x27; strong Calvinist religion. After the liberation of Buda in 1696, by the Habsburgs, Rákospalota became one of the most prosperous villages in the region. Market gardening and agriculture flourished, and two baroque churches were built: one for the Calvinist community (it was demolished at the beginning of the 20th century) and a little Catholic chapel in 1735 on the foundation of the ancient village church.

In 1846 the first railway line of Hungary (Pest-Vác) reached Rákospalota, and the Forest of Palota became a popular beauty spot with restaurants and places of entertainment. Next to the station a new suburb grew with nice villas for the rich citizens of Pest. In the second part of the 19th century Palota was already out of fashion and later the forest was cut down, but in this neighbourhood there are still some derelict, beautiful old homes.

From the 1890s the spread of Budapest reached the village and the council sold out the ploughland for new suburbs. The residents of Újfalu (New Village), Benkő-telep, Kovácsi-telep and Kertváros (Garden Town) were lower-middle-class people and workers from Budapest. These new settlements have a regular grid layout and pleasant houses with gardens. The old peasant village became known as Öregfalu (Old Village). A sumptuous Gothic Revival cathedral, Lutheran Church, Moorish Synagoge, a new big Calvinist church and a Town Hall marked the wealth of the town but there were serious social tensions between the new and the old residents. Between August and November 1919, a Romanian garrison stationed here, after the Hungarian Bolshevik army was crushed by the Romanian Royal army in the War of 1918-1919. The peasant farmers of Öregfalu kept their rich folk traditions, religion and sense of identity until the 1950s. Rákospalota became a town in 1923 and part of Great-Budapest in 1950.

== Neighbourhoods ==
One of the most interesting and special parts of the district is MÁV-telep. The suburb was built by the Hungarian State Railways (MÁV) in the early 1900s for railwaymen. The big art deco blocks of flats were planned in uniform style. Two churches and a market hall served the spiritual and physical needs of the close, tight-knit community. Unfortunately the new M3 freeway cut into two pieces the &quot;telep&quot; (settlement) in the 1980s, but the leafy gardens, narrow streets and nice buildings breathe a special ambience.

== Landmarks ==
Most of the district around Rákospalota is pleasant, leafy suburb. The Fő utca (Main Street) with the tramway has a typical market-town appearance from the turn-of-the-century. In Juhos utca (Sheep Street) and Attila utca there are still some old peasant houses. The Register of National Monuments consists of four buildings from Rákospalota: Old Catholic Chapel (1735), Old Museum (Classic Revival, 19th century), Liva-malom (mill on the Szilas brook, 18th to 19th centuries) and Girl&#x27;s College (early 20th century).

The district is home to sports club Rákospalotai EAC

==Sport==
*Rákospalotai EAC
*Testvériség SE

== See also ==
* Újpalota
* Pestújhely
* Budapest</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q834878" start="0" end="11" title="Rákospalota" label="Rákospalota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="89" end="97" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="99" end="106" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233483" start="113" end="124" title="Pestújhely" label="Pest-újhely"/>
<link wikidata="Q385355" start="129" end="138" title="Újpalota" label="Új-palota"/>
<link wikidata="Q851110" start="152" end="163" title="List of districts in Budapest" label="District XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="193" end="204" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="263" end="274" title="Rákos plain" label="Rákos plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="385" end="393" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="602" end="606" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="617" end="624" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="690" end="708" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="734" end="738" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="836" end="852" title="Market gardening" label="Market gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="857" end="868" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1128" end="1135" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1176" end="1192" title="Forest of Palota" label="Forest of Palota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="1570" end="1578" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="1967" end="1981" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1993" end="2001" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="2330" end="2346" title="Hungarian–Romanian War" label="War of 1918-1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="2633" end="2639" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q168082" start="2657" end="2681" title="Hungarian State Railways" label="Hungarian State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="2731" end="2739" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q961752" start="3687" end="3703" title="Rákospalotai EAC" label="Rákospalotai EAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164604" start="3705" end="3719" title="Testvériség SE" label="Testvériség SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q385355" start="3738" end="3746" title="Újpalota" label="Újpalota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233483" start="3749" end="3759" title="Pestújhely" label="Pestújhely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="3762" end="3770" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139606" wikidata="Q2816339" url="?curid=1139606" title="Behind the Mask">
<text>Behind the Mask may refer to:

== Film and television ==
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1932 film), a film featuring Boris Karloff
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1936 film) or &quot;The Man Behind the Mask&quot;, a British mystery film by Michael Powell
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1946 film), a film starring Kane Richmond as the character The Shadow
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1958 film), a film starring Michael Redgrave
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1991 film), a documentary film about the Irish Republican Army
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot;, a 1997 film featuring Cyril Nri
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (1999 film), a film starring Donald Sutherland
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (2002 film), a 2002 unauthorized documentary about Slipknot
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (2006 film), a documentary about the Animal Liberation Front
* &quot;Behind the Mask: The Rise of Leslie Vernon&quot;, a 2006 horror film
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (documentary series), a 2013 documentary series about sports mascots
* &quot;Marvel&#x27;s Behind the Mask&quot;, a 2021 documentary film special from Marvel

== Literature ==
* &quot;Behind the Mask: My Autobiography&quot;, a 2019 book by Tyson Fury
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot;, an autobiography by American baseball umpire Dave Pallone
* &quot;Behind the Mask: On Sexual Demons, Sacred Mothers, Transvestites, Gangsters, Drifters, and Other Japanese Cultural Heroes&quot;, a book by Ian Buruma
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot;, a short story by Lin Carter, included in the collection &quot;The Xothic Legend Cycle: The Complete Mythos Fiction of Lin Carter&quot;

== Music ==
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (album) or the title song, by Fleetwood Mac, 1990
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot; (song), by Yellow Magic Orchestra, 1978; covered by several performers
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot;, a song by Twice from &quot;Eyes Wide Open&quot;, 2020
* &quot;Behind the Mask&quot;, the theme song for the TV series &quot;Queen of Swords&quot;, performed by Jose Feliciano, 2000

== Other uses ==
* Behind the Mask (NPO), a non-profit African LGBT rights organisation

== See also ==
* &quot;Behind a Mask&quot;, a novella by Louisa May Alcott
* &quot;Behind a Mask&quot; (album), a 2013 album by Louna
* The Face Behind the Mask (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2816339" start="0" end="15" title="Behind the Mask" label="Behind the Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880861" start="59" end="98" title="Behind the Mask (1932 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1932 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749856" start="133" end="172" title="The Man Behind the Mask" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1936 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23368783" start="256" end="295" title="Behind the Mask (1946 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1946 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880860" start="357" end="396" title="Behind the Mask (1958 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1958 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="433" end="472" title="Behind the Mask (1991 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1991 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620017" start="488" end="524" title="List of films featuring the Irish Republican Army" label="film about the Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261060" start="578" end="587" title="Cyril Nri" label="Cyril Nri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="590" end="629" title="Behind the Mask (1999 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (1999 film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="633" end="664" title="Donald Sutherland filmography#1990s" label="film starring Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880864" start="667" end="706" title="Behind the Mask (2002 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (2002 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572033" start="757" end="796" title="Behind the Mask (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="854" end="896" title="Behind the Mask: The Rise of Leslie Vernon" label="Behind the Mask: The Rise of Leslie Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950983" start="925" end="973" title="Behind the Mask (documentary series)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (documentary series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112184576" start="1030" end="1059" title="Marvel&amp;#x27;s Behind the Mask" label="Marvel&amp;#x27;s Behind the Mask"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1137" end="1170" title="Behind the Mask: My Autobiography" label="Behind the Mask: My Autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229517" start="1280" end="1292" title="Dave Pallone" label="Dave Pallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q680728" start="1440" end="1450" title="Ian Buruma" label="Ian Buruma"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1544" end="1610" title="The Xothic Legend Cycle: The Complete Mythos Fiction of Lin Carter" label="The Xothic Legend Cycle: The Complete Mythos Fiction of Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q280810" start="1632" end="1667" title="Behind the Mask (album)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q792044" start="1712" end="1746" title="Behind the Mask (song)" label="&amp;quot;Behind the Mask&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q100144600" start="1869" end="1883" title="Eyes Wide Open (Twice album)" label="Eyes Wide Open"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1981" title="Queen of Swords (TV series)#Music" label="Queen of Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q85746362" start="2043" end="2064" title="Behind the Mask (NPO)" label="Behind the Mask (NPO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893891" start="2136" end="2149" title="Behind a Mask" label="Behind a Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129445" start="2190" end="2223" title="Behind a Mask (album)" label="&amp;quot;Behind a Mask&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733014" start="2249" end="2290" title="The Face Behind the Mask (disambiguation)" label="The Face Behind the Mask (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139609" wikidata="Q346471" url="?curid=1139609" title="São Jorge">
<text>São Jorge (), Portuguese for Saint George, may refer to the following places:
==Brazil==
*São Jorge, Alto Paraíso de Goiás, is a village in the State of Goiás
*São Jorge d&#x27;Oeste, a municipality in the state of Paraná 
*São Jorge, Rio Grande do Sul, is a municipality in the State of Rio Grande do Sul 
*São Jorge, São Paulo, is a bairro (neighbourhood) in the city of São Paulo

==Cape Verde==
*São Jorge, Cape Verde, a village in the municipality of São Filipe, Fogo
*São Jorge (Santiago), a settlement in the municipality of São Lourenço dos Órgãos, Santiago

==Ghana==
*São Jorge da Mina, present-day Elmina, Ghana (formerly the Gold Coast)

==Portugal==
*Caldas de São Jorge, town in the civil parish of São Jorge, in the municipality of Santa Maria da Feira 
*Castle of São Jorge, a Moorish castle located in the center of Lisbon 
*São Jorge (Arcos de Valdevez), a civil parish in the municipality of Arcos de Valdevez
*São Jorge de Arroios, a civil parish within the city of Lisbon
*São Jorge da Beira, a civil parish in the municipality of Covilhã
*São Jorge do Selho, a civil parish in the municipality of Guimarães
*São Jorge de Vizela, a civil parish within the city of Vizela

In the Azores:
*São Jorge Island, an island in the Central Group

In Madeira:
*Arco de São Jorge, a civil parish in the municipality of Santana
*São Jorge (Santana), a civil parish in the municipality of Santana

==Mozambique==
* Goa Island, also known as 

==See also==
* Saint George (disambiguation) - English</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346471" start="0" end="9" title="São Jorge" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="29" end="41" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q10375709" start="90" end="122" title="São Jorge, Alto Paraíso de Goiás" label="São Jorge, Alto Paraíso de Goiás"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803364" start="160" end="182" title="São Jorge d&amp;#x27;Oeste" label="São Jorge d&amp;#x27;Oeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006981" start="224" end="252" title="São Jorge, Rio Grande do Sul" label="São Jorge, Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="308" end="328" title="São Jorge, São Paulo" label="São Jorge, São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837104" start="335" end="341" title="bairro" label="bairro"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="373" end="382" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252033" start="400" end="421" title="São Jorge, Cape Verde" label="São Jorge, Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509828" start="474" end="494" title="São Jorge (Santiago)" label="São Jorge (Santiago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="578" end="595" title="São Jorge da Mina" label="São Jorge da Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="609" end="615" title="Elmina" label="Elmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="617" end="622" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="637" end="647" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209226" start="664" end="683" title="Caldas de São Jorge" label="Caldas de São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q636780" start="770" end="789" title="Castle of São Jorge" label="Castle of São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="842" end="871" title="São Jorge (Arcos de Valdevez)" label="São Jorge (Arcos de Valdevez)"/>
<link wikidata="Q490302" start="911" end="928" title="Arcos de Valdevez" label="Arcos de Valdevez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850958" start="930" end="950" title="São Jorge de Arroios" label="São Jorge de Arroios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="994" end="1012" title="São Jorge da Beira" label="São Jorge da Beira"/>
<link wikidata="Q849026" start="1052" end="1059" title="Covilhã" label="Covilhã"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1061" end="1079" title="São Jorge do Selho" label="São Jorge do Selho"/>
<link wikidata="Q170903" start="1119" end="1128" title="Guimarães" label="Guimarães"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1130" end="1149" title="São Jorge de Vizela" label="São Jorge de Vizela"/>
<link wikidata="Q551955" start="1185" end="1191" title="Vizela" label="Vizela"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="1209" end="1225" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q776573" start="1272" end="1289" title="Arco de São Jorge" label="Arco de São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088866" start="1338" end="1357" title="São Jorge (Santana)" label="São Jorge (Santana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49641979" start="1423" end="1433" title="Goa Island" label="Goa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156271" start="1466" end="1495" title="Saint George (disambiguation)" label="Saint George (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139616" wikidata="Q5871983" url="?curid=1139616" title="Hitler's Priestess">
<text>Hitler&#x27;s Priestess: Savitri Devi, the Hindu-Aryan Myth and Neo-Nazism is a book by Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke. It is a biography of Savitri Devi.

It was published by New York University Press in hardcover in June 1998 () and in paperback in October 2000 ().

==Contents==
* Introduction: &quot;Discovered Alive in India: Hitler&#x27;s Guru!&quot;
# Hellas and Judah
# Āryāvarta
# Hindu nationalism
# The Nazi Brahmin
# The Duce of Bengal
# Akhenaten and Animal Rights
# The Hitler Avatar
# Defiance
# Pilgrimage
# The ODESSA Connection
# Inside the Neo-Nazi International
# Last Years and Legacy: Nazis, Greens, and the New Age
* Notes and References, Bibliographical Note, Index, About the Author

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="88" end="112" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="122" end="131" title="biography" label="biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q270337" start="135" end="147" title="Savitri Devi" label="Savitri Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="170" end="195" title="New York University Press" label="New York University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="318" end="323" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="325" end="331" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="339" end="343" title="Guru" label="Guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="353" end="359" title="Greece" label="Hellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q282220" start="364" end="369" title="Judah (Bible)" label="Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428240" start="372" end="381" title="Āryāvarta" label="Āryāvarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="384" end="401" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="408" end="412" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="413" end="420" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714189" start="427" end="431" title="Duce" label="Duce"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="435" end="441" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="444" end="453" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="458" end="471" title="Animal Rights" label="Animal Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="485" end="491" title="Avatar" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="505" end="515" title="Pilgrimage (book)" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159658" start="522" end="528" title="ODESSA" label="ODESSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862789" start="549" end="575" title="List of neo-Nazi organizations" label="the Neo-Nazi International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="608" end="614" title="Green movement" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="624" end="631" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139618" wikidata="Q5058938" url="?curid=1139618" title="Censorship in the Republic of Ireland">
<text>In Ireland, the state retains laws that allow for censorship, including specific laws covering films, advertisements, newspapers and magazines, as well as terrorism and pornography, among others. In the early years of the state, censorship was more widely enforced, particularly in areas that were perceived to be in contradiction of Catholic dogma, including abortion, sexuality and homosexuality. The church had banned many books and theories for centuries, listed in the .

== Overview ==
Freedom of speech is protected by Article 40.6.1 of the Irish constitution, which says &quot;The right of the citizens to express freely their convictions and opinions&quot; . However the article qualifies this right, providing that it may not be used to undermine &quot;public order or morality or the authority of the State&quot;. Furthermore, the constitution explicitly requires that the publication of &quot;seditious, or indecent matter&quot; be a criminal offence. The scope of the protection afforded by this Article has been interpreted restrictively by the judiciary, largely as a result of the wording of the Article, which qualifies the right before articulating it. Indeed, until an authoritative pronouncement on the issue by the Supreme Court, many believed that the protection was restricted to &quot;convictions and opinions&quot; and, as a result, a separate right to communicate was, by necessity, implied into Article 40.3.2.

Under the European Convention on Human Rights Act 2003, all of the rights afforded by the European Convention serve as a guideline for the judiciary to act upon. The act is subordinate to the constitution.

Censorship in the country is primarily managed by three bodies; the Censorship of Publications Board which deals with written media like newspapers, magazines and books; the broadcasting regulator Coimisiún na Meán which deals with electronic media like radio, television and the internet and Irish Film Classification Office which deals with film, video and occasionally computer games. All three bodies get their authority from the government’s Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media.

Due to the country&#x27;s geographic and cultural closeness to the United Kingdom, Ireland has considerable strong access to the British media. This is especially true in broadcasting media which easily spills over to Ireland, which enables many in the country to watch or listen many major British broadcasters like the BBC and ITV. In due course, regulations regarding censorship in the UK are indirectly enabled in Ireland.

In terms of press freedom, Ireland is noted highly on the Press Freedom Index. The country is ranked Good over the last five years, and is currently in 2024 ranked eighth.

==Current censorship==

===Film===

The Irish Film Classification Office, previously known as the Irish Film Censors Office until 2008, heavily cut films and videos for rental release, or placed high age ratings on them. In 2000 &quot;The Cider House Rules&quot; received an 18 certificate in Ireland due to its themes of abortion and incest, although in other countries, such as the UK, the film received a 12 certificate. 

===Advertisements===

Advertisements are regulated by the Advertising Standards Authority, and must be truthful and factually accurate. In addition, adverts for illegal services are not allowed. The ASA is a voluntary industry body which has no statutory powers and has no power to remove a publication from circulation. This power is vested in the Censorship of Publications Board. Given the status of the ASA some advertisers choose to continually ignore its rulings by running controversial advertisements purely to draw attention to their products and services.

===Newspapers, magazines and news websites===

Whilst still theoretically censorable, newspapers and magazines are free to publish anything which does not break Ireland&#x27;s tough libel or contempt of court laws. The Censorship of Publications Board reviews newspapers and magazines referred to it by the Revenue Commissioners and by members of the public. Until the late 1980s a large number of (mainly foreign) newspaper and magazines were banned in Ireland including &quot;Playboy&quot; and the &quot;News of the World.&quot; &quot;Playboy&quot;&#x27;s ban was lifted in 1995, while on the other hand the British edition of the &quot;News of the World&quot; was still, theoretically, banned when it ceased publication in 2011. Similarly, the news website &quot;The Journal&quot; regularly prevents public commenters from commenting in ongoing court cases, as they may break the country&#x27;s strict contempt of court laws.

The listing of periodicals under permanent banning orders as of 2007 includes many publications which have ceased to be published, as well as ones which are now sold freely without any realistic chance of prosecution, such as naturist magazine &quot;Health and Efficiency&quot;. A large proportion of the banning orders date from the 1950s or before; and a similar proportion cover true crime publications, a type which were once illegal due to a perceived risk of glorifying or encouraging criminal behaviour. In 2011, softcore pornographic magazine publisher Paul Raymond Publications successfully appealed against the ban on five of their publications; &quot;Mayfair&quot;, &quot;Escort&quot;, &quot;Club International&quot;, &quot;Razzle&quot; and &quot;Men Only&quot;, one of which, &quot;Razzle&quot; has been banned since 1935, and these publications can now be freely sold.

The press in Ireland is however self-regulated by its own ombudsman, the Press Council of Ireland. The Press Council is a voluntary industry body, that regulates all major newspapers, magazines and news websites. However, it has no statutory powers and has no power to remove a publication from circulation.

===Pornography===

Pornography that includes any participants being beneath the Irish age of consent [which is 17 years old] is strictly illegal. This includes videos, DVD, film, photographs, digital files, drawings and text descriptions. There are no other laws banning specific types of pornography in Ireland. However, distribution of obscene material by the telephone network can be prosecuted under the Post Office (Amendment) Act of 1951, the Director of Film Classification at the Irish Film Classification Office may ban public display of films considered to be obscene, and the Censorship of Publications Board may prohibit the sale and distribution of books and periodicals if they are found to be obscene. In the 1960s, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Dublin John Charles McQuaid lobbied the Irish government to have pornography banned outright.

The government-controlled IE Domain Registry currently has a ban on all domain names it considers &quot;offensive or contrary to public policy or generally accepted principles of morality&quot;. In particular, the domains &quot;pornography.ie&quot; and &quot;porn.ie&quot; are known to be banned.

=== Music ===
In general, music is not censored in Ireland although broadcasters follow the ombudsman Coimisiún na Meán broadcasting rules regarding language and suitability when broadcasting on the radio. For example, in 2017 radio station RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta removed the track &quot;C.E.A.R.T.A&quot; by the Belfast Irish language rap group Kneecap from an afternoon programme&#x27;s playlist due to the song&#x27;s &quot;drug references and cursing&quot;.

In the past, references to records or songs being &quot;banned&quot; in Ireland refer to one or more radio stations refusing to play the songs rather than any legislative ban, although before 1989 it may have been a moot point given that the only legal broadcasting stations in Ireland were those operated by state broadcaster RTÉ. In the 1930s there was even a short-lived airplay ban on an entire &quot;genre&quot; of music known as the &quot;ban on Jazz&quot; (with an exceptionally wide definition of what constituted &quot;jazz&quot;). Such bans only served to further increase listenership to foreign radio stations (such as Radio Luxembourg and the BBC) in Ireland, and led to the growth of Irish pirate radio.

The song &quot;&quot;They never came home&quot;&quot; on the album Ordinary Man by Christy Moore which was released in 1984, was banned on grounds of contempt of court by a judge of the High Court in 9 August 1985. It wasn&#x27;t overturned until the album was re-released by his record company in 2004.

In 2003, the Irish national carrier Aer Lingus dropped a playlist of Irish rebel songs that was offered for its passengers, after a complaint from the UUP politician Roy Beggs, saying it was offensive to Northern Irish unionists.

=== Books ===

Like magazines and newspapers, books can be banned by the Censorship of Publications Board which can ban publications based on obscenity or indecency. The most notable ban was the novel &quot;The Tailor and Ansty&quot; by the author Eric Cross which was questioned in the Seanad by senator Sir John Keane on its banning in 1942. Book bans were significantly reduced when the authority of the Index Librorum Prohibitorum was abolished in 1966. A year later, the ban was changed so it only lasted twelve years instead of indefinitely, although it could be renewed. In 2010, the last series of book bans were finished as the previously bans have completed their twelve year limitation. Since March 2016 the Censorship of Publications Board has issued a book ban for &quot;The Raped Little Runaway&quot; by Jean Martin due repeat references of raping a ten-year-old minor. In February 2017, a man from County Clare was charged with possession of book in question, making first such charge in twenty years.

While Irish novel &quot;Ulysses&quot; was censored in the U.S. between 1921 and 1934, and the UK between 1922 and 1936, the Censorship of Publications Board never banned it. When the British government in 1985 censor the publication of the memoirs of the MI5 spy Peter Wright in &quot;Spycatcher,&quot; on the grounds of national security&quot;,&quot; it was not applicable in Ireland and the controversy made the book a bestseller.

=== Radio and television broadcasting ===
Broadcasting in Ireland is regulated by the Coimisiún na Meán, formerly known as the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI) until 2023. It is the body that is authorised to regulated what can be broadcast on radio and TV on behalf of the Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media. All three major TV companies; RTÉ, Virgin Media Television and TG4 have editorial guidelines. News, current affairs programmes and chat shows are like newspapers, in that they are pretty much free to broadcast on anything, provided they don&#x27;t break Ireland&#x27;s strict libel and contempt of court laws. They are also required to be objective and broadcast a range of political viewpoints. Television companies since 2005, voluntary have put a watershed of 9pm, in which programming for a mature audience can be shown. A significant quantity of audio-visual media in Ireland comes directly or indirectly from the United Kingdom, and as such it is subject to British regulation and censorship. British audio-visual media is not regulated by Coimisiún na Meán, but by Ofcom.

In January 2014 in an incident known as Pantigate, during an interview on the RTÉ One talk show &quot;The&quot; &quot;Saturday Night Show&quot;, the host Brendan O&#x27;Connor was discussing homophobia with well known drag queen Rory O&#x27;Neill&quot;.&quot; O&#x27;Neill commented in his opinion, that the religious think tank, the Iona Institute, and two conservative journalists John Waters and Breda O’Brien of being homophobic. The three parties collectively threaten RTÉ with libel action, and forced the broadcaster to remove the clip from the catch-up service the RTÉ Player. RTÉ settled the three parties with an 85 thousand euro pre-court settlement. Nevertheless, the pre-court settlement itself was harshly criticised by members of Oireachtas especially civil rights campaigner senator David Norris, and MEP Paul Murphy. RTÉ&#x27;s head of television defended the pay-out stating that it saved RTÉ &quot;an absolute multiple&quot; in the long term.

===Central Bank of Ireland===

In July 2009, the Central Bank of Ireland blocked insurers and banks from making any critical statements containing &quot;any references&quot; to them by means either of &quot;public press statements&quot; or un-approved public references, whether &quot;written or oral.&quot;

===Credit Institutions (Stabilisation) Act 2010===
The Credit Institutions (Stabilisation) Act 2010 was passed by 78–71 in December 2010 in partial response to the post-2008 Irish banking crisis. Section 60 provides that the Irish government may apply to the courts for an order made under the Act to be heard in private. Section 59 prohibits anyone from publishing the fact that the minister has made an order or direction under the Act; even publication that such a prohibition order has been made is also an offence under the Act. Days after the Act was passed, an order was sought by minister Brian Lenihan Jnr and approved allowing a transfer of over €3.7 billion into Allied Irish Bank, then an insolvent bank. Two &quot;Irish Times&quot; reporters were expelled from the court by judge Maureen Harding Clark just before the hearing.

=== Oireachtas footage ===
Proceedings of the Dáil Éireann, the Seanad Éireann, and various Oireachtas Committees are broadcast on Oireachtas TV and the Houses of Oireachtas website. Although the copyright of footage is under a version of a Creative Commons licence CC BY 4.0, the copyright does limit on the use of this footage, including a prohibition of its use in the context of political satire or light entertainment. A way to deal around this restriction is by presenting footage of the Oireachtas as stand alone news, and then showing the footage through satire. An example of this is when in December 2009, Green deputy Paul Gogarty used unparliamentary language in the Dáil, by saying the f-word at Labour deputy Emmet Stagg. Due to it wide reporting in the press, the deputy was asked to explain the situation on a chat show which included showings of the incident. 

==Formerly censored topics==

===The Troubles: RTÉ and Section 31 of the Broadcasting Authority Act===

During the Troubles in Northern Ireland, from 1968 to 1994, censorship was used principally to prevent Raidió Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ) interviews with spokespersons for Sinn Féin and for the IRA. Under Section 31 of the Broadcasting Authority Act 1960, the Minister for Posts and Telegraphs could issue a ministerial order to the government-appointed RTÉ Authority not to broadcast material specified in the written order. In 1971 the first order under the section was issued by Fianna Fáil Minister for Posts and Telegraphs Gerry Collins. It instructed RTÉ not to broadcast,
:&quot;any matter that could be calculated to promote the aims or activities of any organisation which engages in, promotes, encourages or advocates the attaining of any particular objectives by violent means&quot;.
Collins refused clarification when RTÉ asked for advice on what this legal instruction meant in practice. RTÉ interpreted the Order politically to mean that spokespersons for the Provisional and Official IRA could no longer appear on air. In 1972 the government sacked the RTÉ Authority for not sufficiently disciplining broadcasters the government accused of breaching the Order. RTÉ&#x27;s Kevin O&#x27;Kelly had reported on an interview that he conducted with the (Provisional) IRA Chief of Staff, Seán Mac Stíofáin, on the Radio Éireann &quot;This Week&quot; programme. The recorded interview was not itself broadcast. MacStiofáin&#x27;s voice was not heard. However, he was arrested after the O&#x27;Kelly interview and charged with membership of the IRA, an illegal organisation. Soon afterwards, at the non-jury Special Criminal Court O&#x27;Kelly was jailed briefly for contempt because he refused to identify a voice on a tape seized by the Gardaí as that of Mac Stiofáin. Mac Stiofáin was convicted in any case. On appeal by O&#x27;Kelly to the Supreme Court a fine was substituted as a means purging O&#x27;Kelly&#x27;s contempt. The fine was paid anonymously and O&#x27;Kelly was released.

In 1976, Labour Minister for Posts and Telegraphs Conor Cruise O&#x27;Brien amended Section 31 of the Broadcasting Act. He also issued a new Section 31 Order. O&#x27;Brien censored spokespersons for specific organisations, including the Sinn Féin political party, rather than specified content. That prevented RTÉ from interviewing Sinn Féin spokespersons under any circumstances, even if the subject was unrelated to the IRA campaign in Northern Ireland conflict. On one occasion that led to the interruption of a call-in show about gardening on radio because a caller was a member of Sinn Féin. The changes eroded liberal interpretations by RTÉ of its censorship responsibilities, afforded by the original 1971 Order, and encouraged a process of illiberal interpretation.

Also in 1976, O&#x27;Brien attempted to extend censorship to newspaper coverage of the &#x27;Troubles&#x27; by targeting in particular &quot;The Irish Press&quot;; In an interview with &quot;Washington Post&quot; reporter Bernard Nossiter, O&#x27;Brien identified &quot;Press&quot; Editor, Tim Pat Coogan, as someone who might be prosecuted under a proposed amendment to the Offences Against the State Act. O&#x27;Brien cited pro-republican Letters to the Editor as coming under the terms of the legislation for which the editor could be made legally liable. Coogan, who was immediately warned of O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s intentions by Nossiter, then published the Nossiter-O&#x27;Brien interview (as did &quot;The Irish Times&quot;). Due to public opposition the proposed provisions were amended to remove the perceived threat to newspapers. The 1973-77 Fine Gael/Labour Coalition Government also tried to prosecute the &quot;Irish Press&quot; for its coverage of the maltreatment of republican prisoners by the Garda &quot;Heavy Gang&quot;, with the paper winning the case.

The United Kingdom operated similar rules between 1988 and 1994 covering eleven republican and loyalist organisations, but they were less severe than the Section 31 Order. For instance, British broadcasters could dub Sinn Féin speeches and interviews with an actor&#x27;s voice, or subtitle footage. That was not possible in Ireland where O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s Section 31 Order, which remained in place until 1994, specifically banned &#x27;reports of interviews&#x27; with spokespersons for censored organisations. Moreover, British broadcasters were more liberal than RTÉ in defining when a person was a spokesperson for a censored organisation. They held that an MP like Sinn Féin President Gerry Adams or a Sinn Féin councillor could be interviewed about constituency business or in their private capacity. RTÉ would not allow this under any circumstances, a stance that caused a crisis in RTÉ in the early 1990s. In addition, the British censorship rules did not apply at election time, whereas they operated at all times in Ireland.

Under severe pressure from successive governments, from approximately 1977 RTÉ extended Section 31 to censor all Sinn Féin members, not merely the Sinn Féin spokespersons specified in the Section 31 Order. This extension of the Order came to a head in the early 1990s. Sinn Féin member Larry O&#x27;Toole was not permitted to talk on RTÉ about a strike in &quot;Gateaux&quot;, a cake factory in Finglas, north Dublin, where O&#x27;Toole worked. He was informed in writing by RTÉ that his Sinn Féin membership was the reason for the censorship. O&#x27;Toole challenged what he contended was RTÉ self-censorship in the High Court. After the court found in O&#x27;Toole&#x27;s favour in August 1992, RTÉ appealed the ruling that liberalised its Section 31 regime. Consequently, RTÉ were accused of appealing to be censored. RTÉ then lost in the Supreme Court in March 1993.

In 1991, European Commission of Human Rights upheld the ban in &quot;Purcell v. Ireland&quot;, though not unanimously. The Section 31 broadcasting ban lapsed on 19 January 1994 because it was not renewed by Minister for Arts, Culture and the Gaeltacht Michael D. Higgins, eight months prior to the August 1994 IRA ceasefire. The last person censored under the lapsing Order in January 1994 was Larry O&#x27;Toole, who was banned from appearing in a joint RTÉ/Channel Four programme on the Northern Ireland conflict, chaired by Channel Four&#x27;s John Snow. The Channel Four production team wished to speak to O&#x27;Toole about his court victory. RTÉ would not permit this as O&#x27;Toole had been chosen as a candidate in European elections to be held five months later. RTÉ said O&#x27;Toole was therefore a Sinn Féin spokesperson, irrespective of the capacity in which he was to be interviewed or the proposed interview&#x27;s distant relationship with a future election.

===Abortion and birth control===

Until the early 1990s, discussing abortion in any way, including the provision of impartial information, was disallowed, and any publication providing information on the medical treatment would be confiscated. In the 1980s, the Irish Family Planning Association and the Trinity College Dublin and University College Dublin students&#x27; unions were successfully sued by the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children for publishing telephone numbers for abortion clinics in the United Kingdom. On one occasion British newspaper &quot;The Guardian&quot; was withdrawn by its Irish distributors for a day to pre-empt a threatened ban due to the inclusion of an advertisement for a UK abortion clinic in that day&#x27;s issue (despite the advert having appeared on a number of prior occasions without incident).

In May 1992, Proinsias De Rossa leader of Democratic Left, subverted this ban by reading the offending telephone numbers into the Dáil record; because of his absolute privilege as a member of the Oireachtas, he avoided prosecution.

In the wake of the X Case, the fourteenth amendment of the Constitution of Ireland approved in November 1992 removed the constitutional prohibition. Regulation of access to information to abortion was put on a statutory basis by the Regulation of Information (Services Outside the State For Termination of Pregnancies) Act 1995. This was repealed by the Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018.

===Blasphemy===

Until 2018, blasphemy was prohibited by Article 40.6.1°.i. of the 1937 Constitution. The common law offence of blasphemous libel, applicable only to Christianity and last prosecuted in 1855, was ruled in 1999 to be incompatible with the Constitution&#x27;s guarantee of religious equality. Since banning blasphemy was mandated by the Constitution, abolishing the offence required a referendum. Since it was deemed by the government of the time that a referendum solely for that purpose &quot;would rightly be seen as a time wasting and expensive exercise&quot;, the lacuna was filled in 2009 by a new offence of &quot;publication or utterance of blasphemous matter&quot;, against any religion, under the Defamation Act 2009, section 36. The law included the offence of blasphemous libel. It was never enforced.

The advocacy group Atheist Ireland responded to the enactment by announcing the formation of the &quot;Church of Dermotology&quot; (named after Dermot Ahern, the minister who introduced the 2009 law).[51] On the date on which the law came into effect, it published a series of potentially blasphemous quotations on its website and vowed to challenge any resulting legal action.[52] Scientist Richard Dawkins described the new law as &quot;wretched, backward and uncivilised&quot;.

After the 2015 &quot;Charlie Hebdo&quot; shooting, Ali Selim of the Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland suggested that the blasphemy provision of the Defamation Act 2009 should be applied to any media outlet reproducing cartoons depicting Muhammad as part of the &quot;Je suis Charlie&quot; campaign.[53]

The text of the 2009 Act defined the crime where: &quot;he or she publishes or utters matter that is grossly abusive or insulting in relation to matters held sacred by any religion, thereby causing outrage among a substantial number of the adherents of that religion, and (b) he or she intends, by the publication or utterance of the matter concerned, to cause such outrage&quot;.
* The judge would need to be satisfied the matter is &quot;abusive and insulting&quot; as distinct from opinion.
* Judicial interpretation of &quot;held sacred&quot; and &quot;any religion&quot; could render the Act unenforceable.
* A defendant&#x27;s lawyer would argue the definition of &quot;grossly&quot;, &quot;thereby causing&quot;, &quot;outrage&quot; and &quot;substantial number&quot;.
* Article s.36 (3) provides that – &quot;it shall be a defence to proceedings for an offence under this section for the defendant to prove that a reasonable person would find genuine literary, artistic, political, scientific, or academic value in the matter to which the offence relates.
* Further, a &quot;religion&quot; is further defined in s.36 (4); it – &quot;does not include an organisation or cult— (a) the principal object of which is the making of profit, or (b) that employs oppressive psychological manipulation— (i) of its followers, or (ii) for the purpose of gaining new followers.&quot;
* s.36 could be held to be in breach of 44.2.1° of the Constitution &quot;The State shall not impose any disabilities or make any discrimination on the ground of religious profession, belief or status.&quot;
In October 2014, Minister of State Aodhán Ó Ríordáin gave the official government response to a report on the blasphemy issue by the Constitutional Convention, announcing that it had decided to hold a referendum on the issue.[71]

On 26 October 2018, a constitutional amendment was approved by a margin of 64.85% to 35.15% which removed the offence of blasphemy from the Constitution. The provisions of the Defamation Act 2009 were repealed upon the commencement of the Blasphemy (Abolition of Offences and Related Matters) Act 2019 on 17 January 2020.

===Mail===

Censorship of mail in Ireland goes back to, at least, the 1660s and possibly earlier. Both overt and covert censorship of Irish mail took place, mainly in England and sometimes using warrants, from then through the 19th century. The Irish Civil War saw mail raided by the IRA, marked as censored and sometimes opened. This was the first recorded such action within the new independent state. The National Army also opened mail and censorship of irregulars&#x27; mail in prisons took place.

During the 1939–1945 Emergency extensive postal censorship took place under the control of the Department of Defence whose powers were conferred by the Emergency Powers Act 1939. Civilian mail was controlled by the approximately 200 censors who worked in Dublin&#x27;s Exchequer Street and who had all been vetted by the G2 Directorate of Intelligence and the Gardaí. Using the Black List and White List to target certain mail, the small staff were unable to effect 100% censorship; however, continental European mail was all reviewed, as was all incoming and outbound airmail. Following the overthrow of France and the Low Countries in May 1940, the British instigated full terminal mail censorship but the Irish were unable to look at more than about 10% due to the enormous staff this would have required. Covert censorship of mail between Northern Ireland and the south was effected by warrants obtained by G2, who also obtained warrants from the Minister for Justice for internal mail oversight.

The military internees, British, German and a few of other nationalities, held in the Curragh Camp had their mail censored, even local mail, though they are known to have posted their letters outside the camp to try to evade the camp oversight. IRA internees&#x27; mail was also censored under the Offences against the State Act that had been in place since June 1939.

The Border Campaign led to the internment of IRA members, again under the Offences against the State Act, and their mail was overtly censored between 1957 and 1960 most often with an Irish language censor mark reading &quot;Ceadaithe ag an gCinsire Mileata&quot; applied to the outside of the letter and also to the sheets contained within. In the 1980s mail from IRA members imprisoned in Limerick and likely also Portlaoise prisons has been recorded as censored but there is no record of civilian mail censorship since 1945.

==Unusual omissions==
Since the 1990s, Ireland has rapidly developed from socially conservative, deeply religious Catholic-dominated state into a modern European, secular and liberal nation. Nevertheless this has created a situation where legislation and regulation regarding certain areas of censorship hasn&#x27;t caught up with the necessary requirements needed and as such this leads to various unusual omissions.

===Music videos===

Under the Video Recordings Act 1989, works that are concerned with religion, music or sport may be exempt from classification, thus music videos are exempt from film classification, whereas in the UK, they must be classified. Broadcasters usually use their discretion and obey the British classifications and showing-time restrictions. Ireland receives all of the UK-licensed music channels, which are subject to British music video laws; with the only Irish regulated broadcasters regularly showing music videos were Channel 6 or City Channel. However, for several years TV3 ran a late-night music programme, which quite often showed uncensored music videos containing large amounts of nudity.

===Computer games===

Unlike most other countries, the Film Classification Office have little involvement in computer game censorship. This led to an unusual situation where in 1997 the British-owned retailer GAME sold the British censored version of &quot;Carmageddon&quot;, whilst domestically owned retailers sold the uncut versions directly imported from the United States. Games may only be banned if the IFCO judges that it is unfit for viewing, which has happened once to date, with the banning of &quot;Manhunt 2&quot; on 18 June 2007, over two weeks before its launch date of 6 July.

Ireland is a member of PEGI, but places no legal powers on its age recommendations. Retailers may attempt to enforce them at their discretion.

=== Sex shops ===
Due to Ireland’s old conservative censorship laws on pornography and the country&#x27;s social conservatism, dedicated sex shops didn&#x27;t exist until the establishment of Utopia in February 1991 in the town of Bray, County Wicklow. Since then, Ireland unusually doesn&#x27;t have any kind of licensing system or rules governing the sale of pornography or sex toys. Compared to the United Kingdom, where if a retailer who wishes to sell any kind of pornographic material such as magazines and DVDs, is required by law to be licensed by the local council with a sex establishment licence. By contrast, Irish retailers can sell any adult material provided it is legal. For example, the Irish branch of the second-hand retailer CeX openly sells second-hand pornographic DVDs. Also where in Great Britain, the shop windows of such retailers must be frosted or covered up as required under Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981, no such requirements exist in Ireland. Any rules governing shop displays are more due to self censorship by the retailer, or guidelines governed by the retailer’s landlord. The only legislation is the Indecent Advertisements Act 1889, which prohibits the display of anything indecent, that affixed to an object that is visible from the street.

There have been calls by both local residents and the then industry trade body, the Irish Association of Adult Shops to establish such a licensing system in Ireland. This is mainly so to restrict the development of such establishments near schools. As of 2024, no such licensing system exists.

==Irish statutes on censorship==

*The Censorship of Films Act 1923 was an act &quot;to provide for the official censoring of cinematographic pictures and for other matters connected therewith&quot;. It established the office of the Official Censor of Films and a Censorship of Films Appeal Board (and see William Magennis). It was amended by the Censorship of Films (Amendment) Act 1925, in connection with advertisements for films. It was amended by the Censorship of Films (Amendment) Act 1930 to extend the legislation to &quot;vocal or other sounds&quot; accompanying pictures.
*The Committee on Evil Literature was appointed in 1926 to report on the effectiveness of the censorship laws. It concluded that the then-current censorship laws were inadequate, and that the government had a duty to ban &quot;morally corrupting&quot; literature.
*The Censorship of Publications Act 1929 was an act &quot;to make provision for the prohibition of the sale and distribution of unwholesome literature and for that purpose to provide for the establishment of a censorship of books and periodical publications, and to restrict the publication of reports of certain classes of judicial proceedings and for other purposes incidental to the matters aforesaid&quot;. It established the Censorship of Publications Board. A book caught by the act was one that &quot;in its general tendency indecent or obscene ... or ... advocates the unnatural prevention of conception or the procurement of abortion or miscarriage or the use of any method, treatment or appliance for the purpose of such prevention or such miscarriage&quot;.
*The Emergency Powers Act 1939 dealt with the preservation of the State in time of war and contained provisions relating to the censorship of communications, including mail, newspapers and periodicals
*The Censorship of Publications Act 1946 repealed a large part of the 1929 act and was &quot;to make further and better provision for the censorship of books and periodical publications&quot;. Periodicals caught by the act included issues that &quot;have devoted an unduly large proportion of space to the publication of matter relating to crime&quot;.
*The Censorship of Publications Act 1967 provided for prohibition orders made on the grounds of indecency or obscenity to expire after a period of twelve years. A further prohibition order could then be made by the Censorship of Publications Board in respect of the same book.
*The Health (Family Planning) Act 1979 deleted references to &quot;the unnatural prevention of conception&quot; in the Censorship of Publications Act 1929 and the Censorship of Publications Act 1946.
*The Video Recordings Act 1989 regulates the broadcast and the sale of videos 
*The Regulation of Information (Services Outside the State for Termination of Pregnancies) Act 1995 modified the effect of the Censorship of Publications Acts 1929 to 1967 in respect of certain information likely to be required by a woman to avail herself of &quot;services provided outside the State for the termination of pregnancies&quot;. However, the information in question must not advocate or promote the termination of pregnancy.
*The Defamation Act 2009 which defines such offences.
*The Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018 repealed
**(a) sections 16 and 17 (1) of the Censorship of Publications Act 1929;
**(b) sections 7 (b) and 9 (1)(b) of the Censorship of Publications Act 1946;
**(c) section 10 of the Health (Family Planning) Act 1979;
**(d) the Regulation of Information (Services outside the State for Termination of Pregnancies) Act 1995.
*The Blasphemy (Abolition of Offences and Related Matters) Act 2019 which
**(a) amended section 7 (2)(a)(ii) of the Censorship of Films Act 1923;
**(b) amended section 3 (2) of the Censorship of Films (Amendment) Act 1925;
**(c) repealed sections 36 and 37 of the Defamation Act 2009.

==References==
==External links==
* Irish Statute Book:
** Censorship of Publications Acts 1929, 1946, 1967
** Censorship of Films Acts 1923, amendments list
* What We Do &gt; Other Regulatory Functions &gt; Censorship/Classification — from Department of Justice website; links to most recent list of prohibited publications 
* Oireachtas Library Catalogue — lists digitised versions of annual reports via the following search queries:
** &quot;censorship of publications board&quot; (most years 1946–1981)
** &quot;Film Censor&quot; (1990–2008) and &quot;Irish Film Classification Office&quot; (since 2009)
*Censorship in Ireland – from the International Freedom of Expression Exchange
*Censorship of publications in Ireland — from the official Irish government information website
*&quot;Tales out of school&quot; — Irish author John McGahern&#x27;s experience with the Irish censorship system
*Sunday Times article on Irish Censor&#x27;s office
*Survey on attitudes of Dublin Population to Section 31 of the Broadcasting Act, Niall Meehan, Jean Horgan, Dublin City University monograph, January 1987</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3" end="10" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="334" end="342" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="360" end="368" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="370" end="379" title="human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="384" end="397" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="492" end="509" title="Freedom of speech" label="Freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="548" end="566" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Irish constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412455" start="1449" end="1493" title="European Convention on Human Rights Act 2003" label="European Convention on Human Rights Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058942" start="1714" end="1746" title="Censorship of Publications Board (Ireland)" label="Censorship of Publications Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q117154461" start="1843" end="1860" title="Coimisiún na Meán" label="Coimisiún na Meán"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349928" start="1939" end="1971" title="Irish Film Classification Office" label="Irish Film Classification Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294422" start="2093" end="2157" title="Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media" label="Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2227" end="2241" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302956" start="2289" end="2302" title="Mass media in the United Kingdom" label="British media"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="2331" end="2349" title="Broadcasting" label="broadcasting media"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2481" end="2484" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="2489" end="2492" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503884" start="2531" end="2551" title="Censorship in the United Kingdom" label="censorship in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="2600" end="2613" title="Freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="2646" end="2665" title="World Press Freedom Index" label="Press Freedom Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349928" start="2801" end="2833" title="Irish Film Classification Office" label="Irish Film Classification Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q648977" start="2996" end="3017" title="The Cider House Rules (film)" label="The Cider House Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058942" start="3536" end="3568" title="Censorship of Publications Board (Ireland)" label="Censorship of Publications Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="3936" end="3941" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="3945" end="3962" title="contempt of court" label="contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058942" start="3973" end="4005" title="Censorship of Publications Board (Ireland)" label="Censorship of Publications Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317995" start="4061" end="4082" title="Revenue Commissioners" label="Revenue Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="4232" end="4239" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="4260" end="4277" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711643" start="4514" end="4537" title="TheJournal.ie" label="&amp;quot;The Journal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q152311" start="4910" end="4918" title="Naturism" label="naturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627787" start="4934" end="4955" title="H&amp;amp;E naturist" label="Health and Efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541116" start="5066" end="5076" title="true crime" label="true crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000136" start="5204" end="5225" title="Softcore pornography" label="softcore pornographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153120" start="5245" end="5270" title="Paul Raymond Publications" label="Paul Raymond Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797119" start="5340" end="5359" title="Mayfair (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Mayfair&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397398" start="5361" end="5379" title="Escort (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Escort&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979936" start="5381" end="5411" title="Club International (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Club International&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299692" start="5413" end="5431" title="Razzle (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Razzle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816219" start="5442" end="5450" title="Men Only" label="Men Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q536390" start="5599" end="5613" title="Self-regulatory organization" label="self-regulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q327538" start="5962" end="5976" title="age of consent" label="age of consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058942" start="6463" end="6495" title="Censorship of Publications Board (Ireland)" label="Censorship of Publications Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785668" start="6607" end="6642" title="Archbishop of Dublin (Roman Catholic)" label="Roman Catholic Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225766" start="6643" end="6663" title="John Charles McQuaid" label="John Charles McQuaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970602" start="6757" end="6775" title="IE Domain Registry" label="IE Domain Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q117154461" start="7131" end="7148" title="Coimisiún na Meán" label="Coimisiún na Meán"/>
<link wikidata="Q253599" start="7270" end="7294" title="RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta" label="RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="7344" end="7351" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="7352" end="7366" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q65327538" start="7377" end="7384" title="Kneecap (band)" label="Kneecap"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="7710" end="7720" title="moot point" label="moot point"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="7821" end="7824" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196539" start="8125" end="8141" title="Radio Luxembourg (English)" label="Radio Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8150" end="8153" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071714" start="8192" end="8210" title="Irish pirate radio" label="Irish pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8234" end="8254" title="Stardust fire#&amp;quot;They Never Came Home&amp;quot;" label="They never came home"/>
<link wikidata="Q257267" start="8296" end="8309" title="Christy Moore" label="Christy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="8363" end="8380" title="contempt of court" label="contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q671721" start="8399" end="8409" title="High Court (Ireland)" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q83716" start="8554" end="8564" title="Aer Lingus" label="Aer Lingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672918" start="8587" end="8603" title="Irish rebel song" label="Irish rebel song"/>
<link wikidata="Q841045" start="8669" end="8672" title="Ulster Unionist Party" label="UUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372562" start="8684" end="8693" title="Roy Beggs Jr" label="Roy Beggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="8722" end="8746" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Northern Irish unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058942" start="8822" end="8854" title="Censorship of Publications Board (Ireland)" label="Censorship of Publications Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767903" start="8956" end="8976" title="The Tailor and Ansty" label="The Tailor and Ansty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386321" start="8997" end="9007" title="Eric Cross (writer)" label="Eric Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="9036" end="9042" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527863" start="9054" end="9068" title="Sir John Keane, 5th Baronet" label="Sir John Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q22765" start="9156" end="9183" title="Index Librorum Prohibitorum" label="Index Librorum Prohibitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="9791" end="9798" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="10022" end="10025" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124586" start="10030" end="10042" title="Peter Wright (MI5 officer)" label="Peter Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787608" start="10052" end="10062" title="Spycatcher" label="Spycatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q117154461" start="10287" end="10304" title="Coimisiún na Meán" label="Coimisiún na Meán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972136" start="10328" end="10361" title="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland" label="Broadcasting Authority of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294422" start="10482" end="10546" title="Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media" label="Department of Tourism, Culture, Arts, Gaeltacht, Sport and Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990726" start="10583" end="10606" title="Virgin Media Television (Ireland)" label="Virgin Media Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252456" start="10611" end="10614" title="TG4" label="TG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="10824" end="10829" title="Defamation" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="10834" end="10851" title="contempt of court" label="contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974417" start="10998" end="11007" title="Watershed (broadcasting)" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503884" start="11235" end="11245" title="Censorship in the United Kingdom" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="11320" end="11325" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131846" start="11368" end="11377" title="Rory O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Pantigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762311" start="11424" end="11471" title="The Saturday Night Show" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Saturday Night Show&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961043" start="11482" end="11503" title="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Connor (media personality)" label="Brendan O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="11519" end="11529" title="homophobia" label="homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="11546" end="11556" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849655" start="11662" end="11676" title="Iona Institute" label="Iona Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263168" start="11711" end="11722" title="John Waters (columnist)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960101" start="11727" end="11740" title="Breda O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Breda O’Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277955" start="11901" end="11911" title="RTÉ Player" label="RTÉ Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175932" start="12127" end="12139" title="David Norris (politician)" label="David Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q616919" start="12149" end="12160" title="Paul Murphy (Irish politician)" label="Paul Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q283785" start="12340" end="12363" title="Central Bank of Ireland" label="Central Bank of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613071" start="12764" end="12794" title="post-2008 Irish banking crisis" label="post-2008 Irish banking crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912430" start="13197" end="13214" title="Brian Lenihan Jnr" label="Brian Lenihan Jnr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642179" start="13274" end="13291" title="Allied Irish Bank" label="Allied Irish Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134208" start="13327" end="13338" title="Irish Times" label="Irish Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911202" start="13393" end="13414" title="Maureen Harding Clark" label="Maureen Harding Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="13487" end="13499" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="13505" end="13519" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100302" start="13572" end="13585" title="Oireachtas TV" label="Oireachtas TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="13682" end="13706" title="Creative Commons license" label="Creative Commons licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225114" start="13824" end="13840" title="political satire" label="political satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546170" start="13844" end="13863" title="light entertainment" label="light entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q831015" start="14057" end="14062" title="Green Party (Ireland)" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474714" start="14070" end="14082" title="Paul Gogarty" label="Paul Gogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897164" start="14088" end="14112" title="unparliamentary language" label="unparliamentary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="14140" end="14146" title="Fuck" label="f-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="14150" end="14156" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777541" start="14164" end="14175" title="Emmet Stagg" label="Emmet Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="14431" end="14443" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="14527" end="14550" title="Raidió Teilifís Éireann" label="Raidió Teilifís Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76382" start="14591" end="14600" title="Sinn Féin" label="Sinn Féin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="14613" end="14616" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781521" start="14913" end="14946" title="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs" label="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q446685" start="14947" end="14960" title="Gerry Collins (politician)" label="Gerry Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481076" start="15715" end="15732" title="Seán Mac Stíofáin" label="Seán Mac Stíofáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="16164" end="16170" title="Garda Síochána" label="Gardaí"/>
<link wikidata="Q735593" start="16467" end="16492" title="Conor Cruise O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conor Cruise O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="16932" end="16944" title="call-in show" label="call-in show"/>
<link wikidata="Q958406" start="17333" end="17348" title="The Irish Press" label="The Irish Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="17383" end="17398" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778356" start="17482" end="17496" title="Tim Pat Coogan" label="Tim Pat Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="18042" end="18051" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303872" start="18292" end="18327" title="1988–1994 British broadcasting voice restrictions" label="similar rules between 1988 and 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q76139" start="18956" end="18967" title="Gerry Adams" label="Gerry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q969978" start="20183" end="20218" title="European Commission of Human Rights" label="European Commission of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865756" start="20381" end="20425" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Minister for Arts, Culture and the Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q57276" start="20426" end="20444" title="Michael D. Higgins" label="Michael D. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q109313222" start="20484" end="20497" title="Chronology of Provisional Irish Republican Army actions (1992–1999)" label="IRA ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q534947" start="20898" end="20916" title="1994 European Parliament election in Ireland" label="European elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004166" start="21413" end="21446" title="Irish Family Planning Association" label="Irish Family Planning Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="21455" end="21477" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="21482" end="21507" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="21508" end="21528" title="students&amp;#x27; union" label="students&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673263" start="21560" end="21605" title="Society for the Protection of Unborn Children" label="Society for the Protection of Unborn Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="21723" end="21735" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399396" start="22012" end="22030" title="Proinsias De Rossa" label="Proinsias De Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185856" start="22041" end="22056" title="Democratic Left (Ireland)" label="Democratic Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="22129" end="22133" title="Dáil" label="Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404273" start="22157" end="22175" title="parliamentary privilege" label="absolute privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="22195" end="22205" title="Oireachtas" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818664" start="22251" end="22257" title="X Case" label="X Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071440" start="22263" end="22283" title="Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="fourteenth amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="22291" end="22314" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697516" start="22586" end="22642" title="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018" label="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="22674" end="22683" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="22728" end="22745" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="1937 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="22751" end="22761" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="22762" end="22769" title="Offence (law)" label="offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925325" start="22773" end="22790" title="blasphemous libel" label="blasphemous libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="23044" end="23054" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q830480" start="23228" end="23234" title="Lacuna (law)" label="lacuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925325" start="23431" end="23448" title="blasphemous libel" label="blasphemous libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813316" start="23493" end="23508" title="Atheist Ireland" label="Atheist Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23674" end="23677" title="Blasphemy law in the Republic of Ireland#cite note-51" label="[51"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23851" end="23854" title="Blasphemy law in the Republic of Ireland#cite note-52" label="[52"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="23866" end="23881" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18718876" start="23971" end="24005" title="Charlie Hebdo shooting" label="&amp;quot;Charlie Hebdo&amp;quot; shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082411" start="24024" end="24058" title="Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland" label="Islamic Cultural Centre of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144589" start="24184" end="24202" title="Depictions of Muhammad" label="depicting Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720579" start="24224" end="24239" title="Je suis Charlie" label="Je suis Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24255" end="24258" title="Blasphemy law in the Republic of Ireland#cite note-53" label="[53"/>
<link wikidata="Q905726" start="25534" end="25560" title="psychological manipulation" label="psychological manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325081" start="25865" end="25882" title="Minister of State (Ireland)" label="Minister of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778602" start="25883" end="25900" title="Aodhán Ó Ríordáin" label="Aodhán Ó Ríordáin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26073" end="26076" title="Blasphemy law in the Republic of Ireland#cite note-71" label="[71"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063954" start="26101" end="26125" title="Thirty-seventh Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="26597" end="26605" title="warrant (law)" label="warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="26647" end="26662" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="26686" end="26689" title="Irish Republican Army (1922–1969)" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q327063" start="26810" end="26823" title="Irish Defence Forces" label="National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673189" start="26859" end="26869" title="irregulars" label="irregulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337549" start="26916" end="26935" title="The Emergency (Ireland)" label="1939–1945 Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q915060" start="26946" end="26963" title="postal censorship" label="postal censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294498" start="27000" end="27021" title="Department of Defence (Ireland)" label="Department of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370636" start="27057" end="27082" title="Emergency Powers Act 1939" label="Emergency Powers Act 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799334" start="27226" end="27256" title="Directorate of Intelligence (Ireland)" label="G2 Directorate of Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366959" start="27265" end="27271" title="Garda Síochána" label="Gardaí"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="27283" end="27293" title="Blacklist" label="Black List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141748" start="27298" end="27308" title="Whitelist" label="White List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="27474" end="27481" title="airmail" label="airmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865904" start="27856" end="27876" title="Minister for Justice (Ireland)" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935258" start="27993" end="28005" title="Curragh Camp" label="Curragh Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349516" start="28205" end="28235" title="Offences against the State Acts 1939-1998" label="Offences against the State Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q748098" start="28277" end="28296" title="Border Campaign (Irish Republican Army)" label="The Border Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q827026" start="28570" end="28576" title="cover (philately)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="28879" end="28900" title="Social conservatism" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035475" start="28902" end="28937" title="Religion in the Republic of Ireland" label="deeply religious Catholic-dominated"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="29376" end="29388" title="music videos" label="music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778100" start="29762" end="29771" title="3e" label="Channel 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123086" start="29775" end="29787" title="City Channel" label="City Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q774637" start="29816" end="29819" title="TV3 (Ireland)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519813" start="30149" end="30153" title="GAME (retailer)" label="GAME"/>
<link wikidata="Q379169" start="30197" end="30208" title="Carmageddon" label="Carmageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799879" start="30451" end="30460" title="Manhunt 2" label="Manhunt 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q192916" start="30557" end="30561" title="Pan European Game Information" label="PEGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="30784" end="30803" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221618" start="30815" end="30823" title="sex shop" label="sex shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q652000" start="30909" end="30929" title="Bray, County Wicklow" label="Bray, County Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q10816" start="31054" end="31061" title="sex toy" label="sex toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244962" start="31177" end="31186" title="Pornographic magazine" label="magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="31191" end="31195" title="Pornographic film" label="DVDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q63843405" start="31259" end="31284" title="sex establishment licence" label="sex establishment licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055676" start="31423" end="31426" title="CeX (retailer)" label="CeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015737" start="31583" end="31619" title="Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981" label="Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="31710" end="31725" title="Self-censorship" label="self censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="32025" end="32044" title="Trade association" label="industry trade body"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32300" end="32328" title="Censorship of Films Act 1923" label="Censorship of Films Act 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015038" start="32567" end="32583" title="William Magennis" label="William Magennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153054" start="32849" end="32877" title="Committee on Evil Literature" label="Committee on Evil Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370636" start="33882" end="33907" title="Emergency Powers Act 1939" label="Emergency Powers Act 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q915060" start="34035" end="34049" title="Postal censorship" label="including mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697516" start="35485" end="35541" title="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018" label="Health (Regulation of Termination of Pregnancy) Act 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100343" start="36189" end="36207" title="Irish Statute Book" label="Irish Statute Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="36394" end="36415" title="Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q995982" start="36573" end="36587" title="Web search query" label="search queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666589" start="36795" end="36839" title="International Freedom of Expression Exchange" label="International Freedom of Expression Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="36899" end="36915" title="Government of Ireland" label="Irish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277641" start="36984" end="36997" title="John McGahern" label="John McGahern"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139620" wikidata="Q5869574" url="?curid=1139620" title="History of the Isle of Wight">
<text>The Isle of Wight is rich in historical and archaeological sites, from prehistoric fossil beds with dinosaur remains, to dwellings and artefacts dating back to the Bronze Age, Iron Age, and Roman periods.

==Formation==
The River Solent was the largest tributary of the Channel River that drained the Hampshire Basin from the Early Pleistocene or late Pliocene. During the Mesolithic period, sea levels in northern Europe were some 30 to 40 metres lower than today, and the land that became Britain was a peninsula of northern Europe. The island was formed at the end of the last Ice Age, about 8–9000 years ago, as sea levels rose, and the land of southern Britain sunk due to the post-glacial rebound of the north that had been under the ice. This flooded the former river valley of the Solent to the north, and the future English Channel to the south, and cut Wight off from the island of Britain. Once open to the sea, tidal scouring widened the Solent.

==Early history==
===Prehistory===

The first inhabitants are assumed to have been hunter-gatherers migrating by land during the Paleolithic 
(Old Stone Age) period, as the ice age began to recede and the climate improved. The island has no visible Paleolithic or Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) sites, but flints from these periods have been found and are on display at Carisbrooke Castle.

===Neolithic ===
There are theories that, during the Neolithic era, Bouldnor was a seaport that traded with the Middle East, or that nomadic gatherers roamed over wider areas than previously thought, because wheat was present there 8,000 years ago, hundreds if not thousands of years before it is known to have been grown in northern Europe.

The Longstone near Mottistone (the standing stone on the hill later becoming an Anglo-Saxon meeting place, this &#x27;moot-stone&#x27; giving name to the nearby settlement) is one of the only three surviving Neolithic (New Stone Age) sites, along with a long barrow on Afton Down and a &#x27;mortuary enclosure&#x27; on Tennyson Down.

===Bronze Age===
Between the Neolithic and Roman eras, Southeastern Britain experienced significant migration from the continent. Finds of late Late Iron Age coins, such as the South Wight and Shalfleet Hoards, suggest trading links both with nearby tribes and further afield. The coins and ingots from these hoards had been defaced before burial, for reasons that are unknown; this feature has only been found in coin finds from Hampshire and Wight. The variety of origin of the coins found locally is more marked than elsewhere in Britain and suggests that the island may have had a degree of political separation.

The island has over 240 bronze age burial mounds or round barrows, nearly all on the chalk downs. One plough-damaged barrow on Gallibury Down was excavated during 1979-80 and dated to between 1600-1400 BCE. There is also evidence from aerial photographs of ring ditches (the remains of barrows) on the limestone near Bembridge. The only significant Iron Age find is at Chillerton Down, where there was a hill fort. However three of the Roman villa sites have also produced late Iron Age pottery, which suggests a continuity of occupation.

Bronze Age Britain had large reserves of tin from mining in Cornwall and Devon. Tin is necessary to smelt bronze. At that time the sea level was much lower, and so tin for export could be brought across the Solent at low tide on carts, or possibly on boats such as those found at Ferriby. A shortage of tin during the Bronze Age collapse and trade disruptions in the Mediterranean around 1300 BCE may have forced metalworkers to seek an alternative to bronze.

===Etymology===
It has been suggested that a 1st century BCE reference to &quot;Ίκτιν&quot; (&quot;Ictin&quot;) by the Graeco-Sicilian Diodorus Siculus might refer to the Isle of Wight, although St. Michael&#x27;s Mount in Cornwall is now considered more likely. A century later, Pliny the Elder uses its Latin name &quot;Vectis&quot; and in the mid 2nd century Ptolemy confirms the position of Vectis as &quot;...below Magnus Portus&quot; (probably the port near Bosham). The Roman historian Suetonius calls the island &quot;insula Vecta&quot; in his account of its capture in year 43, referring to the future emperor Vespasian, who &quot;proceeded to Britain where he fought thirty battles, subjugated two warlike tribes, and captured more than twenty towns, besides the entire Isle of Vectis&quot;.

The form &quot;Vectis&quot; seems reasonably robust but Rivet and Smith were uncertain of its etymology. A gloss on an 1164 manuscript of Nennius equates Old English &quot;wiht&quot; with Latin &quot;divorcium&quot;, which has encouraged writers to think that the island sits like a lever (Latin &quot;vectis&quot;) between the two arms of the Solent. The word could be Brittonic, from a Celtic root akin to Irish &quot;fecht&quot; &quot;journey&quot; and Welsh &quot;gwaith&quot; &quot;work&quot;. A detailed study in 2010 draws attention to the Proto-Germanic word &quot;*wextiz&quot;, which would have been &quot;Vectis&quot; in Latin, and survives in various modern-language forms, including Modern English &quot;whit&quot; &quot;something small&quot; (English &quot;wight&quot; is considered a revival from Middle English), German &quot;wicht&quot; &quot;dwarf, imp&quot;, Dutch &quot;wicht&quot; &quot;little girl&quot; and Norwegian &quot;vette&quot; &quot;being, creature (especially supernatural)&quot;. This might suggest that the meaning is something like &quot;daughter island&quot; or &quot;little companion&quot;; however if Germanic languages were not widely spoken in Britain during the Roman era, as has been the consensus, then they would be an unlikely source for the Latin &quot;Vectis&quot;. However more recently it has been argued that the inhabitants of southern Britain at this time may indeed have been Germanic, rather than Celtic, which could re-open the possibility of the island&#x27;s name having Germanic roots.

===Roman era===
The Romans occupied southern Britain, including the Isle of Wight, for nearly four hundred years. The Romans built no towns on the island, but it became an agricultural centre, and at least seven Roman villas are known. The Roman villas at Newport and Brading have been excavated and are open to the public. When fully developed around AD 300, Brading was probably the largest on the Island, being a courtyard villa with impressive mosaics, suggesting a good income was being made from the agricultural produce of the island.

At Brading Villa a field system can be seen near Brading Down; the remains associated with the villa can be seen as low banks. The chalk downland was cultivated in prehistoric and Roman times because the light chalk soil was not too difficult to plough. It is very likely indeed that the Romans grew vines, as the climate was then warmer than it is now, and on this basis nearby Adgestone Vineyard claims to be the oldest in Britain.

By the late fourth or early fifth centuries AD, Roman troops and officials had withdrawn from Britain.

===Jutish kingdom===
In Bede&#x27;s ecclesiastical history, &quot;Vecta&quot;, along with parts of Hampshire and most of Kent, was settled by Jutes.

According to the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;, Cerdic and his son Cynric conquered the island in 530. The &quot;Chronicle&quot; states that after Cerdic died in 534, the island was given to his nephews Stuf and Wihtgar, who were said to be of Jutish and Gothic origin. The two brothers were said to have set about exterminating the native Britons of Wight, either killing them or driving them into exile. However, it is uncertain whether &quot;Wihtgar&quot;, who is believed to have died in 544, was a real person or came from a misunderstood place name. The &quot;Men of Wight&quot; were known as &quot;Wihtwara&quot;. Carisbrooke was known as the &quot;Fort of the Men of Wight&quot; (&quot;Wihtwarasburgh&quot;), or alternatively the fort may have been named after Wihtgar.

It is believed that the island became a Jutish kingdom ruled by King Stuf and his successors, until 661 when it was invaded by Wulfhere of Mercia and forcibly converted to Christianity. When he returned to Mercia the island reverted to paganism. Arwald was its last Jutish King and the last pagan king in Anglo-Saxon England until the Vikings.

Bede describes the invasion of the island in 686 (noting that Bede was writing fifty years later, and some of his dates are considered approximate) by Caedwalla, a Wessex King. He writes: &quot;After Caedwalla had obtained possession of the kingdom of the Gewissae, he took also the Isle of Wight, which till then was entirely given over to idolatry, and by merciless slaughter, endeavoured to destroy all the inhabitants thereof, and to place in their stead people from his own province; binding himself by a vow, though it is said that he was not yet regenerated in Christ, to give the fourth part of the land and of the spoil to the Lord, if he took the Island. He fulfilled this vow by giving the same for the service of the Lord to Bishop Wilfrid...&quot;. Arwald died in action, and his nephews were betrayed to Caedwalla and executed. Bede adds that 300 &quot;hides&quot; (each being the land that could support a family) were given to the Church.

Little archaeological evidence of this period survives. The main sites are cemeteries at Chessell Down and Bowcombe Down, both excavated in the nineteenth century to produce skeletons, iron swords, knives, and jewellery such as brooches and buckles. The biggest brooches are in the British Museum but some swords, parts of shields, small brooches and buckles are retained in the county archaeological centre.

===The Saxon period and the Vikings===
From about 685-686 the island can be considered part of Wessex, and after the West Saxon kings ruled all England, then part of England.

The Anglo Saxon Chronicle tells how &quot;Wiht-land&quot; suffered from Viking raids: &quot;And then another time they lay in the Isle of Wight, and meanwhile ate out of Hampshire and of Sussex&quot;. Alfred the Great&#x27;s navy defeated the Danes in 871 after they had &quot;ravaged Devon and the Isle of Wight&quot;.

Around 900 the kingdom was divided into shires, and the island became part of the shire of Hampshire.

During the second wave of Viking attacks in the reign of Ethelred the Unready (975-1014) the island was often used by them as a temporary winter base, when they were unable to shelter with their &#x27;cousins&#x27; in Normandy.

In 1002 Ethelred ordered the killing of all Danes in England, in the St. Brice&#x27;s Day Massacre. From 1003 onwards, Sweyn Forkbeard raided England, which may partly have been to avenge the massacre.

Also in 1002 Ethelred had married the Norman princess Emma, and then persuaded the Normans not to give the Vikings shelter. Thereafter they were more regular visitors to the island. In 1006 the Chronicle records: &quot;&quot;when it drew near to winter, the army travelled home, and after Martinmas the raiding-army came to its secure base on the Isle of Wight and there provided themselves everywhere whatever they needed&quot;, and then records raids that they made from there into southern England.

In 1013 Sweyn began a more concerted invasion, and Ethelred was forced to flee to the island: &quot;And then at midwinter the King turned from the fleet to the Isle of Wight, and was there for the season; and after the season turned across the sea to Richard [of Normandy], and was there until the happy event of Swein&#x27;s death occurred&quot;.&quot;.

After Ethelred himself died, England came under Danish rule, and the island continued to be a base for their fleets as recorded by the Chronicle in 1022: &quot;Here King Cnut went out with his ships to Wight.&quot;

After England returned to an English king, occasional Viking raids continued; in 1048 the Chronicle records: &quot;a great earth-tremor widely in England. And in the same year Sandwich and Wight were raided, and the best men that were there were killed; and King Edward [the Confessor] and the earls went out after them in their ships&quot;. The Viking practice of sub-dividing the kingdom amongst powerful Earls had survived their departure, and Wessex came under the control of Earl Godwin, and then his son Harold Godwinson, the future King Harold.

During the war of succession in 1066, the island was used as a base by various contenders. Firstly &quot;came Earl Tostig from beyond the sea into Wight, and with as great a fleet as he could get, and there was given both money and provisions; and then went from there, and did harm everywhere along the sea-cost he could get to&quot; and later his brother Harold Godwinson &quot;...went into Wight, and lay there all the summer and the autumn; and a land army was kept everywhere by the sea, although in the end it was to no avail&quot;. Both men had manors on the island - Harold at Kern and Tostig at Nunwell.

==The Norman Conquest==
After the Battle of Hastings in 1066, the Isle of Wight and the rest of England entered the Norman era. The island would not again be invaded by a foreign nation for another 479 years.

In the Domesday book of 1086 the Island&#x27;s name is &quot;Wit&quot;. William the Conqueror gave its manorial rights to his kinsman William FitzOsbern, who became Lord of the Isle of Wight. Carisbrooke Priory and the fort of Carisbrooke Castle were founded (probably the site had previously been fortified, originally by Romans and subsequently by Jutes or Saxons; there are remains of a late Saxon wall or &quot;burgh&quot; as defence against Viking raiders). Thereafter allegiance on the island was sworn to FitzOsbern as &#x27;Lord&#x27; rather than the king, a role subsequently granted to the de Redvers family by Henry I after his succession in 1100.

For nearly 200 years, 1100-1293, the island was a semi-independent feudal fiefdom, with the de Redvers family ruling from Carisbrooke. The final private owner was the Norman Countess Isabella de Fortibus, who inherited it aged 25 after her brother died suddenly. She ruled for thirty years, during which time all of her children died. On her deathbed in 1293 she was persuaded to sell the island to Edward I, and so it came under control of the English crown.

Newtown was laid out by a Bishop of Winchester and his ecclesiastical estate at Swainston, and granted Borough status in 1256. It did not prosper, partly because it was in competition with the existing ports of Yarmouth, Newport and Southampton, and partly because of the extensive damage it later suffered during French raids (especially in 1377).

Newport was laid out in the late 12th Century as the &#x27;new port&#x27; for Carisbrooke Castle, the town designed on a grid system, unusual for its time.

Notable surviving monuments from this period include the 11th century church of St. Boniface at Bonchurch, the 12th century church at Yaverland, and the Norman entrance arch (now to the churchyard) at Binstead.

==Medieval period==
On 22 April 1313 the ship &quot;St. Marie&quot; was wrecked in Chale Bay, its cargo of wine plundered by local landowners. This led to the construction of St. Catherine&#x27;s Oratory by Walter de Godeton, the Lord of Chale, as penance for the crime.

In 1374, the fleet of the Crown of Castile, led by Fernando Sánchez de Tovar, sacked and burned the island.

In 1377 French raiders attacked and burned several towns, including Newtown, and laid siege to Carisbrooke Castle. Peter de Heynoe, Lord of Stenbury, is said to have killed the French commander with a crossbow shot aimed through an arrow slit still visible in the castle&#x27;s west wall.

The island continued to be governed by a Lordship, but this was now a royal appointment (the position evolving over the years into a Captaincy and eventually a Governorship). It is sometimes said there was a brief interruption in 1444 when Henry Beauchamp was crowned King of the Isle of Wight, with King Henry VI placing the crown on his head; the regal title supposedly expired when he died heirless in 1446. But there little evidence to support this story.

Henry VIII developed the Royal Navy and its permanent base at Portsmouth, and ordered fortifications to be built at Yarmouth, Cowes, East Cowes and Sandown, sometimes using stone from the dissolved monasteries.

==16th century==
The French invaded the island on 21 July 1545. English ships engaged the French navy; two days earlier, the &quot;Mary Rose&quot; had sunk, apparently without damage. Sir Richard Worsley, Captain of the Island, commanded the local militia who resisted the attack, after French troops landed on the southern coast intending to use the island as a base against the mainland. However, the local militia defeated the French troops at the Battle of Bonchurch (although one account claims the French were successful at Bonchurch but defeated at Bembridge).

In 1587 two Catholic missionaries Anderton and Marsden, originally from Lancashire but trained in France, returned to England in disguise, heading for Dover. However, due to a gale their ship landed in Cowes. Fellow passengers had overheard them praying and they were reported on arrival to Governor Carey, taken to London for trial, then executed by hanging, drawing and quartering in Cowes. They were declared &quot;venerable&quot; by Pope Pius XI.

On 23 July 1588 some of the decisive action in the naval battle against the Spanish Armada took place within sight of the island, off Portland. Afterwards the threat of Spanish attacks remained, and the outer fortifications of Carisbrooke Castle were built between 1597 and 1602.

In the late 16th century the bubonic plague arrived in Newport. God&#x27;s Providence House is traditionally the only house in the town where no-one died.

Three of Queen Elizabeth I&#x27;s most influential courtiers came from Newport: Dr Edes, her chaplain, Dr James, her doctor, and Thomas Fleming, who became Lord Chief Justice and presided over the trial of Guy Fawkes in 1606.

==17th and 18th centuries==
Towards the end of the English Civil War in November 1647, Charles I rode out from London to avoid capture by the army, hoping to escape to Jersey. He became lost in the New Forest, missed the intended ship, and so fled to the Isle of Wight. But its Governor Colonel Robert Hammond had already declared for Parliament, and so he imprisoned Charles in Carisbrooke Castle.

The king made several failed attempts to escape, one time famously getting stuck in a castle window. He also had letters smuggled out, most of which were intercepted, which he signed &#x27;J&#x27; to disguise his identity (donkeys operating the castle&#x27;s water-well have subsequently been given names beginning with &#x27;J&#x27;). In September 1648 he discussed the Treaty of Newport with the Presbyterian faction of Parliament, which would have granted him a constitutional monarchy. However, he had no intention of accepting its restrictions, and so also conspired for the Scots to invade England on his behalf. This led to his eventual execution on 30 January 1649.

In 1669, Sir Robert Holmes became governor, and re-organised the island&#x27;s defences. Yarmouth&#x27;s castle was reduced in size, and he built a house for himself alongside, now the George Hotel. His position as the local vice-admiral entitled him to two-thirds of the value of any prizes captured in home waters, and he preyed enthusiastically on foreign ships that happened to sail nearby. On one of his raids he captured a part-completed statue of the French king, and had a likeness of his own head attached instead.

During the Seven Years&#x27; War, the island was used as a staging post for British troops departing on expeditions against the French coast, such as the Raid on Rochefort. During 1759, with a planned French invasion imminent, a large force of soldiers was stationed there. The French called off their invasion following the Battle of Quiberon Bay.

==Early 19th century==
The famous boat-building firm of J. Samuel White was established on the Island in 1802. Other noteworthy marine manufacturers followed over the 19th and 20th centuries including Saunders-Roe a key manufacturer of the Flying-boats and the world&#x27;s first hovercraft. The tradition of maritime industry continues on the Island today.

The famous Regency architect John Nash lived on the island, and designed Newport&#x27;s Guidhall, completed in 1816. It now houses the island&#x27;s history museum.

==Victorian era==
In the 1860s, what remains in real terms the most expensive ever government spending project saw fortifications built on the island and in the Solent, as well as elsewhere along the south coast, including the Palmerston Forts, The Needles Batteries and Fort Victoria, because of fears about the strength of the French and their possible invasion.

Queen Victoria spent childhood holidays on the island and became fond of it. When Queen she made Osborne House her winter home, and so the island became a fashionable holiday resort for many Victorians, including Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Julia Margaret Cameron, and Charles Dickens (who wrote much of &quot;David Copperfield&quot; there), as well as the French painter Berthe Morisot and members of European royalty (many of whom were family relations). Until then, the island had been rural, with most people employed in farming, fishing or boat-building. The boom in tourism, spurred by growing wealth and leisure time, and by Victoria&#x27;s example, led to significant urban development of the island&#x27;s coastal resorts; the island saw significant expansion as many new homes and hotels were built.

Queen Victoria died at Osborne House on 22 January 1901, aged 81.

During her reign, the world&#x27;s first radio station was set up by Marconi in 1897 at the Needles Battery, at the western tip of the island. In 1898 the first paid telegram (called a &#x27;Marconigram&#x27; at the time) was sent from this station, and the island is now the home of the National Wireless Museum, near Ryde.

==Modern history==
In the mid- to late-nineteenth century, a sizeable network of railways was built on the island, notable for its punishing gradients and numerous tunnels, particularly to reach the town of Ventnor. Since the early twentieth century, these lines were often linked to plans for a tunnel under the Solent, an idea still talked of today. Most of the rail network closed between 1956 and 1966, and is now a series of cyclepaths.

During the Second World War the island was frequently bombed. With its proximity to German-occupied France, the island had a number of observation stations and transmitters, as well as the RAF radar station at Ventnor. It was the starting-point for one of the earlier Operation Pluto pipelines to feed fuel to Europe after the Normandy landings. One of the most dramatic incidents on the Isle of Wight during the war came on the night of 4-5 May 1942, in which the Polish destroyer ORP &quot;Błyskawica&quot; successfully defended the towns of Cowes and East Cowes from a detachment of German bombers. Shortly before D-Day Auxiliary Units were deployed to the island for two weeks as a precaution against counter-attacks.

The Needles Battery was used to develop and test the Black Arrow and Black Knight space rockets, which were subsequently launched from Woomera, Australia.
The Isle of Wight Festival was a very large rock festival that took place near Afton Down, West Wight in 1970, following two smaller concerts in 1968 and 1969. The 1970 show was notable both as one of the last public performances by Jimi Hendrix and for the number of attendees, reaching by some estimates 600,000. The festival was revived in 2002 in a different format, and is now an annual event.

The first Governor to hold the crown representative title used now of Lord-Lieutenant was Lord Mountbatten of Burma until his murder in 1979. Lord Mottistone was the last Lord Lieutenant to also hold the title Governor (from 1992 to 1995). Since 1995 there has been no Governor appointed and Mr Christopher Bland has been the Lord Lieutenant.

==Political history==
The island&#x27;s most ancient borough was Newtown on the large natural harbour on the island&#x27;s north-western coast. A French raid in 1377, which destroyed much of the town as well as other Island settlements, sealed its permanent decline. By the middle of the 16th century it was a small settlement long eclipsed by the more easily defended town of Newport. Elizabeth I breathed some life into the town by awarding two parliamentary seats but this ultimately made it one of the most notorious of the Rotten Boroughs. By the time of the Great Reform Act that abolished the seats, it had just fourteen houses and twenty-three voters. The Act also disenfranchised the borough of Yarmouth and replaced the four lost seats with the first MP for the whole Isle of Wight; Newport also retained its two MPs, though these were reduced to one in 1868 and eventually abolished completely in 1885.

Often thought of as part of Hampshire, the Isle of Wight was briefly included in that county when the first county councils were created in 1888. However, a &quot;Home Rule&quot; campaign led to a separate county council being established for the Isle of Wight in 1890, and it has remained separate ever since. Like inhabitants of many islands, Islanders are fiercely jealous of their real (or perceived) independence, and confusion over the Island&#x27;s separate status is a perennial source of friction.

It was planned to merge the county back into Hampshire as a district in the 1974 local government reform, but a last minute change led to it retaining its county council. However, since there was no provision made in the Local Government Act 1972 for unitary authorities, the Island had to retain a two-tier structure, with a county council and two boroughs, Medina and South Wight.

The borough councils were merged with the county council on 1 April 1995, to form a single unitary authority, the Isle of Wight Council. The only significant present-day administrative link with Hampshire is the police service, the Hampshire Constabulary, which is joint between Hampshire and the Isle of Wight.

From the closing decades of the 20th century onwards, there has been considerable debate on the Island over whether or not a bridge or tunnel should connect the island with mainland England. The Isle of Wight Party campaigned from a positive position, although extensive public debate on the subject revealed a strong body of opinion amongst islanders against such a proposal. In 2002 the Isle of Wight Council debated the issue and made a policy statement against the proposal.

==See also==
* History of England
* Isle of Wight Rifles
*Isle of Wight Festival 1970
* Notable residents of the Isle of Wight

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Old Isle of Wight Postcards and Pictures
* Isle of Wight party Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="4" end="17" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="83" end="89" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="100" end="108" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="164" end="174" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="176" end="184" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="190" end="195" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162050" start="224" end="236" title="River Solent" label="River Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q581696" start="270" end="283" title="Channel River" label="Channel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573965" start="301" end="316" title="Hampshire Basin" label="Hampshire Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q444693" start="326" end="343" title="Early Pleistocene" label="Early Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q514873" start="347" end="360" title="late Pliocene" label="late Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="373" end="390" title="Mesolithic period" label="Mesolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="580" end="587" title="Ice age" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="682" end="702" title="post-glacial rebound" label="post-glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="789" end="795" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="825" end="840" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1088" end="1099" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="1223" end="1233" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328595" start="1328" end="1346" title="Carisbrooke Castle" label="Carisbrooke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1402" end="1411" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="1412" end="1415" title="Era (geology)" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949619" start="1417" end="1425" title="Bouldnor Cliff" label="Bouldnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1461" end="1472" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1900" end="1909" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2172" end="2185" title="Late Iron Age" label="Late Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q83893" start="2319" end="2324" title="ingot" label="ingot"/>
<link wikidata="Q109524836" start="3015" end="3030" title="Chillerton Down" label="Chillerton Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096987" start="3186" end="3204" title="Bronze Age Britain" label="Bronze Age Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="3227" end="3230" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="3236" end="3264" title="mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="mining in Cornwall and Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="3286" end="3291" title="smelting" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="3292" end="3298" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="3393" end="3399" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274394" start="3466" end="3473" title="Ferriby Boats" label="Ferriby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059758" start="3504" end="3523" title="Late Bronze Age collapse" label="Bronze Age collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3553" end="3566" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="3782" end="3798" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431121" start="3842" end="3866" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Mount" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="3927" end="3942" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3952" end="3957" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="4009" end="4016" title="Geographia (Ptolemy)" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143046" start="4111" end="4117" title="Bosham" label="Bosham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="4266" end="4275" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="4604" end="4615" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="4820" end="4829" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="4997" end="5011" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805119" start="5221" end="5226" title="wight" label="wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805119" start="5390" end="5407" title="Vættir" label="&amp;quot;vette&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="6015" end="6021" title="Roman Britain" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="6207" end="6218" title="Roman villa" label="Roman villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064005" start="6251" end="6258" title="Newport Roman Villa" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411412" start="6263" end="6270" title="Brading Roman Villa" label="Brading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411412" start="6541" end="6554" title="Brading Roman Villa" label="Brading Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954815" start="6587" end="6599" title="Brading Down" label="Brading Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303808" start="6917" end="6926" title="Adgestone" label="Adgestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="7101" end="7105" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="7176" end="7185" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="7198" end="7202" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q154845" start="7219" end="7224" title="Jutes" label="Jutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="7250" end="7271" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q366048" start="7279" end="7285" title="Cerdic" label="Cerdic"/>
<link wikidata="Q454047" start="7298" end="7304" title="Cynric" label="Cynric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568009" start="7434" end="7438" title="Stuf" label="Stuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568009" start="7443" end="7450" title="Wihtgar" label="Wihtgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="7486" end="7492" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="7571" end="7578" title="Celtic Britons" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568009" start="8050" end="8064" title="Kings of the Isle of Wight" label="Jutish kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568009" start="8079" end="8083" title="Stuf" label="Stuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q164499" start="8137" end="8155" title="Wulfhere of Mercia" label="Wulfhere of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="8216" end="8222" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511840" start="8256" end="8262" title="Arwald" label="Arwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q545062" start="8506" end="8515" title="Caedwalla" label="Caedwalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="9969" end="9975" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="10098" end="10114" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="10300" end="10305" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="10309" end="10318" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183499" start="10378" end="10398" title="Ethelred the Unready" label="Ethelred the Unready"/>
<link wikidata="Q377753" start="10619" end="10648" title="St. Brice&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre" label="St. Brice&amp;#x27;s Day Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q181896" start="10669" end="10684" title="Sweyn Forkbeard" label="Sweyn Forkbeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318142" start="12308" end="12319" title="Earl Godwin" label="Earl Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="12338" end="12354" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="12975" end="12981" title="Tostig Godwinson" label="Tostig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069931" start="12985" end="12992" title="Nunwell" label="Nunwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="13029" end="13047" title="Battle of Hastings" label="Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="13277" end="13298" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244579" start="13339" end="13357" title="William FitzOsbern" label="William FitzOsbern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471154" start="13370" end="13395" title="Lord of the Isle of Wight" label="Lord of the Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039683" start="13397" end="13415" title="Carisbrooke Priory" label="Carisbrooke Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q328595" start="13432" end="13450" title="Carisbrooke Castle" label="Carisbrooke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q979583" start="13957" end="13967" title="Richard de Redvers" label="de Redvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q516610" start="14048" end="14068" title="Isabel de Forz, suo jure 8th Countess of Devon" label="Isabella de Fortibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11790947" start="14326" end="14333" title="Newtown, Isle of Wight" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068671" start="15128" end="15137" title="Chale Bay" label="Chale Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587435" start="15220" end="15248" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Oratory" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246478" start="15283" end="15288" title="Chale, Isle of Wight" label="Chale"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="15343" end="15359" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444942" start="15368" end="15393" title="Fernando Sánchez de Tovar" label="Fernando Sánchez de Tovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079246" start="15541" end="15555" title="Peter de Heyno" label="Peter de Heyno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521796" start="15956" end="15971" title="Henry Beauchamp, 1st Duke of Warwick" label="Henry Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="16016" end="16029" title="Henry VI of England" label="King Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="16177" end="16187" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="16202" end="16212" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="16239" end="16249" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502260" start="16410" end="16435" title="French invasion of the Isle of Wight" label="French invaded the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="16520" end="16529" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q153936" start="16637" end="16644" title="militia" label="militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870514" start="16840" end="16859" title="Battle of Bonchurch" label="Battle of Bonchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="17309" end="17340" title="hanging, drawing and quartering" label="hanging, drawing and quartering"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="17395" end="17407" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="17486" end="17500" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="17544" end="17552" title="Isle of Portland" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575740" start="17755" end="17782" title="God&amp;#x27;s Providence House, Newport" label="God&amp;#x27;s Providence House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="17856" end="17873" title="Queen Elizabeth I" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789657" start="17976" end="17990" title="Thomas Fleming (judge)" label="Thomas Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q13898" start="18053" end="18063" title="Guy Fawkes" label="Guy Fawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="18125" end="18142" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="18161" end="18170" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="18242" end="18248" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="18272" end="18282" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345220" start="18369" end="18383" title="Robert Hammond (English army officer)" label="Robert Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689801" start="18845" end="18862" title="Treaty of Newport" label="Treaty of Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="18872" end="18884" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677713" start="19158" end="19175" title="Sir Robert Holmes" label="Sir Robert Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="19685" end="19706" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417631" start="19828" end="19845" title="Raid on Rochefort" label="Raid on Rochefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201334" start="19867" end="19899" title="Planned French Invasion of Britain (1759)" label="planned French invasion imminent"/>
<link wikidata="Q450318" start="19999" end="20021" title="Battle of Quiberon Bay" label="Battle of Quiberon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676408" start="20080" end="20095" title="J. Samuel White" label="J. Samuel White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806984" start="20225" end="20237" title="Saunders-Roe" label="Saunders-Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="20264" end="20275" title="Flying-boat" label="Flying-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="20304" end="20314" title="hovercraft" label="hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="20394" end="20401" title="Regency" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q309905" start="20412" end="20421" title="John Nash (architect)" label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128307" start="20776" end="20792" title="Palmerston Forts" label="Palmerston Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753363" start="20794" end="20815" title="The Needles Batteries" label="The Needles Batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472222" start="20820" end="20833" title="Fort Victoria (Isle of Wight)" label="Fort Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="20915" end="20929" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q565155" start="21012" end="21025" title="Osborne House" label="Osborne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="21128" end="21149" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q230120" start="21151" end="21173" title="Julia Margaret Cameron" label="Julia Margaret Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="21179" end="21194" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189811" start="21220" end="21237" title="David Copperfield (novel)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q105320" start="21282" end="21296" title="Berthe Morisot" label="Berthe Morisot"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="21857" end="21864" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753363" start="21876" end="21895" title="the Needles Battery" label="the Needles Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284352" start="22184" end="22203" title="Railways on the Isle of Wight" label="network of railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026673" start="22321" end="22328" title="Ventnor" label="Ventnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="22544" end="22553" title="cyclepath" label="cyclepath"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22568" end="22584" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275651" start="22746" end="22763" title="RAF Ventnor" label="RAF radar station"/>
<link wikidata="Q966383" start="22825" end="22840" title="Operation Pluto" label="Operation Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="22884" end="22901" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q349091" start="23039" end="23065" title="ORP Błyskawica (H34)" label="ORP &amp;quot;Błyskawica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400296" start="23180" end="23195" title="Auxiliary Units" label="Auxiliary Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753363" start="23284" end="23299" title="Needles Battery" label="Needles Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q35307" start="23333" end="23344" title="Black Arrow" label="Black Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q152312" start="23349" end="23361" title="Black Knight (rocket)" label="Black Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927441" start="23415" end="23422" title="Woomera Test Facility" label="Woomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="23424" end="23433" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="23439" end="23461" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="23479" end="23483" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690835" start="23514" end="23524" title="Afton Down" label="Afton Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="23668" end="23680" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="23905" end="23920" title="Lord-Lieutenant" label="Lord-Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="23925" end="23950" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797279" start="24244" end="24251" title="Newtown (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q985594" start="24556" end="24563" title="Newport, Isle of Wight" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="24565" end="24576" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="24626" end="24645" title="Member of Parliament" label="parliamentary seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="24707" end="24721" title="Rotten Borough" label="Rotten Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="24743" end="24759" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Great Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049383" start="24883" end="24891" title="Yarmouth (Isle of Wight) (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018738" start="24972" end="24979" title="Newport (Isle of Wight) (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="25202" end="25216" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="25823" end="25848" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="25853" end="25872" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806886" start="25961" end="25967" title="Medina, England" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568935" start="25972" end="25983" title="South Wight" label="South Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="26077" end="26094" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084095" start="26100" end="26121" title="Isle of Wight Council" label="Isle of Wight Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="26181" end="26190" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646041" start="26218" end="26240" title="Hampshire Constabulary" label="Hampshire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="26481" end="26488" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26494" end="26513" title="Isle of Wight Party" label="Isle of Wight Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084095" start="26688" end="26709" title="Isle of Wight Council" label="Isle of Wight Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="26794" end="26812" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999654" start="26815" end="26835" title="Isle of Wight Rifles" label="Isle of Wight Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920369" start="26837" end="26864" title="Isle of Wight Festival 1970" label="Isle of Wight Festival 1970"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26867" end="26905" title="Isle of Wight#Notable residents" label="Notable residents of the Isle of Wight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139622" wikidata="Q7426998" url="?curid=1139622" title="Sauble River">
<text>Sauble River may refer to:

*Sauble River (Ontario), in Bruce County
*Big Sable River, also known as the Sauble River, in Michigan

==See also==
*Au Sable River (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7426998" start="0" end="12" title="Sauble River" label="Sauble River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427002" start="29" end="51" title="Sauble River (Ontario)" label="Sauble River (Ontario)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906256" start="70" end="85" title="Big Sable River" label="Big Sable River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433628" start="146" end="177" title="Au Sable River (disambiguation)" label="Au Sable River (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139650" wikidata="Q503712" url="?curid=1139650" title="Antipodes Islands">
<text>The Antipodes Islands (, ) are inhospitable and uninhabited volcanic islands in subantarctic waters to the south of – and territorially part of – New Zealand. The archipelago lies to the southeast of Stewart Island / Rakiura, and to the northeast of Campbell Island. They are very close to being the antipodal point of Normandy in France: the city farthest away is Cherbourg-en-Cotentin.

The island group consists of one main island, Antipodes Island, of area, Bollons Island to the north, and numerous small islets and stacks.

The islands are listed with the New Zealand Outlying Islands. The islands are an immediate part of New Zealand, but not part of any region or district, but instead &quot;Area Outside Territorial Authority&quot;, like all the other outlying islands except the Solander Islands.

Ecologically, the islands are part of the Antipodes Subantarctic Islands tundra ecoregion. The islands are inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List, together with other subantarctic New Zealand islands. The island group is a nature reserve and there is no general public access. They are the southeasternmost point of land in the world outside of Antarctica.

== Name ==

The island group was originally called the &quot;Penantipodes&quot; meaning &#x27;next to the antipodes&#x27;, because it lies near to the antipodes of London (located around 51.5°S, 180°W). Over time the name has been shortened to &quot;Antipodes&quot;. The island&#x27;s actual antipodes are near Barfleur, Normandy.

== Geography ==

The volcanic Antipodes Islands lie southeast of Stewart Island / Rakiura. They consist of a main island (Antipodes Island), area , surrounded by a series of small offshore islands and rocks. These islands include Bollons Island, at the second largest in the group, to the northeast of the main island&#x27;s North Cape, and the nearby smaller Archway Island; Leeward Island, situated just off the centre of the main island&#x27;s east coast (to which it is connected by a rocky bar at low tide); the two Windward Islands, situated apart, the easternmost of which is to the immediate north of Cave Point, the main island&#x27;s westernmost point; and the tiny Orde Lees Islet, located close to the main island&#x27;s northwestern shore. Numerous small islets and stacks further surround the coast of the main island.

The islands are steep, and cliffs and rocky reefs line the majority of the coasts. The highest point is Mount Galloway at in the north of the main island, which also forms part of the group&#x27;s most recently active volcano. Mount Waterhouse, to Galloway&#x27;s southwest, also reaches over . Several other heights on the main island reach above , as does the highest point of Bollons Island. A ridge of peaks, the Reliance Ridge, runs along the main island&#x27;s south coast. Several small streams run from the slopes of the main island&#x27;s peaks, with the largest of these being the Dougall Stream, which runs northeast from the eastern slopes of Mount Waterhouse to reach the east coast not far from its closest point to Leeward Island. The Ringdove Stream runs east along the northern flanks of the Reliance Ridge to reach the large, rocky Ringdove Bay in the southeast of the main island. A further prominent stream runs southwest from the northwestern slopes of Mount Waterhouse to reach Stack Bay to the south of the Cave Point Peninsula, and a fourth runs north from the slopes of Mount Galloway, reaching the sea to the west of North Cape, close to Reef Point.

=== Islands ===

The following table includes named islands according to Land Information New Zealand.


==History==

=== Prehistory ===

There is no archaeological evidence of human visitation prior to European discovery of the islands. Descriptions of a shard of early Polynesian pottery having been discovered below the surface on the main island in 1886, and housed in the collections of the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa are unsubstantiated. The museum has not been able to locate such a shard in its collection, and the original reference to the object in the museum&#x27;s collection documentation indicates no reference to Polynesian influences.

=== Sealing ===

The island group was seen on March 25, 1800, by Captain Henry Waterhouse commanding HMS &quot;Reliance&quot;. Matthew Flinders was first lieutenant, and his younger brother Samuel was a midshipman on the vessel; Samuel prepared the chart of the islands. Waterhouse reported the presence of seals. In 1803, Waterhouse&#x27;s brother-in-law George Bass applied to Governor Philip Gidley King of New South Wales for a fishing monopoly from a line bisecting southern New Zealand from Dusky Sound to the Otago Harbour to cover all the lands and seas to the south, including the Antipodes Islands, probably because he knew the latter were home to large populations of fur seals. Bass sailed from Sydney to the south that year and was never heard of again, but his information led to a sealing boom at the islands in 1805 to 1807. In February 1805, the first sealing gangs arrived on the island from the American schooners &quot;Favorite&quot; and &quot;Independence&quot;. They killed about 60,000 seals over the course of the year they were stationed on the islands.

At one time, 80 men were present; there was a battle between American and British-led gangs and a single cargo of more than 80,000 skins—one of the greatest ever shipped from Australasia—was on-sold in Canton for one pound sterling a skin, a multimillion-dollar return in modern terms. Prominent Sydney merchants such as Simeon Lord, Henry Kable and James Underwood were engaged in the trade as well as the Americans Daniel Whitney and Owen Folger Smith. William W. Stewart, who claimed to have charted Stewart Island, and probably William Tucker who started the retail trade in preserved Maori heads, were present during the boom. After 1807, sealing was occasional and cargoes small, no doubt because the animals had been all but exterminated.

=== Shipwrecks ===
A much later attempt to establish cattle on the islands was short-lived (as were the cattle).

When the ship (with a crew of 16) foundered off the main island&#x27;s coast in 1893, the eleven surviving crew spent nearly three months living as castaways on the island, living on raw muttonbirds, mussels and roots for 87 days before gaining the attention of the government steamer by a flag made from their sail.
A well-supplied castaway depot was available on the other end of the island, but the survivors&#x27; weak condition and the island&#x27;s mountainous terrain prevented them from searching for depots.

The depot was found and used by the crew of the French barque &quot;President Felix Faure&quot;, wrecked in Anchorage bay in 1908, who were stranded for sixty days until rescued by .

The last wreck at the Antipodes was the yacht &quot;Totorore&quot; with the loss of two lives, Gerry Clark and Roger Sale, in June 1999.

=== Nuclear testing proposals ===

In 1955, the British Government required a large site remote from population centres to test the new thermonuclear devices it was developing. Various islands in the South Pacific and Southern Oceans were considered, along with Antarctica. The Admiralty suggested the Antipodes Islands.

== Flora and fauna ==
The flora of the islands has been recorded in detail, and includes megaherbs. The islands are also home to numerous bird species including the endemic Antipodes snipe, Antipodes parakeet, Reischek&#x27;s parakeet, as well as several albatrosses, petrels and penguins, including half of the world population of the erect-crested penguin.

The original population of fur seals seems to be regionally extinct or in serious peril where &quot;Upland Seals&quot; once found on Antipodes and Macquarie Island have been claimed as a distinct subspecies with thicker furs by scientists although it is unclear whether these seals were genetically distinct.

=== Important Bird Area ===

The Antipodes group has been identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because of its significance as a breeding site for several species of seabirds. The seabirds are southern rockhopper and erect-crested penguins, Antipodean, black-browed, light-mantled and white-capped albatrosses, and northern giant, grey and white-chinned petrels.

== Conservation ==

As with many other islands, introduced rodents have caused problems by preying on the indigenous wildlife. A &quot;Million Dollar Mouse&quot; campaign was launched in 2012 to raise funds for an eradication programme as part of the New Zealand government&#x27;s &quot;Predator Free 2050&quot; project. In the winter of 2016, the Department of Conservation carried out bait drops totalling 65 tonnes from three helicopters, and searched with trained dogs for any remaining rodents, which eliminated the estimated 200,000 mice on Antipodes Island.

The island group is surrounded by the Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Marine Reserve.

==See also==

*Composite Antarctic Gazetteer
*Territorial claims in Antarctica
*New Zealand Subantarctic Islands
*List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands
*List of islands of New Zealand
*List of islands
*Desert island

==References==
==Further reading==
*&quot;Wise&#x27;s New Zealand Guide&quot; (4th ed.; 1969). Dunedin: H. Wise &amp; Co. (N.Z.) Ltd.
*&quot;NGA-IWI-O-AOTEA&quot;. No. 59 (June 1967). &quot;Te Ao Hou – The Maori Magazine&quot;, pp. 43.
*Godley, E.J. &quot;The Botany of Antipodes Island&quot;. New Zealand Journal of Botany, 1989, Vol. 27: 531–563
*Entwisle, Peter (2005). &quot;Taka, A Vignette Life of William Tucker 1784–1817&quot;. Dunedin: Port Daniel Press. .
*Taylor, Rowley, (2006) &quot;Straight Through from London, the Antipodes and Bounty Islands, New Zealand&quot;. Christchurch: Heritage Expeditions New Zealand. .
*Marris, J.W.M. (2000): The beetle (Coleoptera) fauna of the Antipodes Islands, with comments on the impact of mice; and an annotated checklist of the insect and arachnid fauna. &quot;Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand&quot;, 30: 169–195. PDF
*Warham, J.; Johns, P.M. 1975: The University of Canterbury Antipodes Island Expedition 1969. &quot;Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand&quot;, 5(2): 103–131. Google books

==External links==
*Antipodes Islands at the Department of Conservation
*Island Conservation: Antipodes Islands Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503712" start="4" end="21" title="Antipodes Islands" label="Antipodes Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141556" start="80" end="92" title="subantarctic" label="subantarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="146" end="157" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="200" end="224" title="Stewart Island / Rakiura" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593036" start="250" end="265" title="Campbell Island, New Zealand" label="Campbell Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q319909" start="300" end="315" title="Antipodes" label="antipodal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="319" end="327" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008210" start="365" end="386" title="Cherbourg-en-Cotentin" label="Cherbourg-en-Cotentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q891471" start="462" end="476" title="Bollons Island" label="Bollons Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="521" end="526" title="Stack (geology)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q851132" start="562" end="590" title="New Zealand Outlying Islands" label="New Zealand Outlying Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216712" start="662" end="668" title="Regions of New Zealand" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q941036" start="672" end="680" title="Territorial Authorities of New Zealand" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298216" start="789" end="805" title="Solander Islands" label="Solander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q401979" start="850" end="887" title="Antipodes Subantarctic Islands tundra" label="Antipodes Subantarctic Islands tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="888" end="897" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="939" end="958" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q46275" start="980" end="1012" title="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" label="subantarctic New Zealand islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="1036" end="1050" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="1158" end="1168" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q319909" start="1322" end="1331" title="antipodes" label="antipodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1335" end="1341" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211684" start="1482" end="1490" title="Barfleur" label="Barfleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="1492" end="1500" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="1568" end="1592" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island / Rakiura"/>
<link wikidata="Q891471" start="1733" end="1747" title="Bollons Island" label="Bollons Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q85247412" start="1863" end="1877" title="Archway Island (Antipodes Island Group)" label="Archway Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="2282" end="2288" title="Stack (geology)" label="stacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q746726" start="2441" end="2455" title="Mount Galloway" label="Mount Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2564" end="2580" title="Mount Waterhouse, New Zealand" label="Mount Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801902" start="3587" end="3615" title="Land Information New Zealand" label="Land Information New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226618" start="3785" end="3795" title="Polynesian culture" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q915603" start="3910" end="3949" title="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa" label="Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729908" start="4252" end="4268" title="Henry Waterhouse" label="Henry Waterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634020" start="4280" end="4304" title="HMS Reliance (1793)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Reliance&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q219895" start="4306" end="4322" title="Matthew Flinders" label="Matthew Flinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q734298" start="4535" end="4546" title="George Bass" label="George Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="4567" end="4585" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048789" start="4676" end="4687" title="Dusky Sound" label="Dusky Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036651" start="4695" end="4708" title="Otago Harbour" label="Otago Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043473" start="4858" end="4866" title="fur seal" label="fur seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927224" start="5143" end="5155" title="Independence (schooner)" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="5461" end="5467" title="Guangzhou" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517611" start="5580" end="5591" title="Simeon Lord" label="Simeon Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724192" start="5593" end="5604" title="Henry Kable" label="Henry Kable"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205328" start="5609" end="5624" title="James Underwood (businessman)" label="James Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580635" start="5714" end="5732" title="William W. Stewart" label="William W. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41684" start="5762" end="5776" title="Stewart Island" label="Stewart Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019554" start="5791" end="5805" title="William Tucker (settler)" label="William Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326115" start="5838" end="5859" title="Mokomokai" label="preserved Maori heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="6307" end="6318" title="Shearwater" label="muttonbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705685" start="6453" end="6467" title="castaway depot" label="castaway depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552683" start="6917" end="6928" title="Gerry Clark" label="Gerry Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460435" start="7308" end="7328" title="Flora of the Antipodes Islands" label="flora of the islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529292" start="7371" end="7379" title="megaherb" label="megaherb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775119" start="7455" end="7470" title="Antipodes snipe" label="Antipodes snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q240529" start="7472" end="7490" title="Antipodes parakeet" label="Antipodes parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261020" start="7492" end="7516" title="Reischek&amp;#x27;s parakeet" label="Reischek&amp;#x27;s parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55805" start="7537" end="7546" title="albatross" label="albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092053" start="7550" end="7556" title="petrel" label="petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q838959" start="7618" end="7639" title="erect-crested penguin" label="erect-crested penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46650" start="7789" end="7805" title="Macquarie Island" label="Macquarie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="8027" end="8046" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="8056" end="8078" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="8149" end="8156" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q688641" start="8176" end="8195" title="southern rockhopper penguin" label="southern rockhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q838959" start="8200" end="8221" title="erect-crested penguin" label="erect-crested penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328411" start="8224" end="8234" title="Antipodean albatross" label="Antipodean"/>
<link wikidata="Q602598" start="8236" end="8248" title="black-browed albatross" label="black-browed"/>
<link wikidata="Q844776" start="8250" end="8263" title="light-mantled albatross" label="light-mantled"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437614" start="8268" end="8290" title="white-capped albatross" label="white-capped albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q276212" start="8298" end="8312" title="northern giant petrel" label="northern giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q276070" start="8314" end="8318" title="grey petrel" label="grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q276206" start="8323" end="8343" title="white-chinned petrel" label="white-chinned petrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="8695" end="8721" title="Department of Conservation (New Zealand)" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105623951" start="8951" end="8998" title="Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Marine Reserve" label="Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Marine Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156741" start="9016" end="9045" title="Composite Antarctic Gazetteer" label="Composite Antarctic Gazetteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q783953" start="9047" end="9079" title="Territorial claims in Antarctica" label="Territorial claims in Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46275" start="9081" end="9113" title="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands" label="New Zealand Subantarctic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q783935" start="9115" end="9157" title="List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands" label="List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="9159" end="9189" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="List of islands of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q120647565" start="9191" end="9206" title="List of islands" label="List of islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065592" start="9208" end="9221" title="Desert island" label="Desert island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386820" start="9460" end="9472" title="Eric John Godley" label="Godley, E.J."/>
<link wikidata="Q124153341" start="9816" end="9848" title="Heritage Expeditions" label="Heritage Expeditions New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139654" wikidata="Q742726" url="?curid=1139654" title="Solaris (band)">
<text>Solaris is a Hungarian progressive rock band formed in 1980.
Their music has a strong melodic content, often with Eastern European themes, and use of dynamics. There is interplay among the lead instruments of flute, guitar and keyboard, which is used regularly for extended thematic development. Rather than emphasising solos for the various instruments, the band employs them together within the context of musical development.

The band is named after Stanisław Lem&#x27;s philosophical science fiction novel, &quot;Solaris&quot;. Their first album&#x27;s title, (), is named after a famous novel of Ray Bradbury. The members have said that they were influenced by these, and other science fiction books.

The majority of Solaris&#x27; songs are instrumentals. The first track on their first album &quot;Marsbéli Krónikák&quot; is an exception, with a few lines spoken over the music. The pitch-shifting, distortion, and album&#x27;s theme have led many listeners to assume that the voice-over is in a putative Martian language, but it&#x27;s actually in Hungarian: &quot;Megrepedt tükrök (Cracked mirrors) / Kormos acélfalak (Sooty steel walls) / Halott szeméthegyek (Dead piles of garbage) / És szennyes tavak (And polluted lakes) / Azt mondod, itt élt valaha az ember? (Do you say mankind used to live here?)&quot;.

The song &quot;&quot; () from the &quot;SOLARIS 1990&quot; LP appears in several tracks on the later album &quot;Nostradamus: Próféciák könyve&quot;.

From 1986 to 1990, members of Solaris formed a new band, named Napoleon Boulevard, with singer Lilla Vincze. The band had a more mainstream rock sound, and released five successful albums.

In June 2003, Attila Kollár said in an interview that the band is still active, and they will start working on a new studio album that year.

Following their studio albums and a live double CD recorded in 1995 during the Progfest in Los Angeles, the band also started a three-volume &quot;Official Bootleg&quot; series. These contain previously unreleased recordings of mainly live material. The title track of the second volume was originally intended to appear on the first album, but has never been recorded in the studio.

In December 2007, drummer László Gömör told Alternative Press magazine that &quot;the band has made few attempts to reunite and it seems unlikely (Solaris) will reunite.&quot;

A studio album &quot;Martian Chronicles II&quot; was released on October 26, 2014.

Album &quot;Nostradamus - Returnity&quot; was released in 2019.

==Members==

*Erdész, Róbert - keyboards (1980-) 
*Kollár, Attila - flute (1980-) 
*Gömör, László - drums (1982-)
*Kisszabó, Gábor - bass (1980-1982,1995-) 
*Bogdán, Csaba - guitars (1981-1982,1995-)

==Past members==

*Cziglán, István (deceased 1998) - guitars (1980-1998)
*Rauschenberger, Ferenc - drums (1981-1982)
*Seres, Attila - bass (1980)
*Tóth, Vilmos (deceased 2013) - drums (1980-1981)
*Pócs, Tamás - bass (1982-2011)

==Discography==

*Solaris (SP), 1980
*Counterpoint (SP), 1981
*Marsbéli Krónikák (Martian Chronicles) (LP), 1984
*SOLARIS 1990 (double LP, double CD), 1990/1996
*Live in Los Angeles (double CD), 1996
*Nostradamus: Próféciák könyve (Nostradamus: Book of Prophecies) (CD), 1999
*Solaris archív 1. - Back to the roots... (Az első idők...) (CD), 2000
*Solaris archív 2. - NOAB (CD), 2005
*Nostradamus - Live in Mexico (concert CD+DVD), 2007
*Live in Los Angeles (DVD), 2010
*Martian Chronicles II, 2014
*Martian Chronicles live, Koncert a Művészetek Palotájában, 2014
*Nostradamus - Returnity, 2019
*Marsbéli krónikák III (The Martian Chronicles III), EP 2022

==References==

==External links==

*Official homepage 
*Reviews
*Solaris page at e-prog.net </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742726" start="0" end="7" title="Solaris (band)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="13" end="22" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="23" end="39" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170412" start="86" end="93" title="melodic" label="melodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="114" end="128" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="209" end="214" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="216" end="222" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="227" end="235" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530" start="454" end="467" title="Stanisław Lem" label="Stanisław Lem"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="489" end="504" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q261281" start="518" end="525" title="Solaris (novel)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q918052" start="584" end="614" title="The Martian Chronicles" label="a famous novel of Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459994" start="1568" end="1580" title="Lilla Vincze" label="Lilla Vincze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1821" end="1834" title="Album#Studio" label="studio albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268417" start="2234" end="2251" title="Alternative Press (magazine)" label="Alternative Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139658" wikidata="Q1147480" url="?curid=1139658" title="Ty Detmer">
<text>Ty Hubert Detmer (born October 30, 1967) is an American former football quarterback. He won the Heisman Trophy, Maxwell Award, and Davey O&#x27;Brien Award in 1990 while playing college football for the Brigham Young University (BYU) Cougars. Detmer broke numerous National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) records with BYU and was twice recognized as a consensus All-American. He also played professionally in the National Football League (NFL). A late-round pick in the 1992 NFL draft, Detmer played for six NFL teams over 14 seasons, mostly in a backup role. He is currently the athletic director at American Leadership Academy – Gilbert North High School in Gilbert, Arizona.

After his playing career, Detmer became a coach. He was the offensive coordinator at BYU from 2015 to 2017. He is the older brother of former NFL quarterback Koy Detmer.

==Early life==
Detmer was born in San Marcos, Texas. He attended Hobby Middle School, Mount Sacred Heart Middle School, and United Middle School in Laredo, Texas, and Southwest High School in San Antonio, Texas. He earned letters in golf, football, basketball, baseball, and track. As a senior, Detmer won high school All-American honors in football and was the Texas Player of the Year. He also won all-state honors in baseball and all-district accolades in basketball.

==College career==
Detmer attended BYU, where he played for football for the Cougars from 1987 to 1991. In deciding which college to attend, he was in part attracted by BYU&#x27;s alcohol-free environment. He redshirted for the Cougars during the 1987 season, and shared quarterback duties with Sean Covey as a redshirt freshman in 1988. Detmer started only one game that year, but he made the most of the opportunity, passing for 333 yards and five touchdowns in a 65–0 victory over New Mexico. Later, he was named Most Valuable Player of the 1988 Freedom Bowl, after entering the game as a substitute and leading BYU to a come-from-behind 20–17 victory over the Colorado Buffaloes.

Detmer became the full-time starter in 1989. He emerged as one of the top quarterbacks in the nation, passing for 4,560 yards and 32 touchdowns during the regular season. His passer rating of 175.6 led the NCAA, and he finished second to Houston&#x27;s Andre Ware in total offense. He led BYU to a Western Athletic Conference (WAC) Championship, the team&#x27;s first since 1985. Detmer finished the season with a strong performance against Penn State in the 1989 Holiday Bowl, setting NCAA records for most passing yards (576) and most yards of total offense (594) in a single bowl game. He finished ninth in the Heisman Trophy voting.

Detmer&#x27;s 1990 junior season ranks as one of the greatest seasons for a quarterback in college football history. He passed for 5,188 yards and 41 touchdowns in 12 regular-season games and finished the year with 42 NCAA records (and tied for five others). The high point of the season was BYU&#x27;s 28–21 upset victory over the top-ranked Miami Hurricanes; Detmer led the Cougars by passing for 406 yards and three touchdowns against the defending national champions. For his performance that season, he was awarded the Heisman Trophy, as well as many other honors including the Maxwell and Davey O&#x27;Brien awards. He was recognized as a consensus first-team All-American, having been named to the first teams of the Associated Press, UPI, Newspaper Enterprise Association, Football Writers Association of America, Walter Camp Foundation, &quot;Football News&quot;, Scripps Howard, and the &quot;Sporting News&quot;. Unfortunately for Detmer and BYU, the season ended in disastrous fashion: the Cougars lost 59–28 in their final regular-season game against Hawaii on the back of four Detmer interceptions, then lost 65–14 to Texas A&amp;M in the 1990 Holiday Bowl. Detmer was knocked out of the game against Texas A&amp;M, suffering two separated shoulders that required off-season surgery.

The 1991 season started poorly for BYU, as the Cougars lost their first three games (on a neutral field against #1 Florida State and road contests against #23 UCLA and #12 Penn State). After the 0–3 start, Detmer and BYU turned things around. The Cougars won eight straight games and clinched their third consecutive WAC championship with a 52–52 tie against San Diego State in their final regular-season road game. In that contest, BYU fell behind 45–17 before Detmer led a comeback. He finished the game with 599 passing yards and six touchdowns, both career highs. In his final game as a Cougar, Detmer passed for 350 yards to lead BYU to a 13–13 tie against heavily favored #7 Iowa in the 1991 Holiday Bowl. He totaled 4,031 passing yards and 35 touchdowns in regular season play during his senior year. He finished third in the Heisman Trophy voting but won the Davey O&#x27;Brien Award again and also earned the Sammy Baugh Trophy and Today&#x27;s Top VI Award. Additionally, he was again recognized as a consensus first-team All-American.

Detmer finished his college career with the following totals: 1,530 pass attempts; 958 completions; 15,031 passing yards; 121 touchdown passes; 14,665 yards of total offense; 135 touchdowns responsible for; and 162.7 passer rating—all NCAA records at the time. In total, he finished his college career with 59 NCAA records and tied for three others. Including statistics from bowl games, Detmer amassed 16,206 passing yards and 127 touchdown passes at BYU. He graduated with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in recreation administration. In 2012, Detmer was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame.

==Professional career==
===Green Bay Packers===
Despite his success at BYU, many analysts thought that Detmer was too small to play quarterback in the NFL. The Green Bay Packers drafted him in the ninth round (230th pick overall) of the 1992 NFL Draft. Detmer spent four seasons with the Packers, but appeared in only seven games while serving as back-up to starter Brett Favre.

===Philadelphia Eagles===
Detmer found more playing time after signing a free-agent contract with the Philadelphia Eagles in 1996. After Rodney Peete suffered a season ending knee injury, Detmer became the team&#x27;s starting quarterback. Detmer posted a 4–0 record in his first four starts. In his first start against the division rival New York Giants, Detmer completed 18 of 33 passes for 170 yards and no interceptions in the 19–10 victory. In his second start, he threw four touchdown passes (all to Irving Fryar) against the Miami Dolphins. The following week, he passed for a career-high 342 yards against the Carolina Panthers. The next week, he passed for 217 yards and a touchdown and added his first career rushing touchdown against the Dallas Cowboys. It was Philadelphia&#x27;s first victory at Dallas since 1991, and earned Detmer the NFL Player of the Week award. A few weeks later, Detmer and the Eagles ended a three-game losing streak as they shut out the Giants in the rematch 24–0. Detmer threw three touchdowns in the win. For the year, Detmer passed for 2,911 yards and 15 touchdowns; his 80.8 passer rating ranked fourth among NFC quarterbacks. The Eagles posted a 7–4 record with Detmer as the starter during the 1996 season, good enough to make the NFC playoffs. The following season, Detmer shared quarterback duties with Peete and Bobby Hoying.

===San Francisco 49ers===
Detmer left Philadelphia in 1998 and joined the San Francisco 49ers as a backup to Steve Young. He spent only one season in San Francisco. His lone start came against the Panthers in which he passed for 276 yards and 3 touchdowns in the 49ers&#x27; 25–23 victory. He was also the primary holder on field goals and PAT attempts, throwing a touchdown off a botched field goal attempt during a loss to the Patriots.

===Cleveland Browns===
Detmer was traded to the Cleveland Browns in 1999; the Browns wanted him to mentor rookie quarterback Tim Couch. Detmer started the first game of the 1999 season, then served as backup until Couch sprained his foot in week 15. He started the final game of the 1999 season. Detmer injured his right Achilles and was inactive the entire 2000 season.

===Detroit Lions===
Detmer spent three seasons (2001–2003) with the Detroit Lions where he started four games during the 2001 season. His first start was a disaster: he threw seven interceptions against the Browns, the second-highest single-game total in NFL history (tied with seven other players). He was eventually replaced as starter, but did start the final two games of the season. He set career highs for attempts (50) and completions (31) against the Chicago Bears, finishing with 303 passing yards. He closed out the season with 242 yards and 2 touchdowns against the Cowboys.

===Atlanta Falcons===
Detmer spent the 2004 and 2005 seasons with the Atlanta Falcons, but did not see any action as the third-string quarterback behind Michael Vick and Matt Schaub.

In 14 total seasons in the NFL, Detmer played in 54 games (with 25 starts), totaling 6,351 yards passing with 34 touchdowns and 35 interceptions. Detmer did not officially retire from football at the time of his release from Atlanta, but he has not played since then.

==Coaching career==
In December 2009, he was appointed the new head football coach at St. Andrew&#x27;s Episcopal School. In December 2015, Detmer became the offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach at BYU, under new head coach Kalani Sitake. On November 27, 2017, Detmer was released from the coordinator position after just two seasons. The dismissal came following BYU football&#x27;s poor performance over the previous year. Detmer was the head football coach at American Leadership Academy&#x27;s Queen Creek campus. He recently (2024) moved from the ALA-Queen Creek football program to ALA-Gilbert North North Football Program, assuming the Head Coach position at ALA-Gilbert North. 

==NFL career statistics ==
==Personal life==
Detmer&#x27;s brother Koy is a former NFL quarterback, and their father Sonny was a prominent San Antonio high school coach.

Detmer was a major investor in, and employed by, the Athlete Services Division at Triton Financial Corporation from 2007 to 2009. After the firm collapsed, founder Kurt Barton was indicted for fraud. Detmer, who was not implicated in the scandal, claims to have lost more money than anyone else. Overly trusting of Barton, whom he met at church, Detmer became a victim of affinity fraud.

==See also==
*List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing yards leaders
*List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing touchdowns leaders
*List of NCAA major college football yearly passing leaders
*List of NCAA major college football yearly total offense leaders

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1147480" start="0" end="16" title="Ty Detmer" label="Ty Hubert Detmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="63" end="71" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="72" end="83" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="96" end="110" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130978" start="112" end="125" title="Maxwell Award" label="Maxwell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017304" start="131" end="155" title="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien Award" label="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="178" end="194" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="203" end="227" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632326" start="234" end="241" title="BYU Cougars football" label="Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="265" end="305" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146372" start="370" end="382" title="College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="421" end="445" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714933" start="478" end="492" title="1992 NFL draft" label="1992 NFL draft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="609" end="664" title="American Leadership Academy#Campuses and locations" label="American Leadership Academy – Gilbert North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q51684" start="668" end="684" title="Gilbert, Arizona" label="Gilbert, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045507" start="747" end="768" title="offensive coordinator" label="offensive coordinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435108" start="845" end="855" title="Koy Detmer" label="Koy Detmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q982353" start="892" end="909" title="San Marcos, Texas" label="San Marcos, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887868" start="982" end="1002" title="United Middle School" label="United Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571294" start="1025" end="1046" title="Southwest High School (San Antonio, Texas)" label="Southwest High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="1050" end="1068" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="1091" end="1095" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="1107" end="1117" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1119" end="1127" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="1133" end="1138" title="Track and field" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497674" start="1539" end="1549" title="Redshirt (college sports)" label="redshirted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684610" start="1625" end="1635" title="Sean Covey" label="Sean Covey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107975" start="1814" end="1824" title="New Mexico Lobos football" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087321" start="1879" end="1891" title="Freedom Bowl" label="Freedom Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148746" start="1994" end="2012" title="Colorado Buffaloes football" label="Colorado Buffaloes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916446" start="2253" end="2260" title="Houston Cougars football" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754903" start="2268" end="2278" title="Andre Ware" label="Andre Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q984286" start="2313" end="2340" title="Western Athletic Conference" label="Western Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163267" start="2456" end="2466" title="Penn State Nittany Lions football" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585204" start="2474" end="2491" title="1989 Holiday Bowl" label="1989 Holiday Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827329" start="2996" end="3012" title="Miami Hurricanes football" label="Miami Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130978" start="3236" end="3243" title="Maxwell Award" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017304" start="3248" end="3266" title="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien Award" label="Davey O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585913" start="3319" end="3331" title="1990 College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="3377" end="3393" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="3395" end="3398" title="UPI" label="UPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q58432485" start="3400" end="3432" title="Newspaper Enterprise Association" label="Newspaper Enterprise Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="3526" end="3540" title="Scripps Howard" label="Scripps Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="3556" end="3569" title="Sporting News" label="Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684443" start="3717" end="3723" title="Hawaii Warriors football" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707428" start="3785" end="3798" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M Aggies football" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586056" start="3806" end="3823" title="1990 Holiday Bowl" label="1990 Holiday Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586844" start="4067" end="4080" title="1991 Florida State Seminoles football team" label="Florida State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587147" start="4111" end="4115" title="1991 UCLA Bruins football team" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188716" start="4124" end="4134" title="1991 Penn State Nittany Lions football team" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449302" start="4311" end="4326" title="1991 San Diego State Aztecs football team" label="San Diego State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586895" start="4633" end="4637" title="1991 Iowa Hawkeyes football team" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586876" start="4645" end="4662" title="1991 Holiday Bowl" label="1991 Holiday Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828681" start="4870" end="4888" title="Sammy Baugh Trophy" label="Sammy Baugh Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812162" start="4893" end="4918" title="Today&amp;#x27;s Top VI Award" label="Today&amp;#x27;s Top VI Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950190" start="4984" end="4996" title="1991 College Football All-America Team" label="All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591028" start="5099" end="5119" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS quarterbacks with at least 10,000 career passing yards" label="15,031 passing yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="5476" end="5498" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q747833" start="5567" end="5596" title="College Football Hall of Fame" label="College Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="5759" end="5776" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750919" start="5841" end="5850" title="NFL Draft" label="NFL Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q267088" start="5965" end="5976" title="Brett Favre" label="Brett Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="6081" end="6100" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438233" start="6116" end="6128" title="Rodney Peete" label="Rodney Peete"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="6318" end="6333" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802156" start="6485" end="6497" title="Irving Fryar" label="Irving Fryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="6511" end="6525" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="6597" end="6614" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="6728" end="6742" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="7130" end="7133" title="National Football Conference" label="NFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935147" start="7338" end="7350" title="Bobby Hoying" label="Bobby Hoying"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="7427" end="7446" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q740086" start="7462" end="7473" title="Steve Young (American football)" label="Steve Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="7841" end="7857" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991352" start="7918" end="7927" title="Tim Couch" label="Tim Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q223172" start="8114" end="8122" title="Achilles tendon" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="8233" end="8246" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="8624" end="8637" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q505431" start="8905" end="8917" title="Michael Vick" label="Michael Vick"/>
<link wikidata="Q795660" start="8922" end="8933" title="Matt Schaub" label="Matt Schaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586876" start="9291" end="9325" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Episcopal School (Austin, Texas)" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Episcopal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="9389" end="9400" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350585" start="9437" end="9450" title="Kalani Sitake" label="Kalani Sitake"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827913" start="9676" end="9703" title="American Leadership Academy" label="American Leadership Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435108" start="9967" end="9970" title="Koy Detmer" label="Koy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688979" start="10443" end="10457" title="affinity fraud" label="affinity fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591028" start="10474" end="10530" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing yards leaders" label="List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing yards leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591028" start="10532" end="10593" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing touchdowns leaders" label="List of NCAA Division I FBS career passing touchdowns leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096197" start="10595" end="10653" title="List of NCAA major college football yearly passing leaders" label="List of NCAA major college football yearly passing leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096630" start="10655" end="10719" title="List of NCAA major college football yearly total offense leaders" label="List of NCAA major college football yearly total offense leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139661" wikidata="Q146935" url="?curid=1139661" title="Cedrus deodara">
<text>Cedrus deodara, the deodar cedar, Himalayan cedar, or deodar, is a species of cedar native to the Himalayas.

==Description==
It is a large evergreen coniferous tree reaching tall, exceptionally with a trunk up to in diameter. It has a conic crown with level branches and drooping branchlets.

The leaves are needle-like, mostly long, occasionally up to long, slender ( thick), borne singly on long shoots, and in dense clusters of 20–30 on short shoots; they vary from bright green to glaucous blue-green in colour. The female cones are barrel-shaped, long and broad, and disintegrate when mature (in 12 months) to release the winged seeds. The male cones are long, and shed their pollen in autumn.

=== Chemistry ===
The bark of &quot;Cedrus deodara&quot; contains large amounts of taxifolin. The wood contains cedeodarin, ampelopsin, cedrin, cedrinoside, and deodarin (3′,4′,5,6-tetrahydroxy-8-methyl dihydroflavonol). The main components of the needle essential oil include α-terpineol (30.2%), linalool (24.47%), limonene (17.01%), anethole (14.57%), caryophyllene (3.14%), and eugenol (2.14%). The deodar cedar also contains lignans and the phenolic sesquiterpene himasecolone, together with isopimaric acid. Other compounds have been identified, including (−)-matairesinol, (−)-nortrachelogenin, and a dibenzylbutyrolactollignan (4,4&#x27;,9-trihydroxy-3,3&#x27;-dimethoxy-9,9&#x27;-epoxylignan).

==Etymology==
The botanical name, which is also the English common name, is derived from the Sanskrit term &quot;devadāru&quot;, which means &quot;wood of the gods&quot;, a compound of &quot;deva&quot; &quot;god&quot; and &quot;dāru&quot; &quot;wood and tree&quot;.

==Distribution and habitat==
The species natively occurs in East-Afghanistan, South Western Tibet, Western Nepal, Northern Pakistan, and North-Central India.

It grows at altitudes of .

==Reproduction==
“Deodar is a wind-pollinated monoecious species”.

==Cultivation==

It is widely grown as an ornamental tree, often planted in parks and large gardens for its drooping foliage. General cultivation is limited to areas with mild winters, with trees frequently killed by temperatures below about , limiting it to USDA zone 7 and warmer for reliable growth. It can succeed in rather cool-summer climates, as in Ushuaia, Argentina.

The most cold-tolerant trees originate in the northwest of the species&#x27; range in Kashmir and Paktia Province, Afghanistan. Selected cultivars from this region are hardy to USDA zone 7 or even zone 6, tolerating temperatures down to about . Named cultivars from this region include &#x27;Eisregen&#x27;, &#x27;Eiswinter&#x27;, &#x27;Karl Fuchs&#x27;, &#x27;Kashmir&#x27;, &#x27;Polar Winter&#x27;, and &#x27;Shalimar&#x27;. Of these, &#x27;Eisregen&#x27;, &#x27;Eiswinter&#x27;, &#x27;Karl Fuchs&#x27;, and &#x27;Polar Winter&#x27; were selected in Germany from seed collected in Paktia; &#x27;Kashmir&#x27; was a selection of the nursery trade, whereas &#x27;Shalimar&#x27; originated from seeds collected in 1964 from Shalimar Gardens, Kashmir and propagated at the Arnold Arboretum.

&quot;C. deodara&quot; and the three cultivars &#x27;Feelin&#x27; Blue&#x27;, &#x27;Pendula&#x27; and &#x27;Aurea&#x27; have gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit (confirmed 2021).

==Uses==
===Construction material===
Deodar is in great demand as building material because of its durability, rot-resistant character and fine, close grain, which is capable of taking a high polish. Its historical use to construct religious temples and in landscaping around temples is well recorded. Its rot-resistant character also makes it an ideal wood for constructing the well-known houseboats of Srinagar, Kashmir. In Pakistan and India, during the British colonial period, deodar wood was used extensively for construction of barracks, public buildings, bridges, canals and railway cars. Despite its durability, it is not a strong timber, and its brittle nature makes it unsuitable for delicate work where strength is required, such as chair-making.

=== Herbal Ayurveda ===
&quot;C. deodara&quot; is used in Ayurvedic medicine.

The inner wood is aromatic and used to make incense. Inner wood is distilled into essential oil. As insects avoid this tree, the essential oil is used as insect repellent on the feet of horses, cattle and camels. It also has antifungal properties and has some potential for control of fungal deterioration of spices during storage. The outer bark and stem are astringent.

Because of its antifungal and insect repellent properties, rooms made of deodar cedar wood are used to store meat and food grains like oats and wheat in Shimla, Kullu, and Kinnaur district of Himachal Pradesh.

Cedar oil is often used for its aromatic properties, especially in aromatherapy. It has a characteristic woody odor which may change somewhat in the course of drying out. The crude oils are often yellowish or darker in color. Its applications include soap perfumes, household sprays, floor polishes, and insecticides, and is also used in microscope work as a clearing oil.

=== Incense ===
The gum of the tree is used to make rope incense in Nepal and Tibet.

==Culture==

Among Hindus, as the etymology of deodar suggests, it is worshiped as a divine tree. Deva, the first half of the Sanskrit term, means &quot;divine&quot;, &quot;deity&quot;, or &quot;deus&quot;. Dāru, the second part, is cognate with (related to) the words &quot;durum&quot;, &quot;druid&quot;, &quot;tree&quot;, and &quot;true&quot;. Several Hindu legends refer to this tree. For example, Valmiki Ramayan reads:

The deodar is the national tree of Pakistan, and the state tree of Himachal Pradesh, India.

&quot;Under the Deodars&quot; was an 1889 short story collection by Rudyard Kipling.

The 1902 musical &quot;A Country Girl&quot; featured a song called &quot;Under the Deodar.&quot;

==See also==
* List of Indian timber trees

==References==
==External links==

* Conifers Around the World: &quot;Cedrus deodara - Himalayan Cedar&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146935" start="20" end="32" title="Cedrus deodara" label="deodar cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146935" start="34" end="49" title="Cedrus deodara" label="Himalayan cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q146935" start="54" end="60" title="Cedrus deodara" label="deodar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="78" end="83" title="Cedrus" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="98" end="107" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="140" end="149" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="150" end="157" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="298" end="304" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q220869" start="399" end="405" title="Shoot (botany)" label="shoots"/>
<link wikidata="Q310115" start="486" end="494" title="glaucous" label="glaucous"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="528" end="533" title="conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="635" end="639" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="682" end="688" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q412191" start="784" end="793" title="taxifolin" label="taxifolin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="813" end="823" title="cedeodarin" label="cedeodarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422305" start="825" end="835" title="ampelopsin" label="ampelopsin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="837" end="843" title="cedrin" label="cedrin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="845" end="856" title="cedrinoside" label="cedrinoside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="862" end="870" title="deodarin" label="deodarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420786" start="978" end="989" title="α-terpineol" label="α-terpineol"/>
<link wikidata="Q410932" start="999" end="1007" title="linalool" label="linalool"/>
<link wikidata="Q278809" start="1018" end="1026" title="limonene" label="limonene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27105777" start="1037" end="1045" title="anethole" label="anethole"/>
<link wikidata="Q421614" start="1056" end="1069" title="caryophyllene" label="caryophyllene"/>
<link wikidata="Q423357" start="1083" end="1090" title="eugenol" label="eugenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q424634" start="1131" end="1137" title="lignan" label="lignan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1170" end="1182" title="himasecolone" label="himasecolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198762" start="1198" end="1213" title="isopimaric acid" label="isopimaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284467" start="1267" end="1279" title="matairesinol" label="matairesinol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1285" end="1301" title="nortrachelogenin" label="nortrachelogenin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1337" end="1401" title="4,4&amp;#x27;,9-trihydroxy-3,3&amp;#x27;-dimethoxy-9,9&amp;#x27;-epoxylignan" label="4,4&amp;#x27;,9-trihydroxy-3,3&amp;#x27;-dimethoxy-9,9&amp;#x27;-epoxylignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q281801" start="1423" end="1437" title="botanical name" label="botanical name"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="1465" end="1476" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1498" end="1506" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1732" end="1748" title="Afghanistan" label="East-Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="1750" end="1769" title="Tibet" label="South Western Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="1771" end="1784" title="Nepal" label="Western Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1786" end="1803" title="Pakistan" label="Northern Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="1809" end="1828" title="North India" label="North-Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1969" end="1984" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="2186" end="2195" title="USDA zone" label="USDA zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44254" start="2283" end="2301" title="Ushuaia, Argentina" label="Ushuaia, Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="2390" end="2397" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q182493" start="2402" end="2417" title="Paktia Province" label="Paktia Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="2441" end="2449" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q851242" start="3028" end="3044" title="Shalimar Bagh (Srinagar)" label="Shalimar Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="3076" end="3092" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="3231" end="3258" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="3266" end="3287" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321309" start="3697" end="3707" title="houseboats" label="houseboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="3711" end="3719" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="4125" end="4134" title="Ayurvedic" label="Ayurvedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921404" start="4672" end="4678" title="Shimla district" label="Shimla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980880" start="4680" end="4685" title="Kullu district" label="Kullu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862950" start="4691" end="4698" title="Kinnaur district" label="Kinnaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="4711" end="4727" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q184321" start="4730" end="4739" title="Cedar oil" label="Cedar oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q206202" start="4797" end="4809" title="aromatherapy" label="aromatherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053762" start="5156" end="5168" title="rope incense" label="rope incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="5172" end="5177" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="5182" end="5187" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="5209" end="5215" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q715607" start="5592" end="5599" title="Valmiki" label="Valmiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="5600" end="5607" title="Ramayan" label="Ramayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306666" start="5634" end="5647" title="National symbols of Pakistan" label="national tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092403" start="5669" end="5679" title="List of Indian state symbols" label="state tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="5683" end="5699" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883278" start="5715" end="5732" title="Under the Deodars" label="Under the Deodars"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="5777" end="5792" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656142" start="5818" end="5832" title="A Country Girl" label="A Country Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574047" start="5908" end="5935" title="List of Indian timber trees" label="List of Indian timber trees"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139662" wikidata="Q6292662" url="?curid=1139662" title="José Laurel">
<text>José Laurel may refer to:
*José P. Laurel (1891–1959), President of the Philippines (1943–1945), associate justice of the Supreme Court (1936–1942)
*José B. Laurel, Jr. (1912–1998), Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Philippines, Representative of the 3rd District of Batangas, son of José P. Laurel
*José S. Laurel III (1914-1998), Ambassador of the Philippines to Japan, son of José P. Laurel
*José M. Laurel IV, Representative of the 3rd District of Batangas, son of José B. Laurel Jr.
*Jose Laurel Street, in San Miguel, Manila, Philippines</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q360113" start="27" end="41" title="José P. Laurel" label="José P. Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292666" start="149" end="168" title="José Laurel, Jr." label="José B. Laurel, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6292664" start="313" end="331" title="José Laurel III" label="José S. Laurel III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="408" end="425" title="José Laurel IV" label="José M. Laurel IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229740" start="502" end="520" title="Jose Laurel Street" label="Jose Laurel Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139668" wikidata="Q7293273" url="?curid=1139668" title="Rankin River">
<text>The Rankin River is a river in the town of South Bruce Peninsula, Bruce County in southwestern Ontario, Canada which flows from the east side of the Bruce Peninsula to join the Sauble River near Sauble Falls Provincial Park on the west side. The river is in the Lake Huron drainage basin and was named after Charles Rankin, who first surveyed the Bruce Peninsula.

==Course==
The Rankin River begins at Berford Lake about southeast of the community of Mar, and flows west over Berford Dam, then under Ontario Highway 6 to Isaac Lake, where it takes in the right tributary Albemarle Brook arriving from Sky Lake. The river heads south to Boat Lake where it receives the left tributary Clavering Creek at Jordan Bay. It heads south out of the lake over Rankin Dam, then southwest to its mouth at the Sauble River, just upriver of the community of Sauble Falls.

In addition to the Rankin River drainage basin lying in the town of South Bruce Peninsula in Bruce County, portions of the tributary Clavering Creek drainage basin lie in Georgian Bluffs in Grey County.

==History==
During the 18th century, this river was part of a portage from Georgian Bay across the Bruce Peninsula used by fur traders. In the second half of the 19th century, large numbers of passenger pigeons nested along the river. The river is now popular for recreational canoeing and kayaking.

==Natural history==
The river hosts fish species such as bass, Bowfin, northern pike, pickerel and perch, as well as trout and salmon during their spawning seasons. Whereas the entire Rankin River drainage basin has excellent (greater than 35%) forest cover, the riparian zones have only fair (25% to 50%) forest cover. Water chemistry was excellent but benthic species were only fair.

==Tributaries==
*Clavering Creek (left)
*Albemarle Brook (right)

==See also==
*List of rivers of Ontario

==References==

==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7293273" start="4" end="16" title="Rankin River" label="Rankin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492590" start="43" end="64" title="South Bruce Peninsula, Ontario" label="South Bruce Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q991601" start="66" end="78" title="Bruce County, Ontario" label="Bruce County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="82" end="102" title="southwestern Ontario" label="southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q991438" start="149" end="164" title="Bruce Peninsula" label="Bruce Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427002" start="177" end="189" title="Sauble River (Ontario)" label="Sauble River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426999" start="195" end="223" title="Sauble Falls Provincial Park" label="Sauble Falls Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383" start="262" end="272" title="Lake Huron" label="Lake Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="273" end="287" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081930" start="308" end="322" title="Charles Rankin" label="Charles Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492590" start="452" end="455" title="Mar, Ontario" label="Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443944" start="501" end="518" title="Ontario Highway 6" label="Ontario Highway 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426999" start="845" end="857" title="Sauble Falls, Ontario" label="Sauble Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116599" start="1031" end="1046" title="Georgian Bluffs, Ontario" label="Georgian Bluffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546177" start="1050" end="1061" title="Grey County, Ontario" label="Grey County"/>
<link wikidata="Q120638097" start="1126" end="1133" title="portage" label="portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267413" start="1139" end="1151" title="Georgian Bay" label="Georgian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="1187" end="1196" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="1257" end="1273" title="passenger pigeon" label="passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="1341" end="1346" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="1354" end="1359" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="1628" end="1641" title="riparian zone" label="riparian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="1719" end="1726" title="Benthic zone" label="benthic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839888" start="1832" end="1857" title="List of rivers of Ontario" label="List of rivers of Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139674" wikidata="Q871870" url="?curid=1139674" title="Lisenser Fernerkogel">
<text>The Lisenser Fernerkogel (or Lüsener Fernerkogel) is a mountain in the Stubai Alps of Austria.

== Routes ==
From the Franz Senn Hütte hut it is approximately 3½ hours mostly over glaciers and snow, with a small (100 m) easy rock scramble at the end.

Close to, and can be combined with, the Rotgratspitze and Lisenser Spitze.

==External links==
* https://web.archive.org/web/20040129125605/http://www324.ws1.inname.net/bergtouren/touren_tirol/stubaier_alpen/fernerkogel/fernerkogel.htm - in German</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q871870" start="4" end="24" title="Lisenser Fernerkogel" label="Lisenser Fernerkogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q871870" start="29" end="48" title="Lisenser Fernerkogel" label="Lüsener Fernerkogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="55" end="63" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q679261" start="71" end="82" title="Stubai Alps" label="Stubai Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445908" start="118" end="134" title="Franz Senn Hütte" label="Franz Senn Hütte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913973" start="230" end="238" title="scrambling" label="scramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897080" start="292" end="305" title="Rotgratspitze" label="Rotgratspitze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558768" start="310" end="325" title="Lisenser Spitze" label="Lisenser Spitze"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139679" wikidata="Q5865209" url="?curid=1139679" title="History of Lancashire">
<text>Lancashire is a county of England, in the northwest of the country. The county did not exist in 1086, for the Domesday Book, and was apparently first created in 1182, making it one of the youngest of the traditional counties.

The historic county consisted of two separate parts. The main part runs along the northwestern coast of England. When it included Manchester and Liverpool, it had a greatest length of 76 miles, and breadth of 45 miles, and an area of 1,208,154 acres. The northern detached part of the old county palatine, consisting of Furness and Cartmell, was 25 miles in length, 23 miles in breadth and was separated from the main portion of Lancashire by Morecambe Bay and the Kendal district of Westmorland. The highest point in the historic county is at the Old Man of Coniston.

As a county palatine, the Duke of Lancaster had sovereignty rights in the areas of justice and administration within the county. However the third man to hold the title, Henry Bolingbroke, seized the English throne in 1399 to become Henry IV and both the duchy and palatinate have since been possessions of the crown, administered separately but consistently with the rest of the country. The later part of the 19th century brought large reforms with the much of county&#x27;s independent legal system merged into the national courts and a new administrative county and network of county boroughs being formed. Since then Lancashire County Council has been seated at County Hall in Preston.

In 1974 the administrative county was abolished and new ceremonial counties created with the areas around the cities of Manchester and Liverpool forming the larger portions of Greater Manchester and Merseyside. The section north of Morecambe Bay joined Westmorland and Cumberland to form the modern county of Cumbria. However the new Lancashire gained control of the Forest of Bowland and West Craven areas formerly under the administration of the West Riding of Yorkshire.

Throughout these changes, historic Lancashire still continues to be recognised as a geographical and cultural area by the British Government. The historic county palatine boundaries are also still recognised and unmoved with Lancaster still being recognised as the county town. Traditional borders are still followed by organisations such as the Lancashire FA.

The High Sheriffs of Lancashire, Greater Manchester and Merseyside are still appointed by the King in right of the duchy. The duchy also benefits from the legal concept of &quot;bona vacantia&quot; within county palatine, whereby it has the right to property for which the legal owner cannot be found. The proceeds are divided between two registered charities, the Duchy of Lancaster Benevolent Fund and the Duchy of Lancaster Jubilee Trust.

The emblem of the historic county of Lancashire is the Red Rose of the English royal House of Lancaster, and in 2008 the Flag of Lancashire became recognised by the Flag Institute. On 27 November, Lancashire Day celebrates the culture of the historic county ranging from its history to its own dialect.

==Toponymy==
Lancashire takes its name from the city of Lancaster, whose name means &#x27;Roman fort on the River Lune&#x27;, combining the name of the river with the Old English &quot;cæster&quot;, which derived from the Roman word for a fort or camp. Official documents often called it the &quot;County of Lancaster&quot; rather than Lancashire; &quot;Lancastershire&quot; occurs in late 14th century, and Leland was still using it in 1540. &quot;Lancashire&quot; occurs in the Paston Letters in 1464. Lancashire became the preferred designation, as a syncope of Lancastershire.

==Background==

At the time when the Romans arrived in England, much of northern England was inhabited by the Brigantes, though the Cumbrian highland area was inhabited by the Carvetii, who were possibly a tribe within the larger Brigantes group. Another tribe named the Setantii has also been hypothesized based on the name of a Roman era port near the mouth of the River Wyre, called &quot;Portus Setantiorum&quot;, and they were possibly also Brigantes, if they existed.

The remains of Roman forts exist at Burscough, Manchester, Lancaster, Over Burrow, Ribchester, Kirkham and Castleshaw. A number of Roman roads are known to have existed including one between Manchester and Carlisle, via Ribchester and Burrow. It is thought that a cluster of Romano-British farmsteads existed to the east of Burnley

The land that would become the ancient county of Lancashire had been part of the Kingdom of Northumbria. The River Mersey, and further east, its tributary the River Tame, was considered the border with Mercia. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle records that in 923, Edward the Elder brought an army to Mercia and ordered the repair of the defences at Manchester in Northumbria. It seems that from this time the area south of the Ribble became associated with Mercia.

After the Norman conquest, William the Conqueror gave to Roger de Poitou, lands spanning eight ancient counties, which included the area between the River Ribble and the Mersey and Amounderness. However, by the time of the Domesday survey, most of his lands are recorded to be under the king&#x27;s control. In the Domesday Book, some of its lands had been treated as part of Yorkshire. The area in between the Rivers Mersey and Ribble (referred to in the Domesday Book as &quot;Inter Ripam et Mersam&quot;) formed part of the returns for Cheshire. Although some have taken this to mean that, at this time, south Lancashire was part of Cheshire, it is not clear that this was the case, and more recent research indicates that the boundary between Cheshire and what was to become Lancashire remained the river Mersey. South of the Ribble was surveyed as six hundreds: Blackburn, Derby, Leyland, Newton, Salford and Warrington. The entries are brief, and unusually intermix the Anglo-Saxon &quot;hide&quot; with the Danelaw &quot;carucate&quot; as units of measurement. The entries for the north, consist of little more than lists of manors. Amounderness appears as a district, apparently stretching inland to the River Hodder, the hundred is thought to have been created shortly afterwards. Lonsdale was also not recorded as a hundred, the name only appears apparently as a manor attached to Cockerham.

The town of Lancaster itself was at this time apparently administratively united (to the extent it could be administered) with Kendal, Furness and Cartmell, but not with the area south of the Ribble river. This contiguous area of relatively undeveloped highland was administered by men such as Ivo de Taillebois, and a local aristocracy which still included a relatively significant amount of Anglo-Saxons. This is proposed by authors such as William Farrer to be the reason why the first Barons of Kendal used the surname &quot;de Lancaster&quot; despite Kendal not becoming a permanent part of the later developed county of Lancaster.

==Early history==
After Domesday, Roger&#x27;s lands were returned to him and in the early 1090s Lonsdale, Cartmel and Furness were added to Roger&#x27;s estates to facilitate the defence of the area south of Morecambe Bay from Scottish raiding parties, which travelled round the Cumberland coast and across the bay at low water, rather than through the mountainous regions of the Lake District. However, in 1102 he supported Robert Curthose in a failed rebellion against Henry I and his English holdings where forfeit. The Lonsdale Hundred was created sometime during the late 11th or early 12th centuries, certainly by 1168. Place-name evidence suggests that previous district included areas within the River Lune&#x27;s watershed, not included in the new hundred.

Lancashire, like many northern counties fell prey to Scottish Raids from King David I of Scotland with the Battle of Clitheroe in 1138 where the county was then briefly a part of Scotland, to Robert the Bruce with the Great Raid of 1322, reaching as far south as Chorley. A Jacobites battle took place at the Battle of Preston in 1715, while in 1745 Bonnie Prince Charlie marched his Jacobites through Lancashire and gained supporters from Manchester along the way, only for them to retreat through the county back to Scotland from Derby in Derbyshire and ultimately being defeated at the Battle of Culloden the following year.

From 1164 until 1189 the honour of Lancaster was held by the crown and its accounts are recorded in the Pipe rolls. It was usually included under Yorkshire or Northumberland, as when the first reference to a County of Lancaster occurs in 1168 in the accounts of the sheriff. In 1182 Lancaster recorded as a separate shire, with a note stating &quot;because there was no place for it in Northumberland&quot;.

After 1194 the honour was again in the possession of the crown, but in 1267 Edmund Crouchback (father of the House of Lancaster) the son of King Henry III was created the 1st Earl of Lancaster. Henry de Lacy the Earl of Lincoln at this time held the baronies of Clitheroe, Penwortham and Halton and the lordships of Rochdale and Bury in this area. With his death in 1311, ownership passed to Crouchback&#x27;s son Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster who had been married to Henry&#x27;s daughter, Alice. Thomas was executed as a rebel and replaced by his younger brother Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster. In 1351 Henry&#x27;s son, Henry of Grosmont, became the first Duke of Lancaster with palatine jurisdiction within the county. This placed the administration of justice in the county under control of the duke and he appointed his own justices to hear pleas of the Crown and all other common law pleas. He also appointed the Sheriff, coroners and other local officers including an escheator. He also appointed a Chancellor and established a Chancery to issue the writs required for the administration of the Palatinate.

The powers had been granted only for Henry&#x27;s lifetime and after the duke&#x27;s death in 1361 the palatinate (and title) ceased to exist. One of Henry&#x27;s daughter&#x27;s was married to John of Gaunt, the son of Edward III and the dukedom was recreated for him the next year. Before his death in 1377, the king also granted the palatine powers to his son. In 1390 John obtained an extension of this grant from Richard II, enabling his male heirs to inherit control of the palatinate. After John&#x27;s death in 1399, his exiled son Henry of Bolingbroke returned to England, deposing Richard II and becoming king as Henry IV. Henry IV maintained the duchy separately from the other possessions of the crown and the palatinate&#x27;s independent judicial system continued, although administered consistently with the rest of the country.

Once its initial boundaries were established, it bordered Cumberland, Westmorland, Yorkshire, and Cheshire. The county was divided into the six hundreds of Amounderness, Blackburn, Leyland, Lonsdale, Salford, and West Derby. Lonsdale was further partitioned into Lonsdale North, which was the detached part north of Morecambe Bay (also known as Furness), and Lonsdale South. Each hundred was sub-divided into parishes. As the parishes covered relatively large areas, they were further divided into townships that were more similar in size to parishes in counties in the south of England. Outside of the administration of the hundreds were the boroughs.

In 1461 Edward IV decreed that the county palatine should become part of the Duchy of Lancaster and from 1471 the offices of Chancellor of the Duchy and Chancellor of the Palatinate were held by the same person. The administrative centre moved to London, while Lancaster remained the legal centre.

==Industrial Revolution==
Lancashire was one of the homes of modern industrialisation. This started with small scale experiments, for example in the automation of weaving. Lancashire had a long history of supplying wool to skilled weavers in Europe and southern England, as well as having many cottager weavers itself by the 18th century. But the advent of increased imports of cotton needing processing was a trigger to innovation. John Kay, Richard Arkwright, Samuel Crompton, and James Hargreaves were from Lancashire.

Around 1700, a blast furnace thought to be the first built in Lancashire, was constructed in the Cliviger gorge.

Prior to the Municipal Corporations Act there were relatively few boroughs in the county. But following the act, 22 towns were incorporated up to 1862 as the county became more populous due to the continuing industrial revolution.

Under the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 the common law and criminal jurisdictions at Lancaster&#x27;s courts (including the jurisdiction of the Court of Common Pleas) transferred to the new High Court of Justice and the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal in Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster transferred to the Court of Appeal established by that Act. After November 1875 the palatinate consisted only of the Court of Chancery and the Chancellor&#x27;s right to appoint justices of the peace and other local officers.

County Hall in Preston was built as a home for the county administration, the Quarter Sessions and Lancashire Constabulary) and opened on 14 September 1882.
Blackpool Tramway opened in 1885 and is one of the oldest electric tramways in the world.

In 1889, the administrative county of Lancashire was created, covering the historical county except for the county boroughs such as Blackburn, Burnley, Barrow-in-Furness, Preston, Wigan, Liverpool and Manchester.

During the 20th century, the county became increasingly urbanised, particularly the southern part. To the existing county boroughs of Barrow-in-Furness, Blackburn, Bolton, Bootle, Burnley, Bury, Liverpool, Manchester, Oldham, Preston, Rochdale, Salford, St Helens and Wigan were added Blackpool (1904), Southport (1905), and Warrington (1900). The county boroughs also had many boundary extensions. The borders around the Manchester area were particularly complicated, with narrow protrusions of the administrative county between the county boroughs – Lees urban district formed a detached part of the administrative county, between Oldham county borough and the West Riding of Yorkshire.

==Modern history==
By the census of 1971, the population of Lancashire and its county boroughs had reached 5,129,416, making it the most populous geographic county in the UK. The administrative county was also the most populous of its type outside London, with a population of 2,280,359 in 1961. In 1972, under the Courts Act 1971, the remaining major element of legal system, the Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster also merged with the High Court.

On 1 April 1974, under the Local Government Act 1972, the administrative county was abolished, as were the county boroughs. The urbanised southern part largely became part of two metropolitan counties, Merseyside and Greater Manchester.

The boroughs of Liverpool, Knowsley, St Helens and Sefton were included in Merseyside. In Greater Manchester the successor boroughs were Bury, Bolton, Manchester, Oldham (part), Rochdale, Salford, Tameside (part), Trafford (part) and Wigan. Warrington and Widnes, south of the new Merseyside/Greater Manchester border were added to the new non-metropolitan county of Cheshire. The urban districts of Barnoldswick and Earby, Bowland Rural District and the parishes of Bracewell and Brogden and Salterforth from Skipton Rural District in the West Riding of Yorkshire became part of the new Lancashire. One parish, Simonswood, was transferred from the borough of Knowsley in Merseyside to the district of West Lancashire in 1994.
In 1998 Blackpool and Blackburn with Darwen became independent of the county as unitary authorities, but remained in Lancashire for ceremonial purposes, including the provision of fire, rescue and policing.

In March 2005, under the Courts Act 2003, the power to appoint magistrates in Lancashire, Greater Manchester and Merseyside transferred to the Ministry of Justice.


==See also==

* Duchy of Lancaster
* Grade I listed buildings in Lancashire
* Grade II* listed buildings in Lancashire
* History of Cumbria
* History of England
* History of Liverpool
* History of Manchester
* House of Lancaster
* Lancashire Coalfield
* List of collieries in Lancashire since 1854
* List of mining disasters in Lancashire
* Scheduled monuments in Lancashire
==Notes and references==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*Crosby, A. (1996). &quot;A History of Cheshire.&quot; (The Darwen County History Series.) Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Phillimore &amp; Co. Ltd. .
*Harris, B. E., and Thacker, A. T. (1987). &quot;The Victoria History of the County of Chester. (Volume 1: Physique, Prehistory, Roman, Anglo-Saxon, and Domesday).&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press. .
*Morgan, P. (1978). &quot;Domesday Book Cheshire: Including Lancashire, Cumbria, and North Wales&quot;. Chichester, Sussex: Phillimore &amp; Co. Ltd. .
*Phillips A. D. M., and Phillips, C. B. (2002), &quot;A New Historical Atlas of Cheshire&quot;. Chester, UK: Cheshire County Council and Cheshire Community Council Publications Trust. .

==External links==
* https://www.npr.org/2023/06/21/1183045605/black-army-soldiers-england-wwii-battle
* Lancashire Lantern, The Lancashire Life and Times E-Resource network
* The Chetham Society
* The Historic Society of Lancashire and Cheshire
* The Record Society of Lancashire and Cheshire
* Lancashire and Cheshire Antiquarian Society
* Map of the Lancashire County Hundreds 
* The Victoria County History of Lancashire, (seven volumes, as part of British History Online)
* Friends of Real Lancashire, promoting the historic boundaries of Lancashire
* Silent footage of royal visit to Lancaster for the 600th anniversary of the County Palatine of Lancaster 1951 Produced by Sam Hanna, Burnley (Vimeo – North West Film Archive)
* 
* british-towns.net</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="0" end="10" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="16" end="33" title="Counties of England" label="county of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="110" end="123" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="357" end="367" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="372" end="381" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q370209" start="547" end="554" title="Furness" label="Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045962" start="559" end="567" title="Cartmell" label="Cartmell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="670" end="683" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="692" end="698" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="711" end="722" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881521" start="775" end="794" title="Old Man of Coniston" label="Old Man of Coniston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991489" start="802" end="817" title="county palatine" label="county palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346992" start="823" end="840" title="Duke of Lancaster" label="Duke of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="967" end="984" title="Henry Bolingbroke" label="Henry Bolingbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560047" start="1341" end="1362" title="administrative county" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="1378" end="1392" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386149" start="1419" end="1444" title="Lancashire County Council" label="Lancashire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436028" start="1464" end="1475" title="County Hall, Preston" label="County Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="1479" end="1486" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="1545" end="1564" title="Ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1609" end="1619" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="1624" end="1633" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="1665" end="1683" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="1688" end="1698" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="1742" end="1753" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="1758" end="1768" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="1798" end="1805" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1823" end="1833" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406920" start="1856" end="1873" title="Forest of Bowland" label="Forest of Bowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984899" start="1878" end="1889" title="West Craven" label="West Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="1937" end="1961" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="2110" end="2125" title="Historic Counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="2189" end="2198" title="Lancaster, Lancashire" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="2229" end="2240" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483002" start="2310" end="2323" title="Lancashire FA" label="Lancashire FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="2330" end="2342" title="High Sheriff" label="High Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756835" start="2347" end="2357" title="High Sheriff of Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756802" start="2359" end="2377" title="High Sheriff of Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756861" start="2382" end="2392" title="High Sheriff of Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q46273" start="2504" end="2517" title="bona vacantia" label="bona vacantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="2787" end="2802" title="Historic Counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919132" start="2824" end="2832" title="Red Rose of Lancaster" label="Red Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="2854" end="2872" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456765" start="2890" end="2908" title="Flag of Lancashire" label="Flag of Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086900" start="2934" end="2948" title="Flag Institute" label="Flag Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483010" start="2966" end="2980" title="Lancashire Day" label="Lancashire Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483066" start="3063" end="3070" title="Lancashire dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="3129" end="3138" title="Lancaster, Lancashire" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162445" start="3181" end="3191" title="River Lune" label="River Lune"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3240" end="3251" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398356" start="3481" end="3487" title="John Leland (antiquary)" label="Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800676" start="3553" end="3567" title="Paston Letters" label="Paston Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136950" start="3627" end="3634" title="syncope (phonetics)" label="syncope"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="3765" end="3774" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046170" start="3831" end="3839" title="Carvetii" label="Carvetii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480645" start="3926" end="3934" title="Setantii" label="Setantii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544353" start="4022" end="4032" title="River Wyre" label="River Wyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="4145" end="4155" title="Roman fort" label="Roman fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q97441063" start="4166" end="4175" title="Burscough Roman fort" label="Burscough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285089" start="4177" end="4187" title="Mamucium" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q97404308" start="4189" end="4198" title="Lancaster Roman Fort" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17640916" start="4200" end="4211" title="Over Burrow Roman Fort" label="Over Burrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960578" start="4213" end="4223" title="Bremetennacum" label="Ribchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743513" start="4225" end="4232" title="Kirkham, Lancashire" label="Kirkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050612" start="4237" end="4247" title="Castleshaw Roman fort" label="Castleshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="4405" end="4419" title="Romano-British" label="Romano-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q72030539" start="4420" end="4429" title="farmstead" label="farmstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="4454" end="4461" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="4544" end="4566" title="Kingdom of Northumbria" label="Kingdom of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19724" start="4572" end="4584" title="River Mersey" label="River Mersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753684" start="4622" end="4632" title="River Tame, Greater Manchester" label="River Tame"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="4665" end="4671" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="4677" end="4698" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187114" start="4720" end="4736" title="Edward the Elder" label="Edward the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q114319" start="4883" end="4889" title="River Ribble" label="Ribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="4932" end="4947" title="Norman conquest" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="4949" end="4970" title="William I of England" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161853" start="4979" end="4994" title="Roger de Poitou" label="Roger de Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747988" start="5103" end="5115" title="Amounderness" label="Amounderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="5145" end="5160" title="Domesday survey" label="Domesday survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="5298" end="5307" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="5461" end="5469" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="5779" end="5787" title="hundred (division)" label="hundreds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922750" start="5789" end="5798" title="Blackburn (hundred)" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567412" start="5800" end="5805" title="West Derby (hundred)" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538056" start="5807" end="5814" title="Leyland (hundred)" label="Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q750000" start="5816" end="5822" title="Newton in Makerfield" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226845" start="5824" end="5831" title="Salford (hundred)" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="5836" end="5846" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="5898" end="5909" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q521994" start="5916" end="5920" title="Hide (unit)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="5936" end="5943" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579483" start="5950" end="5958" title="carucate" label="carucate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="6054" end="6060" title="Manorialism" label="manors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747988" start="6062" end="6074" title="Amounderness" label="Amounderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511835" start="6134" end="6146" title="River Hodder" label="River Hodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005367" start="6313" end="6322" title="Cockerham" label="Cockerham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099197" start="6619" end="6636" title="Ivo de Taillebois" label="Ivo de Taillebois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863025" start="6814" end="6830" title="Barony of Kendal" label="Barons of Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379216" start="7070" end="7077" title="Cartmel" label="Cartmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q370209" start="7082" end="7089" title="Furness" label="Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="7172" end="7185" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="7243" end="7253" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="7344" end="7357" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q220994" start="7389" end="7404" title="Robert Curthose" label="Robert Curthose"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="7435" end="7442" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674839" start="7487" end="7503" title="Lonsdale Hundred" label="Lonsdale Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162445" start="7668" end="7678" title="River Lune" label="River Lune"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="7804" end="7828" title="King David I of Scotland" label="King David I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888317" start="7838" end="7857" title="Battle of Clitheroe" label="Battle of Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="7923" end="7939" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970652" start="7949" end="7967" title="Great Raid of 1322" label="Great Raid of 1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078535" start="7994" end="8001" title="Chorley" label="Chorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="8005" end="8014" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636587" start="8040" end="8057" title="Battle of Preston (1715)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q312581" start="8081" end="8102" title="Bonnie Prince Charlie" label="Bonnie Prince Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="8171" end="8181" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="8263" end="8268" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="8272" end="8282" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="8320" end="8338" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897185" start="8385" end="8404" title="honour of Lancaster" label="honour of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q614407" start="8464" end="8474" title="Pipe rolls" label="Pipe rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="8568" end="8587" title="County of Lancaster" label="County of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="8676" end="8681" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="8845" end="8862" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund Crouchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="8878" end="8896" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="8909" end="8923" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277330" start="8944" end="8961" title="Earl of Lancaster" label="Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237622" start="8963" end="8976" title="Henry de Lacy, 3rd Earl of Lincoln" label="Henry de Lacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277346" start="8981" end="8996" title="Earl of Lincoln" label="Earl of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897177" start="9031" end="9040" title="Honour of Clitheroe" label="Clitheroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q508016" start="9042" end="9052" title="Penwortham" label="Penwortham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301986" start="9057" end="9063" title="Halton Castle" label="Halton"/>
<link wikidata="Q474605" start="9085" end="9093" title="Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="9098" end="9102" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q249183" start="9183" end="9212" title="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster" label="Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611713" start="9260" end="9265" title="Alice de Lacy, 4th Countess of Lincoln" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q950456" start="9334" end="9362" title="Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster" label="Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q225604" start="9390" end="9407" title="Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster" label="Henry of Grosmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346992" start="9426" end="9443" title="Duke of Lancaster" label="Duke of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991489" start="9449" end="9457" title="County palatine" label="palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331361" start="9597" end="9605" title="justices" label="justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="9647" end="9657" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756835" start="9683" end="9694" title="High Sheriff of Lancashire" label="the Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="9696" end="9703" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q552592" start="9743" end="9752" title="escheator" label="escheator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570373" start="9803" end="9811" title="Chancery (medieval office)" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="9825" end="9829" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q193752" start="10077" end="10090" title="John of Gaunt" label="John of Gaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="10103" end="10113" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="10301" end="10311" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="10506" end="10514" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="10786" end="10796" title="Cumberland, England" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="10798" end="10809" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="10811" end="10820" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="10826" end="10834" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747988" start="10884" end="10896" title="Amounderness" label="Amounderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922750" start="10898" end="10907" title="Blackburn (hundred)" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538056" start="10909" end="10916" title="Leyland (hundred)" label="Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674839" start="10918" end="10926" title="Lonsdale (hundred)" label="Lonsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226845" start="10928" end="10935" title="Salford (hundred)" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567412" start="10941" end="10951" title="West Derby (hundred)" label="West Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866414" start="11044" end="11057" title="Morecambe Bay" label="Morecambe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q370209" start="11073" end="11080" title="Furness" label="Furness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11137" end="11145" title="Parish#England" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752944" start="11371" end="11379" title="Ancient borough" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="11390" end="11399" title="Edward IV of England" label="Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="11459" end="11477" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="11507" end="11530" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q140683" start="12114" end="12122" title="John Kay (flying shuttle)" label="John Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q294153" start="12124" end="12141" title="Richard Arkwright" label="Richard Arkwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q140692" start="12143" end="12158" title="Samuel Crompton" label="Samuel Crompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q140696" start="12164" end="12180" title="James Hargreaves" label="James Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="12219" end="12232" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q921279" start="12301" end="12309" title="Cliviger" label="Cliviger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256081" start="12331" end="12357" title="Municipal Corporations Act 1835" label="Municipal Corporations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946362" start="12431" end="12439" title="Boroughs incorporated in England and Wales 1835–1882" label="22 towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="12526" end="12547" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644929" start="12560" end="12596" title="Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873" label="Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="12601" end="12611" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="12616" end="12624" title="criminal law" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608493" start="12701" end="12722" title="Court of Common Pleas of the County Palatine of Lancaster" label="Court of Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="12747" end="12768" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12797" end="12860" title="Court of Appeal in Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster" label="Court of Appeal in Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137751" start="12880" end="12895" title="Court of Appeal (England and Wales)" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178350" start="12978" end="12995" title="Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster" label="Court of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="13039" end="13060" title="Justice of the peace" label="justices of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436028" start="13088" end="13099" title="County Hall, Preston" label="County Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="13166" end="13182" title="Quarter Sessions" label="Quarter Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482989" start="13187" end="13210" title="Lancashire Constabulary" label="Lancashire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881383" start="13245" end="13262" title="Blackpool Tramway" label="Blackpool Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941148" start="13349" end="13370" title="administrative counties of England" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="13411" end="13428" title="Lancashire County Palatine" label="historical county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="13444" end="13458" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="13468" end="13477" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="13479" end="13486" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="13488" end="13505" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="13507" end="13514" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q208143" start="13516" end="13521" title="Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="13523" end="13532" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13537" end="13547" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="13684" end="13701" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188313" start="13703" end="13712" title="Blackburn" label="Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177608" start="13714" end="13720" title="County Borough of Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q893159" start="13722" end="13728" title="Bootle" label="Bootle"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="13730" end="13737" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="13739" end="13743" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="13745" end="13754" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="13756" end="13766" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177615" start="13768" end="13774" title="County Borough of Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="13776" end="13783" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177619" start="13785" end="13793" title="County Borough of Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177620" start="13795" end="13802" title="County Borough of Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q153647" start="13804" end="13813" title="St Helens, Merseyside" label="St Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177626" start="13818" end="13823" title="County Borough of Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="13835" end="13844" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q868647" start="13853" end="13862" title="Southport" label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177624" start="13875" end="13885" title="County Borough of Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516401" start="14102" end="14106" title="Lees, Greater Manchester" label="Lees"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="14107" end="14121" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban district"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="14266" end="14272" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178700" start="14555" end="14570" title="Courts Act 1971" label="Courts Act 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178350" start="14621" end="14674" title="Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster" label="Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="14736" end="14761" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q769628" start="14888" end="14909" title="Metropolitan county" label="metropolitan counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="14911" end="14921" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="14926" end="14944" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228523" start="14974" end="14982" title="Metropolitan Borough of Knowsley" label="Knowsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179206" start="14984" end="14993" title="Metropolitan Borough of St Helens" label="St Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546645" start="14998" end="15004" title="Metropolitan Borough of Sefton" label="Sefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q512036" start="15084" end="15088" title="Metropolitan Borough of Bury" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364541" start="15090" end="15096" title="Metropolitan Borough of Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278608" start="15110" end="15116" title="Metropolitan Borough of Oldham" label="Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892596" start="15125" end="15133" title="Metropolitan Borough of Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142118" start="15135" end="15142" title="City of Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423078" start="15144" end="15152" title="Tameside" label="Tameside"/>
<link wikidata="Q915954" start="15161" end="15169" title="Trafford" label="Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q684307" start="15181" end="15186" title="Metropolitan Borough of Wigan" label="Wigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022741" start="15203" end="15209" title="Widnes" label="Widnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="15314" end="15322" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q374614" start="15328" end="15343" title="Urban district (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="urban districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049578" start="15347" end="15359" title="Barnoldswick" label="Barnoldswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193132" start="15364" end="15369" title="Earby" label="Earby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951068" start="15371" end="15393" title="Bowland Rural District" label="Bowland Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150148" start="15414" end="15435" title="Bracewell and Brogden" label="Bracewell and Brogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663911" start="15440" end="15451" title="Salterforth" label="Salterforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535858" start="15457" end="15479" title="Skipton Rural District" label="Skipton Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="15487" end="15511" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520517" start="15559" end="15569" title="Simonswood" label="Simonswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228523" start="15607" end="15615" title="Metropolitan Borough of Knowsley" label="Knowsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290796" start="15649" end="15664" title="West Lancashire" label="West Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="15682" end="15691" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q880782" start="15696" end="15717" title="Blackburn with Darwen" label="Blackburn with Darwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="15806" end="15825" title="Ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178704" start="15907" end="15922" title="Courts Act 2003" label="Courts Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983190" start="16025" end="16044" title="Ministry of Justice (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914544" start="16064" end="16082" title="Duchy of Lancaster" label="Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591791" start="16085" end="16123" title="Grade I listed buildings in Lancashire" label="Grade I listed buildings in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151106" start="16126" end="16166" title="Grade II* listed buildings in Lancashire" label="Grade II* listed buildings in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775792" start="16169" end="16187" title="History of Cumbria" label="History of Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="16190" end="16208" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865291" start="16211" end="16231" title="History of Liverpool" label="History of Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136750" start="16234" end="16255" title="History of Manchester" label="History of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q105278" start="16258" end="16276" title="House of Lancaster" label="House of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482985" start="16279" end="16299" title="Lancashire Coalfield" label="Lancashire Coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610737" start="16302" end="16345" title="List of collieries in Lancashire since 1854" label="List of collieries in Lancashire since 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555601" start="16348" end="16386" title="List of mining disasters in Lancashire" label="List of mining disasters in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799923" start="16389" end="16422" title="Scheduled monuments in Lancashire" label="Scheduled monuments in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209096" start="17857" end="17864" title="Burnley" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q156376" start="17866" end="17871" title="Vimeo" label="Vimeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017075" start="17874" end="17897" title="North West Film Archive" label="North West Film Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139688" wikidata="Q6633757" url="?curid=1139688" title="List of places in Lancashire">
<text>This is a list of places within the [[ceremonial counties of England|ceremonial county]] of [[Lancashire]], England. 

==A==
==B==





==C==
==D==
==E==
==F==
==G==
==H==
==I==
==K==
==L==
==M==
==N==
==O==
==P==
==Q==
==R==
==S==
==T==
==U==
==W==
==Y==
==See also==
* List of settlements in Lancashire by population
* Civil parishes in Lancashire
* List of places historically in Lancashire for pre-1974 boundaries
* List of places in England for lists in other counties

==External links==
*Map of places in Lancashire compiled from this list
*Some Lancashire villages</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6633757" start="10" end="106" title="List of places in Lancashire" label="list of places within the [[ceremonial counties of England|ceremonial county]] of [[Lancashire]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405325" start="271" end="318" title="List of settlements in Lancashire by population" label="List of settlements in Lancashire by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896426" start="321" end="349" title="Civil parishes in Lancashire" label="Civil parishes in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633507" start="352" end="393" title="List of places historically in Lancashire" label="List of places historically in Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858915" start="420" end="445" title="List of places in England" label="List of places in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139692" wikidata="Q5865259" url="?curid=1139692" title="History of Leicestershire">
<text>This article is intended to give an overview of the history of Leicestershire, England.

==Geography and toponymy==
The first recorded use of the name &quot;Lægrecastrescir&quot; was in 1086. In Domesday Book (1086) the county is recorded as &quot;Ledecestrescire&quot; and in 1124 &quot;Leþecæstrescir&quot; occurs.

Leicestershire&#x27;s external boundaries have changed little since the Domesday Survey. The Measham-Donisthorpe exclave of Derbyshire has been exchanged for the Netherseal/Overseal area, and the urban expansion of Market Harborough has caused Little Bowden, previously in Northamptonshire to be annexed.

===Hundreds===
Leicestershire was recorded in the &quot;Domesday Book&quot; of 1086 as a city within the wapentake of Guthlaxton when there were four wapentakes completely in Leicestershire: Guthlaxton, Framland, Goscote and Gartree. These later became hundreds, with the division of Goscote into West Goscote and East Goscote, and the addition of Sparkenhoe hundred from a partition of Guthlaxton. City status was later revoked and after several centuries regained in 1919.

===Roads and tracks===
====Prehistoric tracks====
As the county was not densely inhabited before the 10th century there are few traces of early trackways. The prehistoric trackway (&quot;Jurassic Trackway&quot;) which linked the downlands of Wiltshire with the wolds of Yorkshire did cross the county having followed the top of the Northamptonshire uplands. Where the escarpment had broken down as it had in Northamptonshire and Leicestershire it is impossible to know what route was followed; however where the uplands formed a narrow belt the approximate line of it can be identified. It is likely to have been in use already in the early Bronze Age (c. 1900-1500 BC) but if not so early than certainly during the middle Bronze Age (1500-1000 BC). The route of the trackway passes near Husbands Bosworth and Tilton and further on passes into Lincolnshire where it follows Lincoln Edge before crossing the River Humber into Yorkshire.

Another prehistoric road came from the Fens and crossed the limestone plateau round Croxton Kerrial and Saltby, then went between Eastwell and Goadby Marwood and then southwestwards past Wartnaby and Six Hills to reach the Soar at Barrow. Possibly it continued into Charnwood Forest as Beacon Hill was probably an inhabited Bronze Age site, and possibly terminated at Bardon Hill.

Another ancient east to west road crossed the dry limestone plateau and provided a link between the Welland and the Trent. It begins at Stamford (whose name means &quot;stone ford&quot;, a ford by which the Welland was crossed) following the line of Ermine Street (a Roman road) but diverges from the Roman road towards the left and rises to its summit of 500 feet near Buckminster; thereafter it crosses Saltby heath and goes by Three Queens to reach the Vale of Belvoir where its course cannot be identified. Beyond the vale it probably went through Long Bennington to the banks of the River Trent at or near Newark. This road may have been in use as early as the Bronze Age but if not so early then its use began in the early Iron Age. It remained in use in ancient British, Roman and early Anglian times.

Sewstern Lane (also known as The Drift) is an old road which was used throughout the Middle Ages, probably as the most direct way between the great fairs of Nottingham and Stamford. A more direct route came into use later via Stonesby and Waltham on the Wolds. Sewstern Lane became less used after the mid 17th century, apart from its use by the Earls of Rutland on their journeys to London from Belvoir. When coaches started to run in the later 17th century a different route was taken via Stretton, Colsterworth and Great Ponton since Sewstern Lane would have provided insufficient staging posts where food for men and horses would be available. It continued in use as a drove road for cattle until the advent of railways changed the means of transport.

The plateau round Tilton was a meeting place for prehistoric tracks: one of these which is called in its latter stages Ridgemere Lane runs north of Cold Newton, by New York farm to the edge of the flood plain of the Wreak near Syston. Part of it coincides with parish boundaries, proof that it predates the delimiting of parishes in the pre-Conquest era. Another old way goes above Lowesby and South Croxton and comes down to the edge of the plain at Queniborough. No dating of these two tracks is possible except that they are pre-Roman in origin.

Another very old road, perhaps a true ridgeway of the Bronze Age, comes westwards from Stamford and follows a limestone ridge then goes by Edith Weston, Manton and Martinsthorpe (a deserted village) to enter Leicestershire near Withcote. It goes from there along the high ground through Halstead and so to Tilton. From Tilton it continues westward by Billesdon Coplow and the site of the abandoned village of Ingarsby; near Scraptoft it follows Scraptoft Lane and reaches the gravel terrace by the banks of the Soar where Leicester would in later times be founded. It is not certain that this was a through route in prehistoric times but it was such in the Middle Ages and was used by Leicester merchants to reach the fairs of Stamford.

====Roman roads====

There are about 76 miles of Roman roads in the county and these are well marked on Ordnance Survey maps. Most of these are sections of the three principal routs that passed through the county: the Fosse Way, Watling Street, and the Via Devana. 

The longest single stretch of road is between High Cross and the vanished Roman station of Vernemetum and is part of the Fosse Way, constructed about 46-48 AD. The section northwards to Vernemetum forms the present main road to Newark. The next road in age is Watling Street, which dates from 50-51 AD and which marks the boundary between Leicestershire and Warwickshire. The road from Leicester to Manduessum (now Mancetter) was probably made some 20 years later than Watling Street and is part of the rout known as the Via Devana between Camulodunum (today Colchester) and Deva Victrix (now Chester). Parts of this route became disused in Anglo-Saxon times as that people established no villages nearby.

====Medieval roads and bridges====

The Anglo-Saxons were not road makers but the paths and tracks which connected their villages with those nearby form the basis for the modern road system. There are some green tracks in the county of probable Anglo-Saxon origin which are also followed by parish boundaries (these are often called &quot;The Mere&quot;, mere meaning boundary). One of these runs from Countesthorpe towards Gilmorton and another, long known as &quot;The Old Mere&quot;, from the Wigston Magna - Newton Harcourt road nearly to Houghton on the Hill. In the 13th and 14th centuries various fairs and markets were established in some of the villages; those that prospered led to the villages becoming market towns. Between fair and market towns roads became established and communication was also aided by the building to bridges. Most of the medieval bridges of the county outside Leicester were built in the second half of the 13th century or very early in the 14th. None of these early stone bridges survives but there are some later ones in existence at Aylestone, Anstey, Enderby Mill (the road to it was diverted away when turnpikes were built) and Rearsby. These are of uncertain date but probably not earlier than the 15th century.

===Rutland and Leicester===
In 1974, due to the Local Government Act 1972, the county of Rutland was annexed to Leicestershire as a district, and Leicester&#x27;s county borough status was abolished, it becoming a district also.

In 1974, the Local Government Act 1972 abolished the county borough status of Leicester and the county status of neighbouring Rutland, converting both to administrative districts of Leicestershire. These actions were reversed on 1 April 1997, when Rutland and the City of Leicester became unitary authorities. Rutland became a distinct Ceremonial County once again, although it continues to be policed by Leicestershire Constabulary.

==Early history==
The earthworks of Leicestershire include hill-top camps of the 1st century BC and the sites of deserted villages abandoned in the later Middle Ages. There are hill-forts, Roman camps (e.g. Ratby), linear earthworks, castle-sites (e.g.Hallaton), moated homesteads and sites of deserted villages (e.g. Ingarsby). The remains of prehistoric burial mounds and tumuli are scanty. The county was sparsely populated up to the 10th century AD and a large part of it was thickly wooded areas of heavy clay. However, during the rest of the Middle Ages most of the land was progressively cleared and settled; so that it became populous and prosperous, but more so in the eastern half and in the southeast.

Together with Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Lincolnshire, Rutland and Northamptonshire Leicestershire was inhabited by the ancient British tribe formerly known as Coritani (now corrected to Corieltauvi). After the Roman conquest it was included in the province of Flavia Caesariensis. In Anglo-Saxon times the land was settled by the Middle Angles (i.e. the Angles between the East Angles and the Mercians) whose territory was later included in the kingdom of Mercia. From the reign of Egbert, King of Wessex, the kings of Wessex also ruled Mercia. The division of the kingdom into shires or counties was probably done about 800 or even earlier. During the incursions of the Danes the midlands were frequently plundered and laid waste. After the Danish invasions it was included in the Danelaw, whose boundary ran on the south-western boundary of the shire.

===Diocese===
A bishopric of the Middle Angles was established here in 680, and the Anglo-Saxon cathedral was probably located close to (if not on the site of) the present cathedral. The original diocese fell victim to the invasion by the Danes around 870 and after the establishment of the Danelaw in 886 the diocese&#x27;s seat was moved to Oxfordshire and, taking over the existing Diocese of Lindine (created in 678), became the Diocese of Dorchester.

==20th century==
After the division of the Diocese of Lincoln in 1541 the county was part of the Diocese of Peterborough. In the 19th century there were suffragan bishops of Leicester whilst the county was still within the Diocese of Peterborough. The modern diocese of Leicester was founded on 12 November 1926 from the archdeaconries of Leicester and Loughborough and part of the Archdeaconry of Northampton, all from the Diocese of Peterborough. St Martin&#x27;s Church, Leicester, was elevated as the cathedral of the new see.

==County symbol==

The crest of the county council, and the emblem of Leicestershire County Cricket Club, Leicester City FC and Leicestershire Scouts is the red fox. Leicestershire is considered to be the birthplace of fox hunting as it is known today. Hugo Meynell of Quorn, Master of the Quorn Hunt 1753–1800, is known as the father of fox hunting. Melton Mowbray and Market Harborough have associations with fox hunting, as has neighbouring Rutland.

==See also==
* History of England
*Corieltauvi
* Five Burghs
* Diocese of Leicester
*House of Beaumont
* Leir of Britain
*List of lost settlements in the United Kingdom#Leicestershire
*List of hundreds of England and Wales#Leicestershire

==References==
==Further reading==
===Published in the 18th-19th centuries===
*John Throsby (1789) &quot;Select Views in Leicestershire, from Original Drawings, containing historical and descriptive accounts of castles, religious houses, and seats in that county&quot;
*--do.-- (1790) &quot;Supplementary Volume to the Leicestershire Views, containing a Series of Excursions to the Villages and Places of Note in that County&quot; 
* 4 vols. (Nichols included most of Throsby&#x27;s work in his History of the county of Leicester). 
**Volume 1, part 1
** v.1 part 2
** v.3 part 1
** v.4, part 2
* (includes Leicestershire)
*Curtis, John (1831) &quot;A Topographical History of the County of Leicester&quot;. Ashby-de-la-Zouch: W. Hextall
* 
* 
* 

===Published in the 20th century===
* 
*&quot;Victoria County History: Leicestershire&quot; on the website of British History Online (University of London &amp; History of Parliament Trust):
**Volume 2, 1954 by W. G. Hoskins (editor) assisted by R. A. McKinley. &quot;A part-volume, detailing the history of the religious houses of the county.&quot;
**Volume 4 by R. A. McKinley (editor) 1958 &quot;Thematic and topographical accounts of the city of Leicester, as well as histories of parishes added to the city since 1892.&quot;
**Volume 5 by J. M. Lee, R. A. McKinley 1964. &quot;Covers the thirty-eight parishes of Gartree hundred and also the town of Market Harborough.&quot;
*Hoskins, W. G. (1957) &quot;Leicestershire: an illustrated essay on the history of the landscape&quot;. London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton

==External links==

* My Leicestershire History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="63" end="77" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853449" start="411" end="418" title="Measham" label="Measham"/>
<link wikidata="Q965115" start="419" end="430" title="Donisthorpe" label="Donisthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="431" end="438" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="442" end="452" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637795" start="480" end="490" title="Netherseal" label="Netherseal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425853" start="491" end="499" title="Overseal" label="Overseal"/>
<link wikidata="Q783570" start="533" end="550" title="Market Harborough" label="Market Harborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649241" start="562" end="575" title="Little Bowden" label="Little Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="591" end="607" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="680" end="693" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="729" end="738" title="Hundred_(county_division)" label="wapentake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621742" start="742" end="752" title="Guthlaxton" label="Guthlaxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="774" end="783" title="wapentake" label="wapentake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478032" start="827" end="835" title="Framland" label="Framland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587150" start="837" end="844" title="Goscote" label="Goscote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524442" start="849" end="856" title="Gartree (hundred)" label="Gartree"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="877" end="884" title="hundred (division)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985235" start="921" end="933" title="West Goscote" label="West Goscote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328470" start="938" end="950" title="East Goscote (hundred)" label="East Goscote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573651" start="972" end="982" title="Sparkenhoe" label="Sparkenhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23183" start="1342" end="1351" title="Wiltshire" label="Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="1370" end="1379" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="1432" end="1448" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612310" start="1888" end="1905" title="Husbands Bosworth" label="Husbands Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040213" start="1974" end="1986" title="Lincoln Edge" label="Lincoln Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189634" start="2121" end="2136" title="Croxton Kerrial" label="Croxton Kerrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406055" start="2141" end="2147" title="Saltby" label="Saltby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575141" start="2180" end="2194" title="Goadby Marwood" label="Goadby Marwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490381" start="2224" end="2232" title="Wartnaby" label="Wartnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086584" start="2303" end="2319" title="Charnwood Forest" label="Charnwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860201" start="2405" end="2416" title="Bardon Hill" label="Bardon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="2669" end="2682" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983418" start="2789" end="2800" title="Buckminster" label="Buckminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909523" start="2875" end="2890" title="Vale of Belvoir" label="Vale of Belvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937457" start="2971" end="2986" title="Long Bennington" label="Long Bennington"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="3007" end="3018" title="River Trent" label="River Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49940" start="3030" end="3036" title="Newark, England" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927674" start="4437" end="4449" title="Queniborough" label="Queniborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="5492" end="5501" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="5503" end="5517" title="Watling Street" label="Watling Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140226" start="5527" end="5537" title="Via Devana" label="Via Devana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5632" end="5642" title="Vernemetum" label="Vernemetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080475" start="5956" end="5965" title="Mancetter" label="Mancetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q630604" start="6081" end="6092" title="Camulodunum" label="Camulodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="6100" end="6110" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450247" start="6116" end="6128" title="Deva Victrix" label="Deva Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q170263" start="6134" end="6141" title="Chester" label="Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612902" start="6650" end="6663" title="Countesthorpe" label="Countesthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="7550" end="7575" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="7591" end="7598" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="7634" end="7642" title="Districts of England" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="7648" end="7657" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="7665" end="7679" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="7745" end="7770" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137272" start="7785" end="7799" title="county borough" label="county borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="7858" end="7865" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349084" start="7901" end="7910" title="Districts of England" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="8068" end="8085" title="Ceremonial County" label="Ceremonial County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519259" start="8137" end="8164" title="Leicestershire Constabulary" label="Leicestershire Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295499" start="8374" end="8379" title="Ratby" label="Ratby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782721" start="8419" end="8427" title="Hallaton" label="Hallaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031905" start="8485" end="8493" title="Ingarsby" label="Ingarsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244663" start="9043" end="9051" title="Coritani" label="Coritani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244663" start="9070" end="9081" title="Corieltauvi" label="Corieltauvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427468" start="9144" end="9163" title="Flavia Caesariensis" label="Flavia Caesariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520931" start="9214" end="9227" title="Middle Angles" label="Middle Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="9340" end="9346" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154934" start="9366" end="9388" title="Egbert, King of Wessex" label="Egbert, King of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="9555" end="9560" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="9666" end="9673" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="10030" end="10037" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917904" start="10124" end="10142" title="Diocese of Lindine" label="Diocese of Lindine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501001" start="10172" end="10193" title="Mercian Diocese of Dorchester" label="Diocese of Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501001" start="10239" end="10257" title="Diocese of Lincoln" label="Diocese of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426709" start="10349" end="10365" title="suffragan bishop" label="suffragan bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306284" start="10419" end="10442" title="Anglican Diocese of Peterborough" label="Diocese of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561922" start="10578" end="10605" title="Archdeaconry of Northampton" label="Archdeaconry of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137832" start="10645" end="10679" title="Leicester Cathedral" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Church, Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229147" start="10798" end="10832" title="Leicestershire County Cricket Club" label="Leicestershire County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="10834" end="10851" title="Leicester City FC" label="Leicester City FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="10885" end="10892" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="10947" end="10958" title="fox hunting" label="fox hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934202" start="10981" end="10993" title="Hugo Meynell" label="Hugo Meynell"/>
<link wikidata="Q987231" start="10997" end="11002" title="Quorn, Leicestershire" label="Quorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272862" start="11018" end="11028" title="Quorn Hunt" label="Quorn Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018423" start="11079" end="11093" title="Melton Mowbray" label="Melton Mowbray"/>
<link wikidata="Q783570" start="11098" end="11115" title="Market Harborough" label="Market Harborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="11197" end="11215" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244663" start="11217" end="11228" title="Corieltauvi" label="Corieltauvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421506" start="11231" end="11242" title="Five Burghs" label="Five Burghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q871131" start="11245" end="11265" title="Diocese of Leicester" label="Diocese of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q268844" start="11267" end="11284" title="House of Beaumont" label="House of Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800394" start="11287" end="11302" title="Leir of Britain" label="Leir of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11304" end="11365" title="List of lost settlements in the United Kingdom#Leicestershire" label="List of lost settlements in the United Kingdom#Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623819" start="11367" end="11419" title="List of hundreds of England" label="List of hundreds of England and Wales#Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260781" start="11500" end="11512" title="John Throsby" label="John Throsby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139696" wikidata="Q5865276" url="?curid=1139696" title="History of Lincolnshire">
<text>Lincolnshire, England derived from the merging of the territory of the ancient Kingdom of Lindsey with that controlled by the Danelaw borough of Stamford. For some time the entire county was called &#x27;Lindsey&#x27;, and it is recorded as such in the Domesday Book. Later, Lindsey was applied to only the northern core, around Lincoln; it was defined as one of the three &#x27;Parts of Lincolnshire&#x27;, along with Holland in the south-east and Kesteven in the south west.

In 1888 when county councils were set up, Lindsey, Holland and Kesteven each were authorized to have separate &quot;Part&quot; councils. These survived until 1974, when Holland, Kesteven, and most of Lindsey were merged into Lincolnshire, and the northern part, with Scunthorpe and Grimsby, going to the newly formed non-metropolitan county of Humberside, along with most of the East Riding of Yorkshire.

An additional local government reform in 1996 abolished Humberside, and the parts south of the Humber became the unitary authorities of North Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire. These areas became part of Lincolnshire for ceremonial purposes, such as the Lord-Lieutenancy, but are not covered by the Lincolnshire police. These two authorities are in the Yorkshire and the Humber region of England.

The remaining districts of Lincolnshire are Boston, East Lindsey, Lincoln, South Holland, South Kesteven, North Kesteven and West Lindsey. They are part of the East Midlands region.

==Stone Age==
During the Pleistocene epoch, Britain&#x27;s climate alternated between long periods of extreme cold and relative warmth; at least the last three cold spells lead to glaciation, during which ice moved southwards across England. Lincolnshire was covered by ice in the Anglian and Wolstonian glacial stages and the eastern parts of the county were glaciated during the Devensian. Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers migrated to Britain at least 800,000 years ago, but evidence of early settlement in the Midlands is sparse, probably due to the ice disrupting remains. Flint flakes at Kirmington in Lincolnshire have been traced to the Hoxnian interglacial, which fell between the Anglian and Wolstonian stages. Most of the other lower Palaeolithic finds in Lincolnshire are Acheulian hand-axes, which date from that period onwards.

During the Ipswichian warm period after the Wolstonian, humans began fashioning Mousterian flint-axes, a specimen of which has been found at Risby Warren, near Scunthorpe in northern Lincolnshire. Finds from the late Devensian have also been uncovered at Scunthorpe and dated to between 12,000 and 8,000 BC. As the Ice age subsided, Britain&#x27;s climate shifted from sub-Arctic to temperate. Humans developed more complex and innovative stone tools in the Mesolithic era, although their economy remained chiefly hunter-gatherer. The Scunthorpe area may have been a &quot;focus of population&quot; during the Mesolithic. A camp at Willoughton has been excavated, revealing hearths and flints; digging at Sheffield&#x27;s Hill has revealed microliths, indicating a later settlement date, possibly to the 6th millennium BC, while those found at Risby Warren are even more sophisticated and numerous. Mesolithic sites have also been uncovered along the southern edge of the Lincolnshire Wolds and between Ancaster and Grantham.

The Neolithic is the last stage of Stone Age culture, defined by the use of polished stone tools, a dependence on domesticated plants and animals and the development of pottery and other crafts. Few early Neolithic settlements have been identified in Lincolnshire; examples include a hollow at Dragonby, pottery and flint at Great Ponton, and pottery found in a later barrow at Walesby. Long barrows have been discovered in the southern and central Wolds and include the Giants&#x27; Hills barrows at Skendleby. Surface artefacts, mostly late Neolithic flint or other stone tools, are found scattered across the county and especially in the lower Trent Valley and the Lincoln Vale.

==Bronze Age==
Beaker pottery emerged during the late Neolithic and survived into the Bronze Age, which heralded the use of Bronze tools instead of stone. Early beaker remains from around Scunthorpe and in the southern Wolds have been dated to the third millennium BC. Excavations at Risby Warren have revealed a large amount of Bronze Age beaker pottery from the early 2nd millennium BC, while similar material has been identified around Scunthorpe, the southern Wolds and Ancaster. Although Lincolnshire was once noted for its prehistoric burial mounds, modern farming has destroyed many of them; surviving beaker barrows include the Bronze Age sites at Tallington, Thoresway, Broughton, Cleethorpes, Willoughby and Stroxton, along with scattered tumuli in the Wolds. Middle to late Bronze Age discoveries include a hoard of swords and spearheads from Appleby, a gold torc from Low Burnham (in the British Museum), and a now lost gold &quot;armlet&quot; from Cuxwold.

Changes in vegetation occurred across Britain between roughly 1300 and 600 BC; in Lincolnshire, drier conditions caused pine trees to grow around the Fen edge, while oak forests were largely replaced with peat bogs or moorland. As a result, older settlements were abandoned and new ones began to emerge, leading to difficulties in identifying Bronze Age settlement and burial sites in the county. However, late Bronze Age hoards are known and one of them, from Nettleham, is in the British Museum; the hoard of bronzes from Bagmoor Farm, near Scunthorpe, indicates a continental influence on craftsmanship and it is likely that an antennae-pommelled sword from the River Witham was imported from Europe. A wooden trackway from this era has been found at Brigg in north Lincolnshire, nearby to where a wooden boat has been uncovered and tentatively dated to the mid-1st millennium BC. Dug-out canoes have also been uncovered from the Welland, Nene, Trent and Ancholme valleys and the river Witham.

== Iron Age ==
As iron replaced bronze in tool-making in the Iron Age, the distinctive La Tène culture emerged in Celtic societies around 500 BC. Little material from the early stages of La Tène has been uncovered in Lincolnshire. Examples include a bronze brooch from Scunthorpe and a bronze scabbard or sheath with remains of an iron sword found in Wisbech, one of the earliest pieces of decorated La Tène metalwork in the British Isles. A now lost anthropoid-hilted iron dagger in a Bronze sheath with an imp-like pommel probably dated from the 2nd or 1st centuries BC, but the beaten bronze shield dredged from the River Witham remains amongst the &quot;finest and largest surviving La Tène art in Europe&quot;. An early Iron Age farming settlement at Ancaster and salterns at Ingoldmells have been excavated; forts from this period are also known: Honington Camp, Round Hills at Ingoldsby, Careby Camp, and Yarborough Camp. Despite the comparatively small number and size of forts in Lincolnshire, the archaeologist Jeffrey May suggests that the landscape&#x27;s suitability for farming and its prominent salt industry may have led to prosperity during the Iron Age.

The more decorative late Iron Age finds include gold torcs from Ulceby, bronze terrets from Owmby and Whaplode, a bronze ornament from Dragonby, a strap link from Caythorpe and a sword and scabbard from the River Witham. Parts of a war horn were also found in the Witham, but were melted down in the 18th century. There was an &quot;extensive&quot; Iron Age settlement at Old Sleaford, where over 3,500 fragments of coin moulds have been discovered, the largest such find in Europe; it may have been a tribal centre, but never became a walled town under Roman rule. The Ancaster-Sleaford region has a high concentration of settlement, which may be due to geographical factors and the presence of two north–south communication lines, Mareham Lane and Jurassic Way. Similarly, the northern Wolds were more densely inhabited; settlements at Kirmington and Dragonby have been excavated, while North Ferriby was a crossing on the Humber connected to the south by High Street. The earliest coinage in Lincolnshire were gold copies of Gallo-Belgic types, but the distinctive South Ferriby type emerged as the dominant pattern in East Midlands and silver coins became much more common from the 2nd century BC.

The pre-Roman East Midlands were occupied by the Corieltauvi tribe. In his &quot;Geography&quot;, Ptolemy of Alexandria described &quot;Lindum&quot; (modern Lincoln) and &quot;Ratae&quot; (modern Leicester) as the principal towns of the tribe. Whether other groups operated in the county is not clear and it may be that the Catuvellauni controlled parts of southern Lincolnshire. The Roman arrival in AD 43 brought the Ninth Legion to the East Midlands to subjugate the native peoples; they may have reached the county by AD 45.

== Roman ==
The Romans established permanent government in Lincolnshire soon after their invasion of AD 43. The tyrannical rule of the Roman sub-prætor Ostorius Scapula so inflamed the Corieltauvi and their neighbours in Yorkshire, the Brigantes, that the two peoples conducted a simmering, low-key rebellion lasting well into AD 70.

Eventually, the Governorship of Britain was given to the Deputy of the Prefect of Gaul, and the title Vicar of Britain created. He resided at York. The sub-district of Flavia Caesariensis, which comprised Lincolnshire and parts of the Midlands, was created.

Once established, the Romans worked to develop infrastructure in Lincolnshire. They built the Car Dyke, a series of semi-natural and artificial boundary ditches which run from the River Welland at Market Deeping for 64 km to the River Witham at Washingborough, constructed hard standings and walkways across the Fens, and also built inland ports, such as the Brayford Pool at Lincoln.

The main Roman forts in Lincolnshire were:

* Ancaster
* Brant Broughton (Briga)
* Caistor
* Broughton (Praetorium)
* Horncastle (Banovalum)
* Kirton in Lindsey (Inmedio)
* Lincoln (Lindum Colonia)
* Louth (Luda)
* Ludford
* Stow (Sidnacester)
* Tattershall (Drurobrivis) 
* Torksey (Tiovulfingacester)
* Wainfleet (Vainona)
* Willoughby (Verometum)
* Winteringham (Ad Abum)

The Romans built three main roads through Lincolnshire:
* Ermine Street (London to York via Stamford, Lincoln and Winteringham)
* Fosse Way (Lincoln to Exeter)
* Tillbridge Lane (Lincoln to York via Marton and Littleborough)

Other roads of Roman origin are the Salters&#x27; Way, continuing the line from the Leicestershire border across Ermine Street near Old Somerby, to what was then coast at Donington. King Street, including The Long Hollow road, joined Ancaster to the fen edge and &quot;Durobrivae&quot; near Peterborough. Two roads linked Lincoln to the coast across the Wolds. This was used as part of the defence system set up to protect the Saxon Shore and re-used by William the Conqueror in conjunction with Lincoln Castle.

Scores of smaller sections of roads branch off from the three major routes and are certainly Roman as well. They link Ermine Street with the Wolds, and King Street with the coast. Also, Mareham Lane continued the fen-edge line of King Street northwards.

During the Roman period, north Lincolnshire produced the regional, coarseware ceramic Dales ware.

== Early Middle Ages ==
Large numbers of people from Germanic-speaking areas of continental Europe settled in the area starting in the fifth century. Eventually, these became known as Angles, though they most likely did not migrate as part of a coherent tribal group. However, indications of a continuing presence of Britons in the region (such as place names) are stronger than in nearby East Anglia, and the transition from British to Anglo-Saxon control may have been peaceful. It has been suggested that Brittonic was spoken in some communities into the eighth century.

The Kingdom of Lindsey was established between the Witham River and the Humber, in the northern part of what is now Lincolnshire, by the 6th century. It appeared to have maintained its independence until at least the end of the 7th century, but was absorbed by Mercia – a rising power – in the 8th century.

In 865 a formidable Danish raiding army, led by Ivar (spelled &quot;Hinguar&quot; or &quot;Igwar&quot; in English sources), one of the sons of Ragnar Lothbrok, landed in East Anglia and established winter quarters there. Within a few years, this force succeeded in conquering Mercia and all the other Anglo-Saxon kingdoms except Wessex.

Scandinavian settlers followed the raiders into the swathe of England under Danish control, which became known as the Danelaw. They have left a legacy of Scandinavian elements in many Lincolnshire place-names. Lincoln became a Danish borough. In the 10th century, it was designated as the head of the new shire of Lincolnshire.

==Later Middle Ages==
The Anglo-Saxon nobility of Lincolnshire was destroyed by the Norman William the Conqueror, and the lands were divided amongst his followers. He constructed Lincoln Castle and another at Tattershall. Numerous others were built by Norman magnates, the first ones mainly in the years immediately following the Conquest. Another group of castles were built around 1140, during the period of civil war when Stephen and Matilda were disputing the right to rule. The First Battle of Lincoln, in 1141, was part of this conflict.

The Witham valley between Boston and Lincoln was developed with the highest concentration of Christian abbeys and monastic foundations in England. The principal foundations were Barlings Abbey, Bardney Abbey, Catley Abbey, Nocton Priory, Stainfield Abbey, Stixwould Abbey, Tupholme Abbey, Kirkstead Abbey, Kyme Abbey. There were also monastic houses at Bourne Abbey, Sempringhm Abbey and many other places. But the clustering along the Witham was extraordinary.

Fewer castles were built, although some of the manors were fortified in early years. Given the size of Lincolnshire, historians note the relative lack of castles, just as they do the plethora of abbeys along the Witham. Boston had seven friaries but it was defended only by the town walls. There appears to have been no garrison.

Fairs at Stamford, Grantham, and Stow Fair were established, and lasted throughout the period. Corby Glen sheep fair has been held more or less unchanged annually since 1238.

Sheep farming and the wool trade brought untold wealth to the area, and Boston was a major trading centre for wool. The wool trade and associated trades supported the construction of highly elaborate churches in the region. St. Botolph&#x27;s Church in Boston has a tall tower spire that can be seen from miles around across land and sea.

In this period the Queen&#x27;s Champion was appointed, and the post is still held by his successor. Many great estates and schools were founded. The Middle Ages were as rich and colourful in Lincolnshire as anywhere else. But there were conflicts, such as accusations against the Jews and the Lincolnshire rebellion, in which lower classes struggled with constraints, show that life was not all a sybaritic idyll.

An important medieval book, the &quot;Luttrell Psalter,&quot; was the source for nearly every schoolbook illustrations of the period. It lay unregarded in the church at Irnham until the early 20th century, when it was discovered and preserved for the nation. A public subscription in a popular newspaper raised enough money to buy the book before it was sold overseas.

Grantham&#x27;s St Wulfram&#x27;s Church has a fine example of a chained library still extant within the church. Numerous churches were established in Lincolnshire that are dedicated to women saints; their names have been given to daughters of county families and passed down in a tradition continuing long after the Protestant Reformation.

==Early Modern==

During the Protestant reformation, Lincolnshire had strong pro-Catholic sentiments, and on 2 October 1536 an anti Anglican peasant rebellion broke out. The leaders of this rebellion were local peasants and Catholic priests. King Henry VIII responded by dispatching an army of 3,000 soldiers under the command of Sir John Russell and the duke of Suffolk to quell the rebellion. Despite the large number of the rebels (around 60,000), the rebellion was suppressed on 13 October.
During the English Civil War, Lincolnshire was part of the Eastern Association, the Parliamentarian alliance. On its western border lay the Royalist strongholds, of Newark on Trent and Belvoir Castle. Lincolnshire was therefore raided and defended by the respective parties. For a time, Crowland, in the south of the county was fortified for the king.

Lincolnshire was important to the Parliamentarians as it provided access between the great arsenal of Hull and the south and the Eastern Association&#x27;s heartland in the east of England. It also offered a potential starting line for an advance across the English Midlands, cutting the north of England off from the west.

== Victorian ==
In June 1888, Mr G Randall visited &#x27;some 30 villages&#x27; across Lincolnshire, recruiting people who were prepared to move to Queensland, including Bicker, Heckington Fen, Ropsley, Dunston, Minting, Donington-on-Bain, East Barkwith, Binbrook, Claxby, Waddingham, Normanby-by-Spital, Welton, Scampton, Eagle, Caythorpe. He claimed 7000 had already left, recruiting a further 200 who sailed on the SS Waroonga, which landed passengers at Cooktown, Townsville, Cairns, Mackay, Rockhampton, and Brisbane.

==Second World War==

Source:

===The RAF in the Second World War===
In the late 1930s, despite its coastal holiday industry, distant and near water fishing industries, iron mining and smelting, heavy machinery manufacturing, the country&#x27;s main road and railway lines and growing number of airfields, Lincolnshire was large enough to give an impression of being a largely unvisited, peaceful agricultural backwater until the Second World War, when its extent, gentle topography and relative proximity to the enemy led to a further expansion in the number of Royal Air Force stations in the county. By 1945 the number of RAF bases exceeded 46. Some of these had by that stage been lent to the Eighth United States Army Air Force. The first airfields had been built for the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) or the Royal Naval Air Service, the first of them at Skegness, on the coast, in 1912, when the RFC was established.
Among the more famous Royal Air Force stations in the county was and is RAF Cranwell. This had begun as The Royal Naval Air Service Central Training Establishment, Cranwell; commonly known as HMS Daedalus, commissioned 1 April 1916. It became the RAF Officer Training College after the formation of the RAF in April 1918. RAF Swinderby was a Polish-manned RAF station and from 1964, the RAF&#x27;s main Recruit Training Camp. RAF Scampton, was the home base of 617 Squadron.

Lincolnshire still has the strongest claim to being the &#x27;home&#x27; of RAF Bomber Command, playing host to many squadrons, including the Lancaster bombers of the famous 617 &quot;Dambusters&quot; squadron who were based at RAF Scampton. There were two Bomber Groups based in the county – No. 1 in the north and No. 5 Group in the centre and south. The Battle of Britain memorial flight is still led by a Lancaster named &quot;The City of Lincoln&quot;.

Before the war, Sir Frank Whittle had attended RAF Cranwell, near Sleaford, in the late 1920s. Here he formulated his ideas for the jet engine. On 15 May 1941 the world&#x27;s first true jet-engine flight took place at Cranwell, by the Gloster E.28/39.

Most of the airfields were closed after the war and, although most have been built over, disused airfields, abandoned control towers and crumbling concrete bunkers and airfield buildings remain a physical feature of the county in a number of places, and many still, it is said, holding ghosts and are haunted. Many people in Lincolnshire have learned to drive a car on the disused concrete airstrips of the county.

==Cold War history==
RAF Waddington and RAF Scampton formed two of the main bases for the V bomber Force, flying Vulcans, during the Cold War, while Thor missiles were stationed on former wartime air stations at for example, RAF Folkingham.

== See also ==
* List of Historic Sites in Lincolnshire
* List of Churches in Lincolnshire
* List of Roman Sites in Lincolnshire
* History of England

==References==
=== Notes ===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===

* Ambler, R. W., &quot;Churches, Chapels and Parish Communities in Lincolnshire: 1660–1900&quot;, 2000 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Barley, M. W., &quot;Lincolnshire and the Fens&quot;, 1962 (2nd ed. 1972)
* Beastall, T. W., &quot;Agricultural Revolution in Lincolnshire&quot;, 1978 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Bennett, S. &amp; N. Bennett, &quot;An Historical Atlas of Lincolnshire&quot;, 1993 (Hull: University of Hull Press)
* Beresford, Sir Maurice, &quot;New Towns of the Middle Ages&quot;, 1967 (New York and Washington: Praeger)
* Brown, Jonathan, &quot;Farming in Lincolnshire: 1850–1945&quot;, 2005 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Elsden, S. M., &quot;Old Sleaford Revealed&quot;, 1997 (Oxbrow Books)
* Gillett, E., &quot;A History of Grimsby&quot;, 1970 (University of Hull)
* Green, Caitlin [Thomas Green, pseud.], &quot;Britons and the Anglo-Saxons: Lincolnshire AD 400–650&quot;. Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology, 2012.
* Grigg, David, &quot;The Agricultural Revolution in South Lincolnshire&quot;, 1966 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
* Hallam, H. E., &quot;Settlement and Society. A study of the early agrarian history in South Lincolnshire&quot;, 1967 (Cambridge University Press)
* Hodgett, Gerald A. J., &quot;Tudor Lincolnshire&quot;, 1980 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Holderness, B. A., &quot;The English Land Market in the Eighteenth Century: The Case of Lincolnshire&quot;, &quot;Economic History Review&quot;, New Series, vol. 27, No. 4, November 1974, pp. 557–576
* Holmes, Clive, &quot;Seventeenth-Century Lincolnshire&quot;, 1980 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Hosford, W. H., &quot;Some Lincolnshire Enclosure Documents&quot;, &quot;Economic History Review&quot;, New Series, vol. 2, No. 1, 1949, pp. 73–79 
* Mahany, Christine M., &quot;Stamford: Castle and Town&quot;, 1978
* Mahany, Christine M. &amp; David R. Roffe, &quot;Sleaford&quot;, 1979
* Marrat, William, &quot;The History of Lincolnshire, Topographical, Historical and Descriptive&quot;, vol. 2, 1814
* Marrat, William, &quot;The History of Lincolnshire, Topographical, Historical and Descriptive&quot;, vol. 3, 1816
* May, Jeffrey, &quot;Prehistoric Lincolnshire&quot;, 1976 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Membery, Stephen, &quot;An Archaeological Resource Assessment of the Palaeolithic in Lincolnshire&quot;, n.d. (University of Leicester Archaeological Services)
* Olney, R. J., &quot;Rural Society and County Government in Nineteenth-Century Lincolnshire&quot;, 1979 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Owen, Dorothy M., &quot;Church and Society in Medieval Lincolnshire&quot;, 1971 (2nd ed. 1990)
* Page, William (ed.), &quot;The Victoria County History of the County of Lincoln&quot;, vol. 2, 1906 (London: Victoria County History)
* Pevsner, Sir Nikolaus &amp; John Harris (rev. Nicholas Antram), &quot;The Buildings of England: Lincolnshire&quot;, (2nd edition), 1989 [2002] (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press) 
* Platt, Graham, &quot;Land and People in Medieval Lincolnshire&quot;, 1985 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Rawding, Charles, &quot;The Lincolnshire Wolds in the Nineteenth Century&quot;, 2001 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Rogers, Alan, &quot;A History of Lincolnshire&quot;, 1970 (Henley-on-Thames: Darwen Finlayson)
* Sawyer, Peter, &quot;Anglo-Saxon Lincolnshire&quot;, 1998 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Vince, Alan G., &quot;Pre-Viking Lindsey&quot;, 1993 (Lincoln: City of Lincoln Archaeology Unit) 
* Whitwell, J. B., &quot;Roman Lincolnshire&quot;, 1970 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
* Wright, Neil, &quot;Lincolnshire Towns and Industry: 1770–1914&quot;, 1982 (Lincoln: Lincolnshire Society for History and Archaeology)
== Further reading ==
* Crowson, Andy, Tom Lane, Kenneth Penn &amp; Dale Trimble (eds.), &quot;Anglo-Saxon Settlement on the Siltland of Eastern England&quot;, Lincolnshire Archaeology and Heritage Reports series, no. 7 (Heckington: Lincolnshire Heritage Trust, 2005).
* Lane, Tom, &amp; E. Morris (eds.), &quot;A Millennium of Salt-Making: Prehistoric and Romano British Salt Production in the Fenlands&quot;, Lincolnshire Archaeology and Heritage Reports series, no. 4 (Heckington: Lincolnshire Heritage Trust, 2001).

== External links ==
* The Lost Port of Sutton: Roman period</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="0" end="12" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="14" end="21" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q886986" start="79" end="97" title="Kingdom of Lindsey" label="Kingdom of Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="126" end="133" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="134" end="141" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="145" end="153" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="253" end="266" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q441499" start="275" end="282" title="Lindsey (government district)" label="Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="329" end="336" title="Lincoln, Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624738" start="419" end="426" title="Holland, Lincolnshire" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739843" start="449" end="457" title="Kesteven" label="Kesteven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="491" end="505" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q913386" start="745" end="755" title="Scunthorpe" label="Scunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q179406" start="760" end="767" title="Grimsby" label="Grimsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="795" end="818" title="shire county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636805" start="822" end="832" title="Humberside" label="Humberside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23088" start="857" end="881" title="East Riding of Yorkshire" label="East Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="997" end="1016" title="unitary authorities" label="unitary authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q175945" start="1020" end="1038" title="North Lincolnshire" label="North Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342914" start="1043" end="1066" title="North East Lincolnshire" label="North East Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="1145" end="1161" title="Lord-Lieutenant" label="Lord-Lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48063" start="1244" end="1268" title="Yorkshire and the Humber" label="Yorkshire and the Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q48091" start="1269" end="1286" title="region of England" label="region of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q894076" start="1333" end="1339" title="Boston (borough)" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q82181" start="1341" end="1353" title="East Lindsey" label="East Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="1355" end="1362" title="Lincoln, Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q303269" start="1364" end="1377" title="South Holland, England" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942426" start="1379" end="1393" title="South Kesteven" label="South Kesteven"/>
<link wikidata="Q607082" start="1395" end="1409" title="North Kesteven" label="North Kesteven"/>
<link wikidata="Q253501" start="1414" end="1426" title="West Lindsey" label="West Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47994" start="1449" end="1462" title="East Midlands" label="East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1497" end="1508" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="1652" end="1662" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763420" start="1753" end="1760" title="Anglian glaciation" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177038" start="1765" end="1775" title="Wolstonian Stage" label="Wolstonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="1853" end="1862" title="Devensian glaciation" label="Devensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="1864" end="1876" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478186" start="2062" end="2072" title="Kirmington" label="Kirmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26961780" start="2113" end="2133" title="Hoxnian interglacial" label="Hoxnian interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="2252" end="2261" title="Acheulian" label="Acheulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295340" start="2322" end="2332" title="Ipswichian interglacial" label="Ipswichian"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="2391" end="2401" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2452" end="2464" title="Risby Warren" label="Risby Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q913386" start="2471" end="2481" title="Scunthorpe" label="Scunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="2528" end="2537" title="Devensian glaciation" label="Devensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="2626" end="2633" title="Ice age" label="Ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="2769" end="2783" title="Mesolithic era" label="Mesolithic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022247" start="2943" end="2954" title="Willoughton" label="Willoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q164777" start="3051" end="3061" title="microliths" label="microliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474787" start="3283" end="3301" title="Lincolnshire Wolds" label="Lincolnshire Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636096" start="3314" end="3322" title="Ancaster, Lincolnshire" label="Ancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q846683" start="3327" end="3335" title="Grantham" label="Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3342" end="3351" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="3373" end="3382" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372426" start="3632" end="3640" title="Dragonby" label="Dragonby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599803" start="3663" end="3675" title="Great Ponton" label="Great Ponton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="3706" end="3712" title="Tumulus" label="barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207906" start="3716" end="3723" title="Walesby, Lincolnshire" label="Walesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652352" start="3725" end="3737" title="Long barrows" label="Long barrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534556" start="3839" end="3848" title="Skendleby" label="Skendleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="3985" end="3997" title="Trent Valley" label="Trent Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="4036" end="4042" title="Beaker culture" label="Beaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="4107" end="4117" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265291" start="4677" end="4687" title="Tallington" label="Tallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796207" start="4689" end="4698" title="Thoresway" label="Thoresway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612226" start="4700" end="4709" title="Broughton, Lincolnshire" label="Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q587765" start="4711" end="4722" title="Cleethorpes" label="Cleethorpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374900" start="4724" end="4734" title="Willoughby, Lincolnshire" label="Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624933" start="4739" end="4747" title="Stroxton" label="Stroxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781302" start="4875" end="4882" title="Appleby, North Lincolnshire" label="Appleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q129262576" start="4901" end="4912" title="Low Burnham" label="Low Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="4921" end="4935" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197068" start="4982" end="4989" title="Cuxwold" label="Cuxwold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="5142" end="5145" title="The Fens" label="Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544574" start="5453" end="5462" title="Nettleham" label="Nettleham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6051" end="6059" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="6077" end="6092" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="6104" end="6110" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012031" start="6341" end="6348" title="Wisbech" label="Wisbech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586488" start="6585" end="6621" title="Witham Shield" label="shield dredged from the River Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032919" start="6771" end="6782" title="Ingoldmells" label="Ingoldmells"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6843" end="6857" title="Honington Camp" label="Honington Camp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6859" end="6870" title="Round Hills, Ingoldsby" label="Round Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11712513" start="6874" end="6883" title="Ingoldsby" label="Ingoldsby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6885" end="6896" title="Careby Camp" label="Careby Camp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6902" end="6917" title="Yarborough Camp" label="Yarborough Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878794" start="7227" end="7233" title="Ulceby, North Lincolnshire" label="Ulceby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114913" start="7255" end="7260" title="Owmby, Lincolnshire" label="Owmby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990637" start="7265" end="7273" title="Whaplode" label="Whaplode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681905" start="7326" end="7335" title="Caythorpe, Lincolnshire" label="Caythorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891939" start="7535" end="7547" title="Sleaford" label="Old Sleaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758782" start="7896" end="7908" title="Mareham Lane" label="Mareham Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10541481" start="7913" end="7925" title="Jurassic Way" label="Jurassic Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160639" start="8052" end="8065" title="North Ferriby" label="North Ferriby"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="8088" end="8094" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8121" end="8132" title="High Street (prehistoric road)" label="High Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244663" start="8415" end="8426" title="Corieltauvi" label="Corieltauvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="8447" end="8456" title="Geography (Ptolemy)" label="Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="8464" end="8485" title="Ptolemy of Alexandria" label="Ptolemy of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="8523" end="8530" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="8562" end="8571" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051384" start="8690" end="8702" title="Catuvellauni" label="Catuvellauni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136315" start="8785" end="8797" title="Ninth Legion" label="Ninth Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="9041" end="9047" title="prætor" label="prætor"/>
<link wikidata="Q515834" start="9048" end="9064" title="Ostorius Scapula" label="Ostorius Scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="9117" end="9126" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="9132" end="9141" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="9302" end="9309" title="Prefect" label="Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="9373" end="9377" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427468" start="9399" end="9418" title="Flavia Caesariensis" label="Flavia Caesariensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120052" start="9584" end="9592" title="Car Dyke" label="Car Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492233" start="9670" end="9683" title="River Welland" label="River Welland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850360" start="9687" end="9701" title="Market Deeping" label="Market Deeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q917000" start="9719" end="9731" title="River Witham" label="River Witham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162650" start="9735" end="9749" title="Washingborough" label="Washingborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958554" start="9849" end="9862" title="Brayford Pool" label="Brayford Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752535" start="9922" end="9930" title="Ancaster Roman Town" label="Ancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957599" start="9933" end="9948" title="Brant Broughton" label="Brant Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560214" start="9959" end="9966" title="Caistor" label="Caistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612226" start="9969" end="9978" title="Broughton, Lincolnshire" label="Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628403" start="9994" end="10004" title="Horncastle, Lincolnshire" label="Horncastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338783" start="10019" end="10036" title="Kirton in Lindsey" label="Kirton in Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="10049" end="10056" title="Lincoln, Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786557" start="10058" end="10072" title="Lindum Colonia" label="Lindum Colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554129" start="10076" end="10081" title="Louth, Lincolnshire" label="Louth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164225" start="10091" end="10098" title="Ludford, Lincolnshire" label="Ludford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255910" start="10101" end="10105" title="Stow, Lincolnshire" label="Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384948" start="10122" end="10133" title="Tattershall" label="Tattershall"/>
<link wikidata="Q574397" start="10151" end="10158" title="Torksey" label="Torksey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017677" start="10181" end="10190" title="Wainfleet, Lincolnshire" label="Wainfleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374900" start="10203" end="10213" title="Willoughby, Lincolnshire" label="Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026475" start="10228" end="10240" title="Winteringham" label="Winteringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="10310" end="10323" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="10325" end="10331" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="10335" end="10339" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233334" start="10382" end="10391" title="Fosse Way" label="Fosse Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="10404" end="10410" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648888" start="10414" end="10429" title="Tillbridge Lane" label="Tillbridge Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11770750" start="10451" end="10457" title="Marton, Lincolnshire" label="Marton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652900" start="10462" end="10475" title="Littleborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Littleborough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10514" end="10531" title="Salters&amp;#x27; Way" label="Salters&amp;#x27; Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="10562" end="10576" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241544" start="10649" end="10658" title="Donington, Lincolnshire" label="Donington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412087" start="10660" end="10671" title="King Street (Roman road)" label="King Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636096" start="10712" end="10720" title="Ancaster, Lincolnshire" label="Ancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="10728" end="10736" title="The Fens" label="fen edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267429" start="10747" end="10757" title="Durobrivae (Water Newton)" label="Durobrivae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="10769" end="10781" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="10800" end="10807" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474787" start="10832" end="10837" title="Lincolnshire Wolds" label="Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="10905" end="10916" title="Saxon Shore Forts" label="Saxon Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="10932" end="10953" title="William I of England" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="10974" end="10988" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758782" start="11177" end="11189" title="Mareham Lane" label="Mareham Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210794" start="11332" end="11342" title="Dales ware" label="Dales ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="11529" end="11535" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q837998" start="11734" end="11745" title="Kingdom of East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11802" end="11824" title="Anglo-Saxon migration debate" label="may have been peaceful"/>
<link wikidata="Q886986" start="11924" end="11942" title="Kingdom of Lindsey" label="Kingdom of Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="12181" end="12187" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="12248" end="12254" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q350321" start="12276" end="12280" title="Ivar the Boneless" label="Ivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="12557" end="12563" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q339271" start="12684" end="12691" title="Danelaw" label="Danelaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="12986" end="13007" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="13074" end="13088" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384948" start="13104" end="13115" title="Tattershall" label="Tattershall"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="13320" end="13327" title="Stephen of England" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150872" start="13332" end="13339" title="Empress Matilda" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q288345" start="13378" end="13401" title="Battle of Lincoln (1141)" label="First Battle of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="13543" end="13548" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861190" start="13618" end="13632" title="Barlings Abbey" label="Barlings Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860175" start="13634" end="13647" title="Bardney Abbey" label="Bardney Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13649" end="13661" title="Catley Abbey" label="Catley Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7046438" start="13663" end="13676" title="Nocton Priory" label="Nocton Priory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13678" end="13694" title="Stainfield Abbey" label="Stainfield Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13696" end="13711" title="Stixwould Abbey" label="Stixwould Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853532" start="13713" end="13727" title="Tupholme Abbey" label="Tupholme Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293952" start="13729" end="13744" title="Kirkstead Abbey" label="Kirkstead Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13746" end="13756" title="Kyme Abbey" label="Kyme Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950215" start="13793" end="13805" title="Bourne Abbey" label="Bourne Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13807" end="13823" title="Sempringhm Abbey" label="Sempringhm Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628961" start="13828" end="13845" title="List of monastic houses in Lincolnshire" label="many other places"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13909" end="13916" title="List of castles in England#Lincolnshire" label="castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="14243" end="14251" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q846683" start="14253" end="14261" title="Grantham" label="Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11227486" start="14267" end="14276" title="Stow Fair, Lincolnshire" label="Stow Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169821" start="14329" end="14339" title="Corby Glen" label="Corby Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592685" start="14634" end="14659" title="St Botolph&amp;#x27;s Church, Boston" label="St. Botolph&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243633" start="14769" end="14790" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Champion" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080471" start="15007" end="15035" title="Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln" label="accusations against the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q48774514" start="15044" end="15066" title="1470 Lincolnshire Rebellion" label="Lincolnshire rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q846398" start="15204" end="15220" title="Luttrell Psalter" label="Luttrell Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049937" start="15335" end="15341" title="Irnham" label="Irnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595664" start="15552" end="15576" title="St. Wulfram&amp;#x27;s Church, Grantham" label="St Wulfram&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482622" start="15601" end="15616" title="Francis Trigge Chained Library" label="chained library"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="15864" end="15875" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329993" start="16432" end="16451" title="Eastern Association" label="Eastern Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="16457" end="16472" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliamentarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="16473" end="16481" title="military alliance" label="alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="16513" end="16521" title="Cavalier" label="Royalist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16538" end="16553" title="Newark-on-Trent#History during the Civil War" label="Newark on Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q816295" start="16558" end="16572" title="Belvoir Castle" label="Belvoir Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q581158" start="16660" end="16668" title="Crowland" label="Crowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="16719" end="16723" title="Charles I of England" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="16817" end="16824" title="arsenal" label="arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="16828" end="16832" title="Kingston-upon-Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="17199" end="17209" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033041" start="17221" end="17227" title="Bicker, Lincolnshire" label="Bicker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17229" end="17243" title="Heckington Fen" label="Heckington Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366774" start="17245" end="17252" title="Ropsley" label="Ropsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315741" start="17254" end="17261" title="Dunston, Lincolnshire" label="Dunston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104338" start="17263" end="17270" title="Minting" label="Minting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241551" start="17272" end="17289" title="Donington on Bain" label="Donington-on-Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327786" start="17291" end="17304" title="East Barkwith" label="East Barkwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913953" start="17306" end="17314" title="Binbrook" label="Binbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129790" start="17316" end="17322" title="Claxby by Normanby" label="Claxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958986" start="17324" end="17334" title="Waddingham" label="Waddingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053005" start="17336" end="17354" title="Normanby by Spital" label="Normanby-by-Spital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982109" start="17356" end="17362" title="Welton, Lincolnshire" label="Welton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429878" start="17364" end="17372" title="Scampton" label="Scampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324985" start="17374" end="17379" title="Eagle, Lincolnshire" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681905" start="17381" end="17390" title="Caythorpe, Lincolnshire" label="Caythorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394526" start="17469" end="17480" title="SS Waroonga (1882)" label="SS Waroonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020734" start="17509" end="17517" title="Cooktown, Queensland" label="Cooktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q190021" start="17519" end="17529" title="Townsville" label="Townsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q189133" start="17531" end="17537" title="Cairns" label="Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q704371" start="17539" end="17545" title="Mackay, Queensland" label="Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="17547" end="17558" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="17564" end="17572" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18005" end="18021" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="18138" end="18153" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="18272" end="18307" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth United States Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="18352" end="18370" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="18384" end="18407" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q977991" start="18430" end="18438" title="Skegness" label="Skegness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347950" start="18565" end="18577" title="RAF Cranwell" label="RAF Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275612" start="18815" end="18828" title="RAF Swinderby" label="RAF Swinderby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895627" start="18919" end="18931" title="RAF Scampton" label="RAF Scampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158122" start="18954" end="18966" title="617 Squadron" label="617 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="19045" end="19063" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158122" start="19153" end="19163" title="No. 617 Squadron RAF" label="Dambusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895627" start="19197" end="19209" title="RAF Scampton" label="RAF Scampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043097" start="19262" end="19267" title="No. 1 Group RAF" label="No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q502561" start="19285" end="19296" title="No. 5 Group RAF" label="No. 5 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="19326" end="19343" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="19378" end="19387" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="19448" end="19461" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891939" start="19494" end="19502" title="Sleaford" label="Sleaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="19560" end="19570" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193794" start="19647" end="19655" title="Cranwell" label="Cranwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q430259" start="19664" end="19679" title="Gloster E.28/39" label="Gloster E.28/39"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="19800" end="19813" title="control tower" label="control tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123976" start="20119" end="20133" title="RAF Waddington" label="RAF Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895627" start="20138" end="20150" title="RAF Scampton" label="RAF Scampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="20188" end="20196" title="V bomber" label="V bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="20211" end="20218" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Vulcans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="20231" end="20239" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q249534" start="20247" end="20260" title="Thor (rocket)" label="Thor missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275324" start="20323" end="20337" title="RAF Folkingham" label="RAF Folkingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061745" start="20357" end="20395" title="List of historic sites in Lincolnshire" label="List of Historic Sites in Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148050" start="20398" end="20430" title="List of churches in Lincolnshire" label="List of Churches in Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018675" start="20433" end="20468" title="List of Roman Sites in Lincolnshire" label="List of Roman Sites in Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="20471" end="20489" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722941" start="21053" end="21075" title="Maurice Beresford" label="Beresford, Sir Maurice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139697" wikidata="Q2973436" url="?curid=1139697" title="Division of Barker">
<text>The Division of Barker is an Australian electoral division in the south-east of South Australia. The division was established on 2 October 1903, when South Australia&#x27;s original single multi-member division was split into seven single-member divisions. It is named for Captain Collet Barker, a British military officer and early explorer, prior to the British Settlement of South Australia, of the southern Mount Lofty Ranges, Fleurieu Peninsula and the region at the mouth of the Murray River near the Coorong where he died in 1831 whilst on active duty after successfully solo swimming the channel of water and went compass in hand over a sandhill.

==Geography==
The 63,886 km² seat currently stretches from Morgan in the north to Port MacDonnell in the south, taking in the Murray Mallee, the Riverland, the Murraylands and most of the Barossa Valley, and includes the towns of Barmera, Berri, Bordertown, Coonawarra, Keith, Kingston SE, Loxton, Lucindale, Mannum, Millicent, Mount Gambier, Murray Bridge, Naracoorte, Penola, Renmark, Robe, Tailem Bend, Waikerie, and parts of Nuriootpa and Tanunda.

==History==

Barker is the only one of South Australia&#x27;s remaining original single member seven divisions, created in 1903, that has never been held by the Australian Labor Party and is traditionally the safest seat for the Liberal Party of Australia in the state. It has been in the hands of the Liberals and its predecessors for its entire existence, except for a six-year period when Country Party MP Archie Cameron held it; however, Cameron joined the United Australia Party, direct forerunner of the Liberals, in 1940. The conservative parties have usually had a secure hold on the seat. This tradition has only been threatened three times. Labor came within 1.2 percent of winning the seat at the 1929 election, and within 1.7 percent of winning the seat at the 1943 election. In the latter election, Barker was left as the only non-Labor seat in South Australia, and indeed the only Coalition seat outside the eastern states. It would be seven decades before the conservatives&#x27; hold on Barker would be seriously threatened again.

Though it has always covered the state&#x27;s entire south-east, Barker was historically a hybrid urban-rural seat that extended for some distance into the Adelaide area. Until 1949, only three seats--Adelaide, Boothby and Hindmarsh were based primarily on the capital. For most of the first half-century after Federation, Barker included Glenelg and the Holdfast Bay area, and at times stretched as far as the inner metropolitan suburbs of Keswick and Henley Beach.

However, it became an entirely rural seat after parliament was expanded in the redistribution prior to the 1949 election when the new Division of Kingston was created based around Glenelg and the southern suburbs of Adelaide. This made an already safely conservative seat even more so. Barker had always included Kangaroo Island and the connecting Fleurieu Peninsula until parliament was expanded in the redistribution prior to the 1984 election. Exchanged between Barker and Mayo since, Kangaroo Island and the Fleurieu Peninsula have been in Mayo since the redistribution prior to the 2004 election, where the massive redistribution of Wakefield, resulting from the abolition of Bonython, saw Barker absorb the Riverland from Wakefield. 

Since 1984, federal electoral division boundaries in Australia have been determined at redistributions by a redistribution committee appointed by the Australian Electoral Commission. Redistributions occur for the boundaries of divisions in a particular state, and they occur every seven years, or sooner if a state&#x27;s representation entitlement changes or when divisions of a state are malapportioned.

The seat&#x27;s most prominent members have been Cameron, a former leader of the Country Party and later Speaker of the House in the Menzies government, Jim Forbes, a minister in the Menzies, Holt, Gorton and McMahon governments, and Ian McLachlan, Minister for Defence from 1996 to 1998 in the Howard government.

===2016 election===
South Australian Senator Nick Xenophon confirmed in December 2014 that by mid-2015 the Nick Xenophon Team (NXT) would announce candidates in all states and territories at the 2016 election, with Xenophon citing the government&#x27;s ambiguity on the Collins-class submarine replacement project as motivation. ABC psephologist Antony Green&#x27;s 2016 federal election guide for South Australia stated NXT had a &quot;strong chance of winning lower house seats and three or four Senate seats&quot;.

A ReachTEL seat-level opinion poll in the safe Liberal seat of Barker of 869 voters conducted by robocall on 20 June during the 2016 election campaign surprisingly found NXT candidate James Stacey leading the Liberals&#x27; Tony Pasin 52–48 on the two-candidate preferred vote. Seat-level opinion polls in the other two rural Liberal South Australian seats revealed NXT also leading in both Grey and Mayo.

Election-night counting showed that Stacey was second to Pasin on first preferences, however the indicative two-candidate preferred count had been done between Pasin and Labor candidate Mat O&#x27;Brien, which meant there was no early indication of whether Stacey would receive enough preferences to beat Pasin before postal, absentee and provisional votes were counted and preferences distributed in the following two weeks. Ultimately, it was confirmed that Stacey had not only overtaken O&#x27;Brien on first preferences, but reduced Pasin&#x27;s margin in Barker to 4.7 percent—thus making Barker a marginal seat for the first time since Cameron&#x27;s near-defeat in the 1943 landslide. However, Barker remains a comfortably safe Liberal seat in a &quot;traditional&quot; two-party matchup with Labor; Pasin only suffered a one-percent swing against Labor.

==Members==
==Election results==

==References==
* ABC profile for Barker: 2016
* Poll Bludger profile for Barker: 2016
* AEC profile for Barker: 2016

==Notes==
==External links==
* SA boundary map, 2001: AEC
* SA boundary map, 1984: Atlas SA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2973436" start="4" end="22" title="Division of Barker" label="Division of Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713747" start="29" end="58" title="Divisions of the Australian House of Representatives" label="Australian electoral division"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="80" end="95" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284566" start="182" end="210" title="Division of South Australia" label="single multi-member division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147053" start="273" end="294" title="Collet Barker" label="Captain Collet Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961829" start="411" end="429" title="Mount Lofty Ranges" label="Mount Lofty Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353372" start="431" end="449" title="Fleurieu Peninsula" label="Fleurieu Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="485" end="497" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129899" start="507" end="514" title="Coorong National Park" label="Coorong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="583" end="591" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="596" end="603" title="Channel (geography)" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="622" end="629" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911541" start="715" end="721" title="Morgan, South Australia" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192804" start="738" end="753" title="Port MacDonnell, South Australia" label="Port MacDonnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q931710" start="782" end="795" title="Murray Mallee" label="Murray Mallee"/>
<link wikidata="Q372498" start="801" end="810" title="Riverland" label="Riverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939549" start="816" end="827" title="Murraylands" label="Murraylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q698920" start="844" end="858" title="Barossa Valley" label="Barossa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884630" start="886" end="893" title="Barmera, South Australia" label="Barmera"/>
<link wikidata="Q827089" start="895" end="900" title="Berri, South Australia" label="Berri"/>
<link wikidata="Q721784" start="902" end="912" title="Bordertown, South Australia" label="Bordertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167671" start="914" end="924" title="Coonawarra, South Australia" label="Coonawarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735638" start="926" end="931" title="Keith, South Australia" label="Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028160" start="933" end="944" title="Kingston SE, South Australia" label="Kingston SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q645439" start="946" end="952" title="Loxton, South Australia" label="Loxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697401" start="954" end="963" title="Lucindale, South Australia" label="Lucindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q393109" start="965" end="971" title="Mannum, South Australia" label="Mannum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083195" start="973" end="982" title="Millicent, South Australia" label="Millicent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327348" start="984" end="997" title="Mount Gambier, South Australia" label="Mount Gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641083" start="999" end="1012" title="Murray Bridge, South Australia" label="Murray Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q492231" start="1014" end="1024" title="Naracoorte, South Australia" label="Naracoorte"/>
<link wikidata="Q958646" start="1026" end="1032" title="Penola, South Australia" label="Penola"/>
<link wikidata="Q746623" start="1034" end="1041" title="Renmark, South Australia" label="Renmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938189" start="1043" end="1047" title="Robe, South Australia" label="Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q988010" start="1049" end="1060" title="Tailem Bend, South Australia" label="Tailem Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960016" start="1062" end="1070" title="Waikerie, South Australia" label="Waikerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391691" start="1085" end="1094" title="Nuriootpa, South Australia" label="Nuriootpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393202" start="1099" end="1106" title="Tanunda, South Australia" label="Tanunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="1270" end="1292" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="1338" end="1364" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="1501" end="1514" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786639" start="1518" end="1532" title="Archie Cameron" label="Archie Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728956" start="1570" end="1592" title="United Australia Party" label="United Australia Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586885" start="1817" end="1830" title="1929 Australian federal election" label="1929 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586889" start="1882" end="1895" title="1943 Australian federal election" label="1943 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="2313" end="2321" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973361" start="2358" end="2366" title="Division of Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973469" start="2368" end="2375" title="Division of Boothby" label="Boothby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973414" start="2380" end="2389" title="Division of Hindmarsh" label="Hindmarsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108740" start="2496" end="2503" title="Glenelg, South Australia" label="Glenelg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879663" start="2512" end="2524" title="Holdfast Bay" label="Holdfast Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395265" start="2598" end="2605" title="Keswick, South Australia" label="Keswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12059873" start="2610" end="2622" title="Henley Beach, South Australia" label="Henley Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586891" start="2732" end="2745" title="1949 Australian federal election" label="1949 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032417" start="2759" end="2779" title="Division of Kingston" label="Division of Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q210371" start="2938" end="2953" title="Kangaroo Island" label="Kangaroo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353372" start="2973" end="2991" title="Fleurieu Peninsula" label="Fleurieu Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586903" start="3057" end="3070" title="1984 Australian federal election" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074088" start="3101" end="3105" title="Division of Mayo" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052932" start="3212" end="3225" title="2004 Australian federal election" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073964" start="3263" end="3272" title="Division of Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284496" start="3306" end="3314" title="Division of Bonython" label="Bonython"/>
<link wikidata="Q372498" start="3338" end="3347" title="Riverland" label="Riverland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658569" start="3516" end="3547" title="Australian Electoral Commission" label="Australian Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574256" start="3878" end="3898" title="Speaker of the Australian House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817718" start="3906" end="3924" title="Menzies government (1949–1966)" label="Menzies government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195021" start="3926" end="3936" title="Jim Forbes (Australian politician)" label="Jim Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884549" start="3965" end="3969" title="Holt government" label="Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="3971" end="3977" title="John Gorton" label="Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="3982" end="3989" title="William McMahon" label="McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982330" start="4007" end="4020" title="Ian McLachlan" label="Ian McLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="4022" end="4042" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919788" start="4068" end="4085" title="Howard government" label="Howard government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028174" start="4133" end="4146" title="Nick Xenophon" label="Nick Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876280" start="4195" end="4213" title="Nick Xenophon Team" label="Nick Xenophon Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="4283" end="4296" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147418" start="4358" end="4401" title="Collins-class submarine replacement project" label="Collins-class submarine replacement project"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="4417" end="4420" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412461" start="4421" end="4433" title="psephologist" label="psephologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777207" start="4434" end="4446" title="Antony Green" label="Antony Green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4609" end="4676" title="Opinion polling for the Australian federal election, 2016#South Australia" label="ReachTEL seat-level opinion poll in the safe Liberal seat of Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353270" start="4704" end="4712" title="robocall" label="robocall"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="4735" end="4748" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216713" start="4831" end="4841" title="Tony Pasin" label="Tony Pasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858737" start="4855" end="4878" title="two-candidate preferred" label="two-candidate preferred"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4885" end="4963" title="Opinion polling for the Australian federal election, 2016#South Australia" label="Seat-level opinion polls in the other two rural Liberal South Australian seats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973634" start="4998" end="5002" title="Division of Grey" label="Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074088" start="5007" end="5011" title="Division of Mayo" label="Mayo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139698" wikidata="Q673819" url="?curid=1139698" title="Milford Track">
<text>The Milford Track is a hiking route in New Zealand, located amidst mountains and temperate rain forest in Fiordland National Park in the southwest of the South Island. The 53.5 km (33.2 mi) hike starts at Glade Wharf at the head of Lake Te Anau and finishes in Milford Sound at Sandfly Point, traversing rainforests, wetlands, and an alpine pass.

The New Zealand Department of Conservation classifies this track as a Great Walk and maintains three huts along the track: Clinton Hut, Mintaro Hut and Dumpling Hut. There are also three private lodges and four day shelters available. Most people complete the trail in 15 to 20 hours of hiking over three days, not counting an additional hour or two to reach the first hut from a boat. However, some people run the track in one day. The fastest known completion of the trail and record is by British ultramarathon, trail and mountain runner Ajay Hanspal in 5 hours and 19 minutes and 33 seconds set on 18th November 2023, beating the previous record by David Haunschmidt by approximately 1 minute. 

== History ==

The native Māori people used the area for gathering and transporting valuable greenstone. They have legends about the area and the native species found in it.

Coming in from the Milford end, Donald Sutherland and John Mackay were the first European explorers to see what are now known as Mackay Falls and Sutherland Falls, in 1880. From the Lake Te Anau end, Quintin McKinnon and a companion set out to find an overland route into Milford Sound and, in 1888, discovered was what is now named McKinnon Pass. This led him to link up with Sutherland on the other side of the pass.

McKinnon (also spelled Mckinnon and Mackinnon) was the first guide to take walkers from Lake Te Anau to Milford Sound. McKinnon began by guiding tours himself and expanded with a marketing campaign from there. Many parts of the Milford Track are named for McKinnon, including McKinnon Pass, the highest point of the track. He also cooked pompolona, a type of scone from which one of the guided trip huts takes its name.&quot;

37 tourists used the new steamer and huts along the improved track in 1899–1900, though some track work remained to be completed. In 1901, the government via the Department of Tourist and Health Resorts, and later the Tourist Hotel Corporation assumed administrative control of the track and guided tours until it was sold to a private enterprise in 1990. The track was very famous with women from early on. Some parties consisted of three-quarters women even in the first half of the 20th century.
For a great length of its history, only commercial guided tours had the right to be on the track, but in 1965 a &quot;freedom walk&quot; by 46 members of the Otago Tramping Club led to the opening up to the current dual system in 1966 with additional huts and facilities for independent walkers created allowing individual, non-guided tours on the route. Today, a quota system allows approximately half the capacity of the track to be used by guided tours, while the other half is undertaken by people walking on their own or in informal groups. The two types of walker use separate systems of huts.

In 1992, sports organiser Robin Judkins planned a mountain marathon to be held on the Milford Track – the Milford Mountain Marathon. The event was most contentious and caused much angst, including death threats, physical attacks and anonymous phone calls. Judkins fought a very public fight with politicians and conservationists, including Gerry McSweeney, and obtained all the approvals and permits, but cancelled the event.

Due to its popularity and the limited facilities available for overnighting (camping is not permitted), the track remains heavily regulated.

== Access ==
Unlike most of the other Great Walks the Milford Track has no direct carpark access, and hence trampers require boat transport to the start of the track from Te Anau Downs to Glade House (the southern start of the track). There is also foot access to the start via the &quot;Dore Pass Route&quot; (10.5 km one way) although this is an advanced track and not recommended for most walkers. At the northern end of the track at Sandfly Point another boat is required to take trampers back to Milford Sound. The north to south option still involves both boats but can only be done during the winter season.

== Summer peak season ==
During the summer peak season of late October to late April, access to the trail is highly regulated. Walkers must complete the track in four days, travelling only in the northward direction. Camping is prohibited on the trail. Walkers can tramp the track independently, or as part of a more expensive guided walk with a guide company. A maximum of 90 walkers can start the trail per day (40 independent, and 50 guided). Usually these 90 places are booked out for many months in advance, despite the high cost of the guided walks.

Due to the one-way ticket system and limited hut capacities, trampers need to keep moving even during bad weather. During periods of especially heavy flooding, the DOC regularly calls in helicopters which fly trampers over flooded sections of the track.

=== Independent tramping ===
If hiking independently, each night must be spent in a hut owned and maintained by the Department of Conservation. The huts for independent walkers have basic facilities, which include bunk areas, restrooms, and cooking facilities; walkers have to carry their own equipment and food.

=== Guided tramp ===
On a guided walk, walkers stay in lodges with facilities such as hot showers and catered meals. Guided trampers need only carry clothing, toiletries, and lunch while on the trail.

== Off season ==
During the off season from May to mid-October, the track is essentially unregulated, and can be tramped in either direction, over any number of days. However, it is much more difficult and dangerous tramping in this season, as facilities at huts are removed, and some bridges (up to 10) are removed to prevent avalanche damage.

== Huts ==
== Sights ==
== See also ==
*Transport in Milford Sound

== References ==
== External links ==

* New Zealand Mountain Safety Council&#x27;s Tramping Video Series: Milford Track</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q673819" start="4" end="17" title="Milford Track" label="Milford Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="23" end="29" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="39" end="50" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="91" end="102" title="rain forest" label="rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q877719" start="106" end="129" title="Fiordland National Park" label="Fiordland National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="154" end="166" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140471" start="232" end="244" title="Lake Te Anau" label="Lake Te Anau"/>
<link wikidata="Q187197" start="261" end="274" title="Milford Sound" label="Milford Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="352" end="390" title="New Zealand Department of Conservation" label="New Zealand Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544383" start="418" end="428" title="New Zealand Great Walks" label="Great Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1074" end="1086" title="Māori people" label="Māori people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279509" start="1141" end="1151" title="pounamu" label="greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19278435" start="1255" end="1272" title="Donald Sutherland (explorer)" label="Donald Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38408" start="1369" end="1385" title="Sutherland Falls" label="Sutherland Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272448" start="1423" end="1439" title="Quintin McKinnon" label="Quintin McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724539" start="1556" end="1569" title="McKinnon Pass" label="McKinnon Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352588" start="3196" end="3209" title="Robin Judkins" label="Robin Judkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6925476" start="3220" end="3237" title="mountain marathon" label="mountain marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="5283" end="5309" title="New Zealand Department of Conservation" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927265" start="6069" end="6095" title="Transport in Milford Sound" label="Transport in Milford Sound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139701" wikidata="Q2834059" url="?curid=1139701" title="Alexander Stewart, Duke of Rothesay">
<text>Alexander Stewart, Duke of Rothesay (16 October 1430 – 16 October 1430) was the eldest of a pair of twins. He died in infancy, and his younger twin brother became James II of Scotland. The twins were born in Holyrood Palace, Edinburgh.

The title Duke of Rothesay is the honour taken by the heir apparent to the Scottish throne, and so it was given to this boy, the fifth child but first son of James I of Scotland and Joan Beaufort.

==Ancestry==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2834059" start="0" end="35" title="Alexander Stewart, Duke of Rothesay" label="Alexander Stewart, Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="163" end="183" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q505950" start="208" end="223" title="Holyrood Palace" label="Holyrood Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="225" end="234" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059510" start="247" end="263" title="Duke of Rothesay" label="Duke of Rothesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q768855" start="271" end="277" title="British honours system" label="honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="291" end="304" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="395" end="414" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q241923" start="419" end="432" title="Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scotland" label="Joan Beaufort"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139709" wikidata="Q5240849" url="?curid=1139709" title="David Warren">
<text>David Warren may refer to:

* David Warren (American football) (born 1978), former collegiate American football player
* David Warren (diplomat) (born 1952), British diplomat
* David Warren (director), American theatre and television director
* David Warren (inventor) (1925–2010), inventor of the flight data recorder
* David Warren (Medal of Honor) (1836–?), American Civil War sailor and Medal of Honor recipient
* David Warren (professor), former president of Ohio Wesleyan University, 1984–1993
* David Warren (runner) (born 1956), British distance runner
* David H. Warren, academic administrator and educator
* David H. D. Warren, computer scientist
* David S. Warren, computer scientist
* Dave Warren (footballer) (born 1981), striker who played for League of Ireland side Cork City
* Dave Warren, Academy Award nominated art director, see 82nd Academy Awards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5240847" start="30" end="62" title="David Warren (American football)" label="David Warren (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476202" start="121" end="144" title="David Warren (diplomat)" label="David Warren (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264453" start="177" end="200" title="David Warren (director)" label="David Warren (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q540582" start="245" end="268" title="David Warren (inventor)" label="David Warren (inventor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107024442" start="321" end="350" title="David Warren (Medal of Honor)" label="David Warren (Medal of Honor)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="418" end="442" title="David Warren (professor)" label="David Warren (professor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592726" start="464" end="488" title="List of Ohio Wesleyan University presidents" label="Ohio Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887525" start="502" end="523" title="David Warren (runner)" label="David Warren (runner)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234573" start="563" end="578" title="David H. Warren" label="David H. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q92686" start="618" end="636" title="David H. D. Warren" label="David H. D. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="659" end="674" title="David S. Warren" label="David S. Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230072" start="697" end="721" title="Dave Warren (footballer)" label="Dave Warren (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189836" start="848" end="867" title="82nd Academy Awards" label="82nd Academy Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139711" wikidata="Q1010468" url="?curid=1139711" title="Velas, Azores">
<text>Velas () is a municipality in the São Jorge Island, in the Portuguese autonomous region of Azores. The municipality encompasses the western portion of the island, with its municipal seat in the town of Velas on the south coast, and is divided into six parishes. The population in 2011 was 5,398, in an area of 117.38 km².

==History==
The origin of the name Velas has never been clarified by historians, although it may refer to the number of sailing ships that congregated in the municipality (&quot;velas&quot; is Portuguese for candles or sails). There may also been confusing in the similarity between &quot;velas&quot;, the word &quot;velhas&quot; (which means &quot;old&quot; in Portuguese) or &quot;belas&quot; (which means &quot;beautiful&quot;, in the same language). Another reference is to the Portuguese term &quot;vilar&quot;, which means vigilant, and may have been used to situation in the Canal, where residents were ever-vigilant for volcanic eruptions and/or seismic events.

The village of Velas is one of the oldest settled communities on the island, and has been traced back to the testimony of Infante D. Henrique, who referred to the 1460 when the community congregated around their church to the evocation of São Jorge. Its administrative status was elaborated in 1500, when it became the municipal authority and main village in the western part of the island (Topo being the first municipality). It was in 1507 that Velas could be identified on a map of the island of São Jorge as village. Similarly, the localities of Santo António (Norte Grande), and in 1559 Manadas were first recognized as a major settlements in the municipality; both centers would become religious parishes in 1543 and 1568 respectively. It was also in 1568, that Rosais would be recognized as a parish.

On the evening of April 28, 1580 (and during the following day), the ground would begin a series of about 80 earthquakes, that would cease abruptly. Nevertheless, on May 1 the tremors would return, followed by a volcanic explosion in the area of Queimada and later in the heights of Ribeira do Nabo, two kilometers east of the initial explosion. Volcanic lava was emitted along the Ribeira do Almeida and in Santo Amaro, and there was record of a pyroclastic flow that was responsible for the deaths of at least 10 people. This volcanic eruption lasted four months, and was responsible for many lava flows that travelled to the sea, and ash that fell as far as Terceira. During those months, 4000 cattle died due to gases and the lack of grazing lands, owing to the ash. Eight-years later, several floods would be responsible for the damage to many homes, while in 1593 agricultural production would fall, caused by a bad harvest.

On December 21, 1641, the community of Velas was also the center of an up-well in ocean that &#x27;&quot;clawed itself from the sea with such luck that it dominated Monte dos Fachos, with three tides&quot;; this mini-tsunami, although never called this in the literature, caused destruction in the village, injuring 50 people and dragging personal items into the sea.

By 1570, Velas had 1000 inhabitants, and later 2000 by the end of the 17th century. In 1822, there were 4200 residents in this municipality, but slowly these numbers diminished with several phases of emigration.

Piracy had always been a problem in the canal that separated the islands of the central group. Consequently, forts, such as the Fort of Santa Cruz in Velas (1629), another fort in 1641 (later expanded in 1644) and the Fort of Nossa Senhora da Conceição were constructed to impede attacks. In 1647, the residents of the municipality also constructed a lookout in the parish of Manadas to watch for pirates, as well as to intimidate them: the erected a gallows on the site to ward-off potential attackers. On September 18, 1708 a naval squadron, commanded by the French corsair René Duguay-Trouin, that included eight carracks and three other heavily armed ships attacked the town of Velas, after being unable to enter the port. The first direct attack on the villagers was repelled by men under the command of Sergeant-major Amaro Teixeira de Sousa, who was able to thwart a landing on September 19. But, the next day a new attempt was made, wherein one group (that included six boats) was directed at the &quot;doors to the city&quot;, while a larger group (that included ten boats) was sent to the Morro das Velas (in the western corner of the village). This second group disembarked near Arco a contingent of 500 men, while killing local residents. The French privateers remained in the village for five days, sacking the churches and main houses. Following this encounter, the residents constructed the Fort of Nossa Senhora do Pilar, also referred to as Castelo da Eira.

In 1647, the parish of Urzelina separated from the parish of Manadas, owing to the existence of its natural port, which was important for the period of the &quot;orange cycle&quot;, as well as off-shipment port for Verdelho and Terrenatez wines. Being a new focus of piracy, the citizens of Manadas constructed a gallows on a lookout to &quot;dissuade&quot; pirates. These improvements did not help during that year&#x27;s earthquake in neighboring Terceira: as a result of the destruction both islands were affected by a period of famine, that was only alleviated through municipal supports.

Between April 23, 1659 and its consecration in February 1675, the Church of São Jorge undertook major renovations, initiated by Father Baltazar Dias Teixeira, under the authority of King D. Afonso VI of Portugal. In order to pay for this re-construction, which would replace a primitive chapel of 1460, the town council initiated an annual tax in 1660, and the actual building began in 1664. The completion of the temple, and its consecration would be presided over by the Bishop of Angra do Heroísmo, D. Lourenço de Castro.

While the taxes imposed on the population were likely an unintended necessity, the famine of 1678, caused by the failure of the cereal crop would lead to minor conflicts between the councils of Pico and São Jorge. Similarly, the Taro Revolt, which started on July 12, 1694 would create internal divisions and tensions between the peasant and administrative classes on the island.

In 1698, the locality of Santo Amaro was elevated to parish status.

During the period of 1713 and 1714 the communities of Velas were affected by both a bad agricultural year and chaotic weather patterns. Famine and disease persisted after a tropical cyclone in late summer (September 25, 1713), which caused &quot;the loss of supplies that caused the deaths of many people from famine&quot;. Later, on December 11, 1713, heavy rains in the areas of Urzelina and Rosais caused the destruction of 27 homes; the Ribeira do Almeida (which ran between the village and Queimada) was so heavily inundated with debris that it allowed residents to walk across the field, which was a sheltered bay in other years. A similar disaster was repeated in December 1732, when flooding caused the deaths of five residents and affected the communities of Urzelina, Figueiras, Serroa and Velas. But, in 1755, at the same time that the Lisbon earthquake affected the Portuguese capital, a tsunami reached the southern coasts of the islands of the Azores. The southern ports and communities of Velas attacked by successive waves, destroying personal possessions and homes. Two years later, the Mandado de Deus (&quot;The Sent of God&quot;) resulted in landslides, destruction of homes and many deaths. The earthquake was known for damaging the Church of Santa Bárbara in Manadas, specifically (in 1770 it was declared a National Monument by royal decree of King D. Sebastião, since it was constructed in 1485).

The latter part of the 18th century, in addition to the reconstruction of many of the older temples (caused by the 1757 earthquake), was a period of many public works. In Manadas, the cornerstone for chapel of Santa Rita de Cássia was laid in 1757, while in 1762 the Church of Nossa Senhora dos Neves over the older 17th-century chapel was constructed.

==Geography==

===Physical geography===

The municipality of Velas occupies half the island of São Jorge, from the northwest coast to the interior around Pico Gordo. It is coincident with the Western regional geomorphological zone from Ponta dos Rosais until approximately the area of Ribeira Seca, and characterized by a cascade of escoria cones and axial deposits that extend along the plateau, formed from fissural volcanism that originates in faults extending from the center of the island which run parallel along a north-northwest to south-southeast axis. A secondary range of faults also extend slightly to the area around the town of Velas. The progress of fissural volcanism runs along these accesses, and has resulted in volcanic features that are younger than the rest of the island; two volcanic complexes have their origin in Velas: the Volcanic Complex of Rosais (which is less than 10 million years in age) and the Volcanic Complex of Manadas (the older system which is between 10 and 600 million years in age). This has resulted in vistas that are exemplified by high coastal cliffs and central plateau dotted by several spatter cones along the center, as well as fajãs (geological debris fields or coastal deltas). The largest &quot;fajã&quot;, which extends from the geological cones of Morro de Lemos and Morre Grande to the Bay of Velas, is occupied by the principal population center, the town of Velas.

===Human geography===
Typically, the municipality is circled by the western branch of the Regional E.R.1-1ª roadway that connects several of the main settled areas on this side of the island: in addition to the urbanized are of Velas, the western plateau is interrupted by the communities of São Pedro, Ribeirinho, Canadinha Nova, Arrifana, Rosais, Loural, Santo António, Norte Grande, Outeiro, Ribeira da Areia, Ladeiras, Manadas, Urzelina, Biscoitos, Boa Hora, Morgadias and Santo Amaro. The extreme coastal communities are relatively detached from the rest of these settlements, and include Fajã da Ribeira Areia, Fajá do Ouvidor (the only fajã with road access), Fajã de Além, Fajã Rasa, Fajã do Centelo, Fajã do João Dias and Fajã das Almas. Administratively, the municipality of Velas encompasses six civil parishes (or &quot;freguesias&quot;) that operate day-to-day functions, while Velas handles municipal services such as development, water, electricity, public administration, security and civil institutions. The six parishes of the municipality are:

* Manadas - located along the southern, with a population of less than 400 inhabitants, also known as the parish of Santa Bárbara;
* Norte Grande - on the border with Calheta, along the north coast, the small parish (688 inhabitants) is known for its two &quot;fajãs&quot;: Fajã da Aeira and Fajã do Ouvidor;
* Rosais - the parish that occupies the western point of the island of São Jorge, it includes Ponta dos Rosais, and has a population of 820 residents in 2001;
* Santo Amaro - neighboring the parish of Velas, it is the location of the island&#x27;s airport with approximately 920 inhabitants in 2001;
* Urzelina - site of the 1808 volcanic eruption that erupted from the center of the parish, and cascaded to the sea; today the parish is population of approximately 866 inhabitants;
* Velas - the parish that includes the town of Velas, as well as the settlements along the Canadinha Nova and Ribeirinho, and includes 1929 residents.

== Notable people ==

* José Avelino Bettencourt, (1962) Head of Protocol of Secretariat of State of the Holy See

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1010468" start="0" end="5" title="Velas, Azores" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="34" end="50" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="59" end="69" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="91" end="97" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="1116" end="1135" title="Henry the Navigator" label="Infante D. Henrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="1233" end="1242" title="Saint George" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186437" start="1385" end="1389" title="Topo (Azores)" label="Topo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088829" start="1559" end="1571" title="Norte Grande" label="Norte Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451528" start="1586" end="1593" title="Manadas" label="Manadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451546" start="2211" end="2222" title="Santo Amaro (Velas)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="2250" end="2266" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q215074" start="2464" end="2472" title="Terceira" label="Terceira"/>
<link wikidata="Q552766" start="3893" end="3911" title="René Duguay-Trouin" label="René Duguay-Trouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="3933" end="3941" title="carracks" label="carracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686507" start="6142" end="6153" title="Taro Revolt" label="Taro Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451528" start="10631" end="10638" title="Manadas" label="Manadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289248" start="10762" end="10774" title="Norte Grande (Azores)" label="Norte Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019047" start="10796" end="10803" title="Calheta (Azores)" label="Calheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451615" start="10940" end="10946" title="Rosais" label="Rosais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451546" start="11099" end="11110" title="Santo Amaro (Velas)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652541" start="11240" end="11248" title="Urzelina" label="Urzelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524971" start="11263" end="11285" title="Urzelina (volcano)" label="1808 volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11422" end="11427" title="Velas (parish)" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574015" start="11596" end="11620" title="José Avelino Bettencourt" label="José Avelino Bettencourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q644545" start="11649" end="11685" title="Secretariat of State (Holy See)" label="Secretariat of State of the Holy See"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139712" wikidata="Q16897080" url="?curid=1139712" title="Rotgratspitze">
<text>The Rotgratspitze (3,237 metres) is a mountain in the Stubai Alps, close to the Lisenser Fernerkogel.

== Routes ==

From the Franz Senn Hütte hut it is approximately 3 hours mostly over glaciers and snow. The West summit is marginally higher and fairly easy. The East would be a bit dodgy to solo.

== See also ==

* Panorama including Rotgrat from Lisenser Spitze


== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16897080" start="4" end="17" title="Rotgratspitze" label="Rotgratspitze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="38" end="46" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q679261" start="54" end="65" title="Stubai Alps" label="Stubai Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q871870" start="80" end="100" title="Lisenser Fernerkogel" label="Lisenser Fernerkogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445908" start="126" end="142" title="Franz Senn Hütte" label="Franz Senn Hütte"/>
<link wikidata="" start="318" end="365" title=":Image:Lisenser-spitze-panorama.jpg" label="Panorama including Rotgrat from Lisenser Spitze"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139715" wikidata="Q2451528" url="?curid=1139715" title="Manadas">
<text>Manadas, once locally known as &quot;Santa Bárbara&quot;, is a civil parish in the municipality of Velas in the Azores. The population in 2011 was 374, in an area of 11.20 km2.

==History==

Santa Bárbara was one of the older parishes on São Jorge, probably founded before 1550, when 250 inhabitants lived in the parish and when it began appearing in documents during the 16th century. In 1568, it was included in a listing of six religious parishes that occupied the island of São Jorge. At the time of its founding, it included an area vastly larger than its current borders with the communities of Urzelina, Terreiros and Fajã das Almas lying within its borders.

At the beginning of 18th century the population had grown to 500 residents.

The Port of Manadas was marked by a lookout&#x27;s hut, constructed in 1647, to monitor shipping the São Jorge Channel. During the era of piracy, the locals would hang supposed pirates from this vantage point, as a warning to pirates or privateers of the consequences of attacking the village/municipality. Years later, the area of Manadas was the location of the Fort of Urzelina, which was used to protect the area. During the &quot;Orange Cycle&quot; (the economic period where local farmers produced citrus fruits for export) the lookout was used to warn of the arrival of cargo ships, and alerting them to have their produce in port for shipment. Later, the port was also the staging port for exports of Castelete wines to the European continent and England.

Manadas was the birthplace of the ethnographer João Teixeira Soares de Sousa, who greatly contributed to the histo-cultural development of the island.

The parochial Church of Santa Bárbara was constructed over an older temple that dated to the 15th century. The remodelled architecture, which dates back to the 18th century, includes rare golden ornamentation and is one example of the Baroque-style, popular in the Azores. Classified a national monument, it remains unaltered since its construction; includes original azulejo (dedicated to local quarrymen), its golden altars, an original roof (built with cedros) and original sacristy. In addition, the parish is populated with several other historical religious sanctuaries: Chapel of Santa Rita de Cássia, Chapel of Senhora da Guadalupe and Chapel of Santo Cristo.

==Geography==

Located 15 kilometres from the municipal seat of Velas, on the municipalities southern border with (Calheta); it is delimited by the São Jorge Channel (on the southern coast), the civil parish of Urzelina (along the Ribeira Large) and the ridge of Pico da Esperança (in the civil parish of Norte Grande. The parish contains the localities Fajã das Almas, Ladeiras, Manadas and Ponta das Casteletes.

The parish is populated by older cottages, orchards and fields in scattered settlements dispersed by mountainous cliffs, and highlighted by small coastal plains. The largest of these &quot;fajãs&quot;, location of the parochial church and village port, is the largest settlement (Fajã das Almas), located in the middle of the southern coast. Its semi-planar surface is in contrast with the cliffs to the east which front the São Jorge Channel, and has produced a micro-climate that has sustained many orchards and fields that produce coffee, wine, tropical fruits and species of Dragon trees (Dracaena draco) typical of the Canary Islands, Cape Verde and Madeira.

Along the foothills, there are several springs and fountains that sustained early settlements, while the ports, including the Port of Terreiros was originally center for the fishing industry, but now used for sport and summer fishermen.

==Economy==
The principal industry in this parish is dairy production, being the location of a branch of the island&#x27;s Cooperative dos Lacticínios.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2451528" start="0" end="7" title="Manadas" label="Manadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010468" start="99" end="104" title="Velas, Azores" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="112" end="118" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6298402" start="1556" end="1585" title="João Teixeira Soares de Sousa" label="João Teixeira Soares de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179385" start="2029" end="2036" title="azulejo" label="azulejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056949" start="2117" end="2123" title="cedar wood" label="cedros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010468" start="2394" end="2399" title="Velas, Azores" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019047" start="2445" end="2452" title="Calheta (Azores)" label="Calheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652541" start="2541" end="2549" title="Urzelina" label="Urzelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088829" start="2635" end="2647" title="Norte Grande" label="Norte Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q157952" start="3338" end="3352" title="Dracaena draco" label="Dracaena draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="3369" end="3383" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="3385" end="3395" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="3400" end="3407" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139721" wikidata="Q3051155" url="?curid=1139721" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park">
<text>Elitch Gardens Theme &amp; Water Park, colloquially known as Elitch&#x27;s (formerly known as Elitch Zoological Gardens, first and second incarnation of Elitch Gardens, Elitch Gardens - The Great Escape and Six Flags Elitch Gardens), is an amusement park in Denver, Colorado. It is owned by KSE Radio Ventures, LLC and operated by Premier Parks, LLC. Distinctive for being located in a downtown area, it is open April through October.

==History==

===Gurtler era (1994–1995)===

As space was getting scarce at the original location of Elitch Gardens at 38th Avenue and Tennyson Street, the Gurtler family and their financial partners purchased a plot of land in the Platte River valley near downtown Denver for the price of $6.1 million in June 1994. $90 million was spent relocating some rides from the original park and construction of the new park. The money was from a mix of public and private dollars and various loans.

On October 1, 1994—the end of the 1994 season—the original park closed permanently and a majority of the rides were moved to the new property, which opened on May 27, 1995. Attendance was about one million the first year there, lower than the expected 1.2 million. Some notable rides at the park&#x27;s opening were the original Carousel and Sidewinder roller coaster, relocated from the old park; and a new version of the Mister Twister, the Twister II.

In October, 1996, the Gurtler family and its partners sold the park to growing theme park operator Premier Parks for $65 million.

===Premier era (1996–1998)===
Premier noted the lackluster figures the new park had in its first two seasons, and so new additions were rushed in for the park&#x27;s third season in 1997. The first and most notable addition that year was the park&#x27;s third roller coaster, Mind Eraser, a Suspended Looping Coaster by Vekoma. The next big addition was Tower of Doom, an Intamin freefall ride that stands at . Also added was the park&#x27;s 700-seat Trocadero Theater, named after the famous ballroom and dance hall at the original park. The price tag for these additions came to a total of $28 million.

Throughout this short era, the park had &quot;The Great Escape&quot; as a surname underneath the park&#x27;s name in its logo, like most of its sister parks at the time, (Darien Lake, Riverside Park, and The Great Escape)

In April 1998, Premier Parks purchased the Six Flags Theme Parks from Time Warner. With this acquisition, Premier re-branded some of their other parks as new Six Flags theme parks as part of a deal made between Time Warner and Premier. Elitch Gardens was one of these parks, and big changes came the next year.

===Six Flags era (1999–2006)===

Numerous additions came in 1999 when the park was officially rebranded Six Flags Elitch Gardens. The first and most notable addition as a Six Flags theme park was Boomerang: Coast to Coaster. Various Warner Bros. properties, including the &quot;Looney Tunes&quot; and DC Comics franchises, were also introduced, including costumed characters and shows.

Throughout 1999 to 2001, additions were rushed in, such as the new Looney Tunes Movietown area of the park, as well as water rides and flat rides.

In 2002, the park added Flying Coaster, a suspended steel flying roller coaster. It was a prototype model, and suffered from numerous operational glitches. It ceased operation in 2008, and was eventually sold to Luna Park in Coney Island in 2010, where it was installed in 2011 after being refurbished and updated by ride manufacturer Zamperla.

In 2004, the park installed the Half Pipe coaster, one of three operating in the United States.

In 2005, Six Flags removed Chance-Morgan Chaos flat rides for safety reasons. The same year, the park added a vertical water slide called Edge to its Island Kingdom water park.

Also in 2005, control of Six Flags was obtained by Washington Redskins owner Daniel Snyder, in a proxy fight following a shareholder revolt, which led to Kieran Burke being ousted as CEO. Snyder installed friend and former ESPN executive Mark Shapiro as the company&#x27;s new CEO.

The park faced a grim future in 2006 when Shapiro announced that the company would sell off six of its properties. Costumed workers and entertainment workers were laid off as a part of cost-cutting.

=== PARC Management era (2007–2010) ===
In October 2006, Six Flags announced that Elitch Gardens, along with six other parks, would be sold for a total of $312 million. The agreement saw them sell the properties to PARC Management, who in turn sold them to CNL Lifestyle Properties. CNL would then lease them back to PARC Management under a 52-year triple-net lease.

Immediate changes under the new management included the removal of all Looney Tunes and DC Comics branding and dropping Six Flags from the park&#x27;s name reverting to the Elitch Gardens name. In Late-October 2006, A new ProSlide Bowl water slide, named RipQurl, was added for the 2007 season. In 2008 a new interactive dark ride, Ghost Blasters, opened. It takes guests through a dark mansion haunted with ghosts. Using light guns, guests have the opportunity to extinguish the ghosts while competing against one another as digital counters keep track of the scores. Alongside the new rides, the park hosts a summer concert series which has included Raven-Symoné, Metro Station, Sara Evans, and Lee Ann Womack. It also has live entertainment shows, such as &quot;Survivor Live!&quot;, and &quot;Sea Lion Splash!&quot; The ones for 2010 were &quot;Rocknation: Don&#x27;t Stop Believin&#x27;&quot;, &quot;Bob the Builder Live: Let&#x27;s Recycle!&quot;, &quot;120 Rockin&#x27; Years at Elitch&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;Laser Rocks&quot;. During October it has haunted houses and a Trick or Treat Trail.

=== CNL Lifestyle Properties era (2011–2014) ===
However, after less than three years into the 52-year contracts, CNL terminated their agreements with PARC Management in November 2010. The move came after, according to their 2010 SEC filings, PARC defaulted on their lease obligations on the properties. In early 2011, CNL appointed Herschend Family Entertainment as the new operators of the park, along with Darien Lake.

On March 8, the park announced three new rides, Tube Top (a Proslide Tantrum waterslide) in Island Kingdom Family Water Park, Rockin’ Tug, and Tike Bikes both in the newly transformed kid&#x27;s area, KiddieLand.

In 2013, the park&#x27;s operation was transferred from Herschend Family Entertainment to CNL Lifestyle.

===Premier Parks LLC era (2015-present)===
On June 5, 2015 the park was purchased by an investment team made up of Revesco Properties, Kroenke Sports Entertainment, and Second City Real Estate. Operation remained under the control of Premier Parks, LLC.

Due to the growing concerns of the COVID-19 pandemic, Elitch Gardens announced a delay of the 2020 season operations. On July 31, 2020, with the ongoing pandemic, the park announced that the park will not operate at all for the remainder of 2020. The cancellation is the first time in 130 years, that the park closed down for an entire season, with the park&#x27;s entire 130th season instead being deferred to 2021.

===Future of Elitch Gardens (&quot;The River Mile&quot; redevelopment)===

In March 2018, the owners of Elitch Gardens, Revesco, revealed the redevelopment plan for the theme park. Elitch Gardens was considered to be aging and in need of relocation, and considered to be a &quot;donut hole&quot; surrounded by the denser center of the city.

On December 17, 2018, the Denver City Council voted 12–0 in favor of giving Revesco Properties permission to begin the project.

No further details, including a permanent closing date for Elitch Gardens or relocation have been announced. However, there are rumors that it will relocate. As of 2024, Elitch Gardens is still operating for the season.

==Entertainment &amp; Events==
In 1998, Six Flags&#x27; Fright Fest debuted at the park. The event was typically held at the end of the operating season (October) until 2006.

When the park was sold to PARC Management in 2007, a replacement event for Fright Fest named &quot;Fall Family Fun Fest&quot; added family oriented areas such as hay mazes and pumpkin painting, as well as haunted houses and trick or treat trails.

In 2008, &quot;FrightFest&quot; was reinstituted, but with a lack of space between the words &quot;Fright&quot; and &quot;Fest&quot; in order to avoid legal trouble with Six Flags. The event continued on for several years, including 2011-2014 when Herschend Family Entertainment managed the property. The park is currently managed by Premier Parks, LLC, who continues to host the event.

===Island Kingdom Family Water Park===

Island Kingdom is a family water park located next to the entrance of Elitch Gardens. It is open in Summer, and admission is included with admission to Elitch Gardens. It has several main attractions: a large tube slide tower, a family body slide tower, a family water playground, a large family raft ride, a half pipe water attraction, and a lazy river.

==Public transportation==

There is an RTD light rail stop located next to the park&#x27;s entrance, served by C, E, and W line trains. The tram station also serves neighboring Ball Arena. Many park visitors take mass transit instead of paying for expensive parking. There is a bus station just off park grounds as well, which is served by route 10 operated by First Transit.

==Rides==

===Roller coasters===
===Thrill rides===

===Family rides===

===Kids&#x27; Rides===
===Water rides===

==Water Park Rides==
==Past rides==
==See also==

*Incidents at CNL Income Properties parks
== References ==
==External links==
*Elitch Gardens Official Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="0" end="37" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Elitch Gardens Theme &amp;amp; Water Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="61" end="74" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Elitch&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="94" end="119" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Elitch Zoological Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="153" end="167" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Elitch Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="169" end="202" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Elitch Gardens - The Great Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051155" start="207" end="231" title="Elitch Gardens Theme Park" label="Six Flags Elitch Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="240" end="254" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="258" end="264" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q29438842" start="291" end="314" title="Kroenke Sports &amp;amp; Entertainment" label="KSE Radio Ventures, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148768" start="331" end="349" title="Premier Parks, LLC" label="Premier Parks, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361885" start="536" end="550" title="Elitch Gardens" label="Elitch Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508555" start="1270" end="1280" title="Sidewinder (Elitch Gardens)" label="Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1351" end="1365" title="Elitch Gardens#Mister Twister" label="Mister Twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432851" start="1371" end="1381" title="Twister II" label="Twister II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780924" start="1806" end="1831" title="Suspended Looping Coaster" label="Suspended Looping Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q546697" start="1835" end="1841" title="Vekoma" label="Vekoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q660675" start="1887" end="1894" title="Intamin" label="Intamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016111" start="2292" end="2303" title="Six Flags Darien Lake" label="Darien Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q846548" start="2305" end="2319" title="Six Flags New England" label="Riverside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496825" start="2325" end="2341" title="The Great Escape &amp;amp; Splashwater Kingdom" label="The Great Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q824278" start="2387" end="2408" title="Six Flags (1961–2024)" label="Six Flags Theme Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="2414" end="2425" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q893035" start="2852" end="2879" title="Boomerang (roller coaster)" label="Boomerang: Coast to Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="2889" end="2901" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="2934" end="2946" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="2957" end="2966" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549857" start="3215" end="3229" title="Flying Coaster (Elitch Gardens)" label="Flying Coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q833676" start="3249" end="3270" title="flying roller coaster" label="flying roller coaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864620" start="3403" end="3412" title="Luna Park, Coney Island (2010)" label="Luna Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="3416" end="3428" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q605772" start="3526" end="3534" title="Zamperla" label="Zamperla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135493" start="3569" end="3578" title="Half Pipe (roller coaster)" label="Half Pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2955956" start="3661" end="3674" title="Chance-Morgan" label="Chance-Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q824278" start="3837" end="3846" title="Six Flags (1961–2024)" label="Six Flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="3863" end="3882" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014697" start="3889" end="3902" title="Daniel Snyder" label="Daniel Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="4035" end="4039" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226352" start="4050" end="4062" title="Mark Shapiro (media executive)" label="Mark Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359574" start="4510" end="4525" title="PARC Management" label="PARC Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931765" start="4552" end="4576" title="CNL Lifestyle Properties" label="CNL Lifestyle Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954788" start="4644" end="4660" title="NNN Lease" label="triple-net lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="4734" end="4746" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="4751" end="4760" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406150" start="4885" end="4893" title="ProSlide" label="ProSlide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934961" start="4972" end="4993" title="interactive dark ride" label="interactive dark ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="5085" end="5094" title="light gun" label="light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188648" start="5315" end="5327" title="Raven-Symoné" label="Raven-Symoné"/>
<link wikidata="Q864991" start="5329" end="5342" title="Metro Station (band)" label="Metro Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q463989" start="5344" end="5354" title="Sara Evans" label="Sara Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q454082" start="5360" end="5374" title="Lee Ann Womack" label="Lee Ann Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856068" start="5428" end="5436" title="Survivor (U.S. TV series)" label="Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="5460" end="5468" title="Sea lion" label="Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q888360" start="5568" end="5583" title="Bob the Builder" label="Bob the Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q254342" start="6097" end="6127" title="Herschend Family Entertainment" label="Herschend Family Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016111" start="6173" end="6184" title="Darien Lake" label="Darien Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406150" start="6247" end="6255" title="Proslide" label="Proslide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6491" end="6504" title="CNL Lifestyle" label="CNL Lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q945207" start="6642" end="6670" title="Stan Kroenke" label="Kroenke Sports Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148768" start="6741" end="6759" title="Premier Parks, LLC" label="Premier Parks, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="6797" end="6814" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q87742736" start="6915" end="6923" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Colorado" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259692" start="7548" end="7567" title="Denver City Council" label="Denver City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504496" start="7928" end="7939" title="Six Flags Fright Fest" label="Fright Fest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359574" start="8074" end="8089" title="PARC Management" label="PARC Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q606777" start="8210" end="8219" title="maze" label="hay mazes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="8824" end="8830" title="Summer" label="Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309183" start="9119" end="9133" title="RTD Bus &amp;amp; Rail" label="RTD light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q795470" start="9257" end="9267" title="Ball Arena" label="Ball Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453919" start="9441" end="9454" title="First Transit" label="First Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083894" start="9623" end="9663" title="Incidents at CNL Income Properties parks" label="Incidents at CNL Income Properties parks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139722" wikidata="Q6804175" url="?curid=1139722" title="Measure 36">
<text>There are several ballot measures called Measure 36:

*Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (1996) (minimum wage)
*Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (2004) (constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16986295" start="18" end="32" title="Initiatives and referendums in the United States" label="ballot measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092239" start="55" end="86" title="Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (1996)" label="Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (1996)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101052" start="103" end="134" title="Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (2004)" label="Oregon Ballot Measure 36 (2004)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139725" wikidata="Q16057562" url="?curid=1139725" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division">
<text>The 38th (Welsh) Division (initially the 43rd Division, later the 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division and then the 38th Infantry (Reserve) Division) of the British Army was active during both the First and Second World Wars. In 1914, the division was raised as the 43rd Division of Herbert Kitchener&#x27;s New Army, and was originally intended to form part of a 50,000-strong Welsh Army Corps that had been championed by David Lloyd George; the assignment of Welsh recruits to other formations meant that this concept was never realised. 

The 43rd was renamed the 38th (Welsh) Division on 29 April 1915, and shipped to France later that year. It arrived in France with a poor reputation, seen as a political formation that was ill-trained and poorly led. The division&#x27;s baptism by fire came in the first days of the Battle of the Somme, where it captured Mametz Wood at the loss of nearly 4,000 men. This strongly held German position needed to be secured in order to facilitate the next phase of the Somme offensive, the Battle of Bazentin Ridge. Despite securing its objective, the division&#x27;s reputation was adversely affected by miscommunication among senior officers.

A year later the division made a successful attack in the Battle of Pilckem Ridge, the opening of the Third Battle of Ypres. This action redeemed the division in the eyes of the upper hierarchy of the British military. In 1918, during the German spring offensive and the subsequent Allied Hundred Days Offensive, the division attacked several fortified German positions. It crossed the Ancre River, broke through the Hindenburg Line and German positions on the River Selle, ended the war on the Belgian frontier, and was considered one of the Army&#x27;s elite units. The division was not chosen to be part of the Occupation of the Rhineland after the war, and was demobilised over several months. It ceased to exist by March 1919.

In March 1939, following the reemergence of Germany and its occupation of Czechoslovakia, the British army increased the number of divisions within the Territorial Army by duplicating existing units. On paper, the division was recreated as the 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division, a duplicate of the 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division. It was formed in September 1939, however it was never deployed overseas as a division, having been restricted to home defence duties around the United Kingdom.

In 1944, it was disbanded and its units were either deployed or broken up to reinforce the 21st Army Group in Normandy during Operation Overlord. The 38th Division was recreated on 1 September 1944 as the 38th Infantry (Reserve) Division, a training formation that took over the role previously occupied by the 80th Infantry (Reserve) Division. In this form, the division completed the training of recruits, who were then dispatched overseas as reinforcements. At the end of the war, the division was again stood down.

==First World War==

===Formation and training===

On 28 July 1914, the First World War began; on 4 August, Germany invaded Belgium and the United Kingdom entered the war to uphold the Treaty of London (1839). Britain faced a continental war it was not prepared to fight; the Expeditionary Force was dispatched but the country lacked the forces required for the protracted war envisioned by the military leadership.

On 5 August, Herbert Kitchener was appointed Secretary of State for War. This position allowed Kitchener a largely independent role within the war cabinet. His first act, the next day, was to request parliamentary approval to increase the strength of the British Army by 500,000 men. Over the following days, the Army Council laid out plans for Kitchener&#x27;s proposed expansion: traditional recruitment would be used to expand the regular army, bypassing the county associations and thus avoiding expanding the Territorial Force. The first wave, originally termed the New Expeditionary Force, became the First New Army. Historian Peter Simkins wrote that Kitchener held the Territorial Force in disdain, calling it an ill-trained &quot;Town Clerk&#x27;s Army&quot;, and this was partially why he set up a parallel recruitment system. Simkins noted that it would be a &quot;gross oversimplification to ascribe Kitchener&#x27;s decision merely to prejudice and ignorance&quot;. Had the Territorial Force been used as the basis for expansion it would have been &quot;swamped&quot; and &quot;rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out any function at all&quot;, when a &quot;viable home defence force&quot; was needed due to the threat of a German invasion.

On 19 September 1914, Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George stated publicly that he &quot;should like to see a Welsh Army in the field&quot;. This thought quickly picked up support from politicians and from Kitchener; a Welsh Army Corps of two divisions totalling 50,000 men was approved on 10 October. The recruits were to be drawn from Wales as well as Monmouthshire and from Welshmen living in Liverpool, London and Manchester. The creation of the corps soon became a source of dispute between Lloyd George and Kitchener and was never realised due to a lack of potential recruits. Llewelyn Wyn Griffith, an officer within the 38th (Welsh) Division, commented that &quot;the population of Wales was not sufficient to raise two full divisions and all the corps units required&quot;. By the end of 1914, it had been decided that only one division would be raised. The 10,000 men, who had since joined the Welsh Army Corps, were formed into the 43rd Division of Kitchener&#x27;s Fifth New Army. The division comprised the 113th, 114th and 115th Brigades, and was made up of battalions from the Royal Welsh Fusiliers (RWF), the South Wales Borderers (SWB) and the Welsh Regiment (Welsh). On 19 January 1915, Major-General Ivor Philipps was assigned as the first divisional commander. By March, 20,000 men had been enlisted and over the coming months the first units reached full strength. Despite steady recruitment, by 30 June 1915, 20 per cent of recruits had been removed, having been discharged primarily for medical reasons or transferred to other units leaving 27,836 men within the ostensible Welsh Army Corps. The division was made up predominately of Welshmen, but it included soldiers from the rest of the United Kingdom and several other nations.
On Saint David&#x27;s Day (1 March 1915), the new division was inspected by Lloyd George. During April, the Fourth New Army was broken up to provide reinforcements for deployed combat units. The Fifth New Army, in turn, was renamed the Fourth New Army. As part of this re-organisation, the 38th Division became the 31st Division. On 29 April, the 43rd was renamed the 38th (Welsh) Division. The division spent most of 1915 dispersed, with the majority located across North Wales with units training at Pwllheli, Colwyn Bay, Llandudno and Rhyl; some units were based in the south at Abergavenny. At these locations, the men undertook basic training, were drilled, and trained for open warfare. On 19 August, the division moved to Winchester, England, where it assembled for the first time as a coherent single unit. Final training took place and limited instruction was given on tactics for trench warfare, on the assumption that practical experience would be easier to gain in France. Following training, it took until November for the division to be fully equipped with rifles. To be declared fit for overseas service, the division&#x27;s soldiers had to fire 24 rounds on a rifle range. On 29 November, the division was inspected for the last time before its deployment; Queen Mary and Princess Mary reviewed the troops at Crawley Down.

Prior to its deployment, the division was roughly 18,500 men strong. During November, the division departed from Southampton and by 5 December it had arrived in France at Le Havre. The division&#x27;s artillery initially remained behind to conduct live fire exercises at Larkhill, but had re-joined the division by the end of December.

The initial reaction by the regular army to the division was one of hostility. The division was seen as lacking experience and training; the latter was a criticism levelled at all New Army divisions. Questions were also raised about the divisional leadership and about securing officer commissions through influence. Historian Clive Hughes wrote, &quot;regulars professed disgust at the blatantly political character&quot; of the division. The prime example of this concern was Philipps himself. He had retired from the Indian Army in 1903 as a Major, and then joined the Pembroke Yeomanry becoming the regiment&#x27;s Colonel in 1908. Prior to the war, Philipps was elected a member of parliament, and was part of Lloyd George&#x27;s Liberal Party. Following the outbreak of the war, he was promoted to Brigadier-General and given a command of a brigade. He was then posted to Lloyd George&#x27;s Minister of Munitions, before being given command of the 38th ahead of regular army officers who held seniority. Hughes commented that Philipps&#x27;s political appointment &quot;can hardly have improved his standing&quot; and that he was viewed as a &quot;jumped-up ex-Indian Army major who had no right to a divisional command&quot;, who had received his position via his association with Lloyd George.

===Initial actions and the Battle of the Somme===
Once in France, the division joined XI Corps and was placed in reserve, relieving the 46th (North Midland) Division. The first casualties were soon suffered due to training accidents with grenades. The division was then temporarily split up and spent time attached to the Guards Division and 19th (Western) Division, to gain experience in trench warfare. It relieved the 19th (Western) Division and until the summer manned the front in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region. It was rotated along the XI Corps sector, and spent time in Festubert, Givenchy, La Gorgue, Laventie and Neuve Chapelle. Units of the division took turns on the front line, maintained positions, conducted trench raids and were subjected to German bombardments, all of which allowed the men to gain experience of active service conditions. During this period Captain Goronwy Owen of the 15th RWF carried out a trench raid into no man&#x27;s land, where he located a party of German soldiers who had just finished laying barbed wire. Owen followed the Germans back to their trench and ambushed them. The divisional history comments that &quot;the greater portion [of the German party] were killed&quot; and the raid was considered by the Army to be &quot;the third best ... carried out so far&quot; in the war. For his actions, Owen was mentioned in dispatches.
During 10–11 June 1916, the division was relieved by the 61st (2nd South Midland) Division and moved into reserve. It then moved south and joined XVII Corps of the Third Army to train for the Battle of the Somme. New trenches were dug and the division made practice attacks on them using novel tactics: attacking in waves in conjunction with artillery and machine gun fire. Towards the end of the month, the division moved further south to the Somme valley. They then joined II Corps and were placed in reserve. The division was allocated to the second wave, which was intended to exploit the expected success of both the Third and Fourth Armies. After the breach of the German lines, the Reserve Army cavalry divisions would capture Bapaume. The 38th (Welsh) Division would then move forward to relieve the cavalry and secure the town, to allow the cavalry to advance north towards Arras.

1 July was the first day on the Somme and although it was behind the lines in reserve, the division suffered its first casualty of the battle due to German artillery fire. The 1 July attack was a disaster on the Fourth Army front, and total British losses amounted to 57,470 largely north of the Albert–Bapaume road. In particular, XV Corps attacked the villages of Fricourt and Mametz. Throughout the day, the 7th Division assaulted and captured Mametz. The 21st Division pushed into the German lines and flanked Fricourt to the north. Due to this move and the capture of Mametz, the Germans abandoned Fricourt; the two divisions advanced up to and suffered 7,500 casualties. Between these two villages were the entrenched German positions in Mametz Wood. These needed to be captured to allow XV Corps to advance further into German territory. More ground was gained in subsequent attacks, but German defences and rain hindered moves to clear Mametz Wood. Following casualties within the 7th Division, the 38th (Welsh) Division was attached to XV Corps to relieve the division and clear the wood.
Mametz Wood was defended by elements of the German Lehr Infantry Regiment and 163rd Infantry Regiment. These units were entrenched within the wood; the German second line was only behind, allowing the position to be reinforced easily. From 6–9 July, the 38th Division conducted reconnaissance and probing attacks, to determine the strength of the German position.

On 7 July, the division launched two battalions upon the wood after a brief preliminary bombardment. At 08:00, the 16th Welsh and 10th SWB attacked. As soon as the advance began it became obvious that the preliminary bombardment had failed to silence the German machine gun positions and German shells started to fall upon the attackers and the trenches they had left, resulting in a temporary communication breakdown. Caught between machine gun fire from their front and their flanks, the attack bogged down within of the wood. Unable to move further, the troops were ordered to dig in to await a renewed British bombardment. At 11:00 the troops tried again but were unable to push further forward. A proposed third attack in the afternoon was called off. The 16th Welsh Battalion historian wrote that &quot;&#x27;[c]ut to Ribbons&#x27; would be an apt description&quot; as casualties amounted to 276 men. The 10th SWB suffered 180 casualties.

During the evening, the 14th RWF launched a minor trench raid. On 8 July, this was supposed to develop into an attack on the southern tip of the wood. While the division prepared to launch a battalion-sized attack, XV Corps commander Lieutenant General Henry Horne ordered a smaller attack by a platoon. The day was spent in confusion; conflicting orders were issued and Horne travelled to the division to clarify his intentions. In the end, no attack was launched.

When Horne found out that the 14th RWF had not moved and that their attack had been pushed back to 8 July, he summoned Ivor Philipps to Corps Headquarters and sacked him. General Douglas Haig, commander of the BEF, noted this event in his diary. He wrote: &quot;visited HQ XV Corps and saw General Horne. He was very disappointed with the work of the ... 38th Welsh Div&quot;. Haig further commented that Philipps was relieved of his command as the majority of the division had &quot;never entered&quot; the woods despite the &quot;most adequate ... bombard[ment]&quot;, had suffered &quot;under 150 casualties&quot; during their attack and that: &quot;a few bold men [who had] entered the Wood found little opposition&quot;. Historian Don Farr wrote that Haig&#x27;s entries are at odds with the facts and that he relied heavily on what Horne had told him. Farr states that Horne&#x27;s account to Haig was self-serving, did no justice &quot;to the difficulties confronting the troops on the ground&quot;, and did not acknowledge the failure of the bombardment. He also suggests that the sacking of Philipps may have been political, by a distrusting officer corps towards a perceived political appointee.

Hughes quoted a regular officer who was attached to the division who described Philipps as &quot;an excellent administrator&quot; who was &quot;valued [for] his service with the division&quot;. Historian Tim Travers wrote that &quot;perhaps Philipps was a poor commander&quot; but the opening attacks on Mametz Wood demonstrated the faults of the entire command structure, not just of Philipps, as there was pressure from the top down to get results. Farr wrote that &quot;there is evidence that ... Philipps ... balked at sending waves of [his] men unprotected against machine guns&quot; and Travers wrote that Philipps had shown moral courage in cancelling unprepared attacks and for giving his troops &quot;instructions not to press the attack if machine-gun fire was met&quot;. Horne had intended to replace Philipps with Major-General Charles Blackader but was overruled by Haig who ordered that Herbert Watts, commander of the 7th Division, was to take temporary command. During 9 July, the decision was made that the division would launch a full-scale attack the next day. At 03:30 on 10 July, the preliminary bombardment began.
The initial bombardment lasted for 45 minutes, striking the German front line positions; the shelling was also temporarily halted to attempt to lure the German defenders back into the front line. At 04:15, the division launched its attack. Advancing behind a creeping barrage were the 13th Welsh (on the right flank), the 14th Welsh (in the centre) and the 16th RWF (on the left flank). A smoke screen had been laid down on either flank, which succeeded in drawing German fire away from the assault. The divisional history called this attack &quot;one of the most magnificent sights of the war ... wave after wave of men were seen advancing without hesitation and without a break over a distance which in some places was nearly 500 yards&quot;.

The 14th Welsh rapidly entered the wood and cleared the German positions with bayonets and rifle fire. In the face of determined German resistance and flanking machine gun fire, the 13th Welsh suffered many casualties and their attack stalled. The division reinforced the right flank by committing the 15th Welsh who were able to push through into the wood. Before they could link up and aid the 13th, German troops infiltrated the gap between the two battalions, got behind the 15th Welsh and almost wiped out a company. These troops had to fight their way out, and just seven returned . Despite the losses, the three battalions of the Welsh regiment were able to form a cohesive line defending the edge of the wood and repulsed strong German counter-attacks. The 16th RWF, which had fallen behind the creeping barrage, were met with determined German resistance which repulsed two assaults. The 15th RWF was sent to reinforce and both battalions were then able to push their way into the wood where German resistance, including a machine gun, prevented a further advance.

The 10th Welsh moved up to cover the gap between the five battalions already engaged and the 13th RWF were deployed to clear the German position in front of their sister battalions; divisional engineers arrived to dig trenches and lay wire. During the afternoon, the 10th SWB and 17th RWF were committed to the wood. At 16:00, another attack began and met with little resistance. The 10th SWB captured the eastern stretches of the wood and inflicted many casualties on the Germans. The 15th Welsh, along with the 15th and 17th RWF, fought north through the wood and made it to within of the northern edge when they were thrown back by German fire. A further attack during the evening was called off and the troops were pulled back up to and ordered to dig in for the night.
During the night, the 113th and 114th Infantry Brigades were ordered out of the wood and the 115th Brigade assembled in their place. The next day, the 115th Brigade prepared an assault to clear out the Germans. The 115th Brigade&#x27;s commanding officer, Brigadier-General H. J. Evans, wanted to launch a surprise attack but was overruled. The subsequent bombardment to support the attack fell short in places, hitting British troops and provoking German artillery fire. As well as the friendly fire, the barrage also caught German troops in the open as they fled from the wood. The remaining Germans offered determined resistance and the 16th Welsh were held up by machine gun fire and the use of a flamethrower. Despite this, the brigade was able to clear Mametz Wood by the end of the day. The German second line position was on higher ground which dominated the edge of the wood and, coupled with artillery fire, resulted in the brigade pulling back to its start line to avoid further casualties.
That evening, the 21st Division relieved the 38th Division who moved near Gommecourt and relieved the 48th (South Midland) Division. On 12 July, Watts returned to the 7th Division and Blackader assumed command of the 38th. The division had suffered 3,993 casualties during the six days it had fought on the Somme, with over 600 men killed. Although it had captured 400 prisoners and Mametz Wood (the largest wood on the Somme), paving the way for the assault on Bazentin Ridge, the reputation of the division had been further hindered by inaccuracies. The failure of the first attack harmed the division&#x27;s reputation, as the comparably few casualties were seen as evidence of a lack of determination by the men. The 113th Brigade&#x27;s commander, Brigadier-General Price-Davies, made things worse by reporting panic among the men and refusals of orders. Price-Davies later wrote: &quot;I may not have given my brigade full credit for what they did&quot;, but the damage had been done. The difficulty of wood fighting was not appreciated at the time, and Farr wrote that the reputation of the division suffered due to the repeated interference by Horne in matters best left to the divisional or brigade staff and his &quot;inexperience of battlefield command at this level&quot;.

===Ypres Salient===
At the end of August 1916, the division was deployed to the Ypres Salient where it remained for the next ten months seeing no major action. The division spent its time rebuilding and consolidating washed out trenches and raiding German positions. For the former, the division was commended by their Corps commander Rudolph Lambart (XIV Corps). In November, elements of the 14th Welsh launched a large raid on a German position known as High Command Redoubt, a fortified position on a slight rise that overlooked the British lines. From this redoubt, the Germans had been able to direct artillery fire and snipe the British positions. The 14th Welsh raided the position, killing 50 defenders in hand-to-hand combat and taking 20 more as prisoners.
In June, the division was withdrawn into reserve to conduct training exercises for the Ypres offensive. Replicas of the German positions on Pilckem Ridge were built and attacks rehearsed. On 20 July, the division returned to the front taking over from the 29th Division. Until the end of the month, the division was subjected to German artillery fire. These shells, a mixture of high explosive and mustard gas, inflicted serious losses. At the same time, aerial reconnaissance and infantry patrols by the division confirmed that the British preliminary barrage had forced the Germans back to their second line positions.

At 03:50 on 31 July, the Battle of Pilckem Ridge began. The division was ordered to capture the German front line, the second line positions based on Pilckem Ridge, a low ridge that also contained the heavily shelled village of Pilckem, followed by Iron Cross Ridge which lay to the east, before storming down the other side and across a small stream known as the Steenbeck. The division would be opposed primarily by the German 3rd Guards Infantry Division, along with elements of the 3rd Reserve Division and 111th Division, dug-in among trench lines and 280 concrete pillboxes and bunkers. To secure these various objectives, the division planned to attack in waves, with fresh troops constantly moving forward to tackle the next objective.

Due to the Royal Artillery gas bombardments, the German artillery had been largely silenced and played little part in the initial fighting. The 10th and 13th Welsh (advancing on the right) and half the 13th and 16th RWF (on the left), were able to take the German forward positions rapidly, capturing several Germans who had remained behind. The 13th and 14th Welsh then pushed beyond their sister battalions up the ridge, along with the remaining half of the 13th and 16th RWF. Based in the village and Marsouin and Stray Farms, the German resistance was more determined, resulting in increasing British losses. Arthur Conan Doyle, in his history of the war, described the scene:

It was during this stage of the fighting that James Llewellyn Davies earned the Victoria Cross (VC). Davies, alone, attacked a German machine gun position after previously failed efforts had resulted in numerous British deaths. He killed one German and captured another as well as the gun. Although he was wounded, he then led an attack to kill a sniper who had been harassing his unit. Davies subsequently died of his wounds.

Where concrete bunkers were encountered, the troops worked their way around them, cutting the German troops off and forcing them to surrender. Despite their resistance, the German second line was captured without delay. Half of the 13th and 14th Welsh, along with the 15th RWF, then pushed towards Iron Cross Ridge. German troops holding Rudolphe Farm, in the area allocated to the 51st (Highland) Division which had not yet advanced as far, were able to fire into the flanks of the advancing troops. A platoon from 15th Welsh was diverted and assaulted the farm, capturing 15 men and killing or scattering the rest, securing the flank of the advance. The 14th Welsh then rushed Iron Cross Ridge and engaged in hand-to-hand combat to seize the position, before pushing on to capture a dressing station. Their charge had resulted in heavy losses, but yielded 78 prisoners and three machine guns. The 15th RWF had fallen behind the protective creeping barrage to their front and came under fire from a German position known as Battery Copse. Despite many losses, they pushed forward and were able to secure their portion of Iron Cross Ridge.
With Iron Cross Ridge in British hands, the 11th SWB and 17th RWF pushed forward for the Steenbeck. Despite German resistance, based in more concrete defences, these positions were cleared and the river reached, and the two battalions dug-in on the opposite side. Helping to clear German positions during the advance, resulted in Ivor Rees being awarded the VC. Rees silenced one German machine gun position, before going on to clear a concrete bunker with grenades resulting in the death of five Germans and the surrender of 30 more and the capture of a machine gun. Due to the casualties taken, elements of the 16th Welsh and 10th SWB were moved forward to reinforce the newly gained position. At 15:10, the German infantry launched a counter-attack. Fighting continued throughout the day, with the forward British battalions forced to pull back beyond the Steenbeck; German attempts to retake further territory were thwarted. During the afternoon, heavy rain began to fall and did so for three days, hindering future operations. The fighting broke the 3rd Guards Division, which the Welsh divisional history notes &quot;had to be withdrawn immediately after the battle&quot;. During the day, the division took nearly 700 prisoners. Conan Doyle places the division&#x27;s losses at 1,300 men. Other than an exchange of artillery fire, no further fighting took place and the division was withdrawn from the line on 6 August.

Historian Toby Thacker wrote that &quot;the attack on the Pilckem Ridge was considered a great success by Haig and has been similarly viewed by historians&quot;. He continues: &quot;in Haig&#x27;s eyes the Welsh Division had redeemed its reputation after what he had perceived as its poor showing at Mametz Wood&quot;. Haig went on to write that the division had &quot;achieved the highest level of soldierly achievement&quot;. Historian Steven John wrote that the division &quot;regained the honour which it had unjustly lost after their supposed tardiness in the capture of Mametz&quot;.

The division returned to the front line on 20 August. On 27 August, elements of the division attacked. Throughout the day, heavy rain had fallen saturating the ground. The divisional history described the scene: &quot;the men who had been lying in shell-holes which were gradually filling with water found great difficulty in getting out and advancing and keeping up with the barrage&quot;. As the infantry waded through mud, they lost the creeping barrage. Elements of the division reached the German line, in what the historian of the 16 Welsh called &quot;a gallant but hopeless endeavour&quot;. The division remained on the line, subjected to German artillery bombardments, until it was withdrawn on 13 September to take up new positions at Armentières.

===Raiding and reorganisation===

Until early 1918, the division manned various sections of the front line, at times occupying as much as ten miles of the front. During this period, the division worked to improve the trenches they inherited and conducted raids on the German lines. On the night of 7/8 November, the 10th SWB conducted a 300-strong raid on the German lines. Having penetrated into German territory, the battalion destroyed three concrete dugouts, inflicted at least 50 casualties and took 15 prisoners, for a loss of 50 casualties. In addition to raiding, the division helped train the newly arrived 1st Portuguese Division by having a battalion assigned one at a time for tutoring. During the winter, the British realised that the Germans intended to begin an offensive in 1918 (the Spring Offensive) and the division spent the following months improving the front line positions, as well as constructing rear-line defences from the Armentières region to the northern bank of River Lys, laying what the divisional history described as an: &quot;inconceivable amount of concrete and barbed wire&quot;.
By 1918, the number of front line infantry within the British Army in France had decreased, leading to a manpower crisis. In an attempt to consolidate manpower and to increase the number of machine guns and artillery support available to the infantry, the number of battalions in a division was cut from twelve to nine. This had the effect of reducing the establishment of a division from 18,825 men to 16,035. In addition, to ease reinforcement, an attempt was made to consolidate as many battalions from the same regiment within the same brigade. These changes impacted the division, resulting in the 15th RWF, 11th SWB and 10th and 16th Welsh being disbanded and the 2nd RWF joining from the 33rd Division. These changes to the division also saw the machine gun companies consolidated into a single battalion, one medium mortar battery broken up and absorbed by the remaining two batteries and the heavy mortar battery leaving the division to become a Corps asset.

After a short break to train and rest, the division returned to the front line in mid-February and recommenced raiding the German lines. On 15 March, the 16th RWF conducted a raid on a similar scale, and with similar success, to the one conducted by the 10th SWB in November. During the same period, the Germans raided the British lines but managed to capture only two men. In addition, the division&#x27;s snipers were able to gain the upper hand over their German rivals. The divisional history notes that its patrols had gained &quot;control of No Man&#x27;s Land&quot;. Using what had been learned &quot;thorough previous reconnaissance&quot;, in addition to sniping, it was &quot;possible to move about unmolested in exposed trenches or even in the open&quot; in front of the German lines.

===German Spring Offensive===
On 21 March, Germany launched Operation Michael. This attack, which became the opening salvo of their Spring Offensive, aimed to deliver a single, decisive, war winning blow. The Germans intended to strike the southern British flank, to separate the British and French armies and then move north to engage the bulk of the British forces in France in a (battle of annihilation). The aim was to inflict such a defeat upon the British armies that the country would abandon the war, which in turn would force the French to sue for peace. After the first ten days of the German offensive, the casualties suffered by the 2nd and the 47th (London) Divisions were such that the 38th was ordered south to take up positions near Albert to relieve the two formations. The infantry moved south, and the divisional artillery remained at Armentières to support the 34th Division and subsequently took part in the Battle of the Lys. During this battle, the artillery went on to aid French forces before being transferred temporarily to the British 25th Division and conducting a fighting withdrawal. Its actions with both divisions earned the men of the divisional artillery plaudits from both divisional commanders.

Near Albert, the division had been kept in reserve until the night 11/12 April, when the division relieved the 12th (Eastern) Division. The Germans had captured high ground near Bouzincourt and Aveluy, overlooking the British lines. The division was ordered to retake this to deny the Germans the ability to observe the British positions and to gain observation positions overlooking the German lines in the Ancre valley. At 19:30 on 22 April, elements of the 113th and 115th Brigades attacked with support from Australian artillery. The German infantry, supported by a large number of machine guns and much artillery support, resisted the attack. Unable to drive the German infantry off all of the high ground, the division gained on a front, which achieved the objective. The 13th RWF managed to push further ahead and secured a section of high ground overlooking the German lines, fought off several German counter-attacks and took captive and six machine guns. The attack was costly, with the 13th RWF suffering over 400 wounded. The Germans made repeated attempts to push back the British and a big attack was repulsed on 9 May. The division attempted an abortive attack on another German-held ridge and conducted several raids on the German lines, before they were withdrawn for a short break on 20 May.

At this point, Major-General Charles Blackader left the division on medical grounds and was replaced by Major-General Thomas Cubitt. The division received replacements for casualties, disbanded the sniper company and engaged in rifle training. Once back on the line, the division returned to its previous routine of static warfare: conducting patrols and raids, as well as being subjected to raids and artillery bombardments.

===Final battles===
The division returned to the front, on 5 August, and took up position at Aveluy Wood. Shortly after, the Allied armies launched the Battle of Amiens, which led to the start of the Hundred Days Offensive, the culminating offensive of the war. In the 38th Division sector, the Fourth Army pushed the Germans back from their gains and onto the eastern bank of the Ancre. The 38th Division was assigned to cross the river and clear the German-held Thiepval ridge north of Albert.

On 21/22 August, elements of the 114th Brigade crossed the Ancre near Beaumont-Hamel, established a bridgehead, constructed a bridge and fought off German counter-attacks. The next day, further elements of the brigade crossed, securing a further bridgehead and repulsed more German attacks. The 113th Brigade crossed the river via bridges in Albert and assaulted Unsa Hill to the north-east, taking 194 prisoners, three artillery pieces and seven machine guns. The 115th Brigade crossed the river and cleared several German positions facing them, took at least 30 prisoners and captured 15 machine guns. The rest of the division crossed the following day, either wading or using the new bridges. During the early hours, the 114th Brigade launched an attack on Thiepval ridge while the other two brigades attacked Ovillers-la-Boisselle. By the end of the day, in heavy fighting, the division had seized the ridge, pushed the Germans back around Ovillers and taken 634 prisoners. The division history also records the capture of &quot;143 machine guns&quot;.

The division then advanced across the old Somme battlefield, as part of the Second Battle of the Somme. On 25 August, the 113th Brigade cleared Mametz Wood, and the 115th seized Bazentin le Petit. The following day, the 113th Brigade reached the outskirts of Longueval. During the fighting, Henry Weale was ordered to suppress German machine gun positions with his Lewis Gun. The gun jammed, and on his own initiative he rushed the German position killing the crew before charging another that resulted in the German crew fleeing. His actions, which earned him the VC, helped the brigade secure its position. The brigade then fought off numerous counter-attacks while the 115th Brigade surrounded and cleared High Wood (near Bazentin le Petit). Divisional casualties amounted to around 800, and at least 100 prisoners were taken along with the capture of 15 machine guns. The next day saw heavy fighting outside Longueval as the 113th and 114th Brigades attempted to advance, but they were halted by determined German resistance and repeated counter-attacks. The following days saw an exchange of artillery fire and further German counter-attacks repulsed. Longueval was seized late on 28 August after a partial German withdrawal. The division continued its advance, overcame German resistance and counter-attacks to capture Ginchy, Deville Wood and Lesbœufs but were held up by determined resistance at Morval. Following a day-long barrage, Morval was captured on 1 September after heavy fighting and the division pushed on to take Sailly-Saillisel and Étricourt-Manancourt. In an effort to halt the British advance, the Germans had dug in on the far side of the Canal du Nord and, in the words of the divisional history, &quot;smothered the Canal valley with gas shells&quot;. On 3 September, having noticed a weakness in the German positions, elements of the 13th and 14th Welsh stormed across the canal and cleared the eastern bank allowing the rest of the 114th Brigade to cross. On 5 September, the division was relieved and placed in reserve. During August and the beginning of September, the artillery had fired over 300,000 rounds in support of the fighting, 3,614 casualties had been suffered and 1,915 German prisoners taken.

On 11 September, the division returned to the line near Gouzeaucourt; the Germans had dug in along a ridge line from Épehy to Trescault intending to delay the British from reaching the Hindenburg Line. The Fourth Army was tasked with clearing these positions. On 18 September, the Battle of Épehy was fought. The division attacked at 05:40 with the 113th and 114th Brigades. For his role during the assault, William Allison White earned the VC. Alone, he assaulted a machine gun post that was hindering the advance, killing the defenders and capturing the gun. He then launched a second attack, accompanied by two others who were killed, to seize another German machine gun position killing a further five and again capturing the gun. In a third action, White led a small group to overwhelm a German defensive position that was also holding up the advance. He proceeded to organise the defence of the position, and fought off a German counterattack with heavy losses using captured machine guns. Both brigades were able to reach their objectives despite flanking fire, and fought off numerous counter-attacks. Despite this, the Germans were able to cling on to Gouzeaucourt. The battle cleared the German outposts in front of the Hindenburg Line, preparing the way for future operations. On 20 September, the division was pulled off the line for a period of rest.

Eight days later, the division returned in preparation for assaulting the Hindenburg Line. The division advanced, along with the Fourth Army, pressing the retreating Germans before halting at the Hindenburg support line, also known as the Le Catelet-Nauroy Line, due to determined German resistance. On 5 October, the line was breached by the division after the Germans evacuated it for their main position (Siegfried II Stellung, otherwise known as the Masnières-Beaurevoir line) near Villers-Outréaux. The German positions lay behind dense lines of barbed wire, supported by concrete pillboxes and machine gun positions hidden in small woods providing excellent fields of fire over otherwise open countryside. Faced with this level of defence, the division was halted and spent the following days reconnoitring the German positions preparing for an assault.

The division&#x27;s plan of attack was for the 115th Brigade to envelop Villers-Outréaux during dark and assault the village during daylight with tank support, while the 113th Brigade would clear the nearby Mortho Wood. The 114th Brigade would be held in reserve initially but brought up to exploit the success and push deeper into the German defensive belt. At 01:00 on 8 October, the attack began. The initial attack by the 115th Brigade failed, in turn impeding the 113th Brigade, which was unable to approach Mortho Wood due to concentrated German machine gun fire. It was during this first attack, that Jack Williams earned his VC. Elements of the 10th SWB had come under heavy German machine gun fire and suffered numerous casualties. Williams directed a Lewis gunner to suppress the German position, while he assaulted it single-handedly. Rushing the position, he took the surrender of 15 Germans. When they realised Williams was alone they attempted to kill him and re-man their positions. After a brief clash, in which five Germans were bayoneted, the survivors again surrendered to Williams. In silencing the position, he alleviated the danger to his unit and allowed the battalion to resume the advance. The entire 115th Brigade soon rallied, and achieved their initial objective while the 113th were able to gain a foothold near theirs. At 05:00, the 2nd RWF – following a friendly fire incident – assaulted Villers-Outréaux and cleared the village with tank support. At 08:00, the 114th Brigade was committed to the battle as orders to delay the advance arrived late. The troops were held up by undetected barbed wire and heavy German fire until 11:30, when they disengaged and pressed forward exploiting the success of the 115th Brigade. The divisional history commented that the attack &quot;progressed rapidly and resulted in a complete rout of the enemy&quot; and that the brigade was able to achieve its final objective on the Prémont–Esnes road. Meanwhile, the 113th Brigade engaged in heavy fighting to clear the German trenches around Mortho Wood. During this action, the division suffered 1,290 casualties and took 380 prisoners. The divisional history noted that 8 October was &quot;perhaps ... the stiffest fighting of the whole advance&quot;.

After the assault, the 33rd Division pursued the retreating German forces, while the 38th stayed close behind ready to take over the advance or assault strongly-held German positions as needed. On 9 October, Clary was liberated and the next day the divisional artillery was firing in support of the 33rd which had made contact with German forces. Over the next few days, the 33rd Division pursued the Germans to the River Selle and launched a bloody assault on the defended eastern bank during the opening stages of the Battle of the Selle. While a bridgehead was secured, it was abandoned due to losses and the 38th Division was moved forward. On the night of 13/14 October, the division took over the line near Troisvilles and Bertry. Over the next six days, the division prepared itself: conducting reconnaissance, constructing bridges and moving up heavy artillery. During these preparations, the Germans bombarded elements of the division&#x27;s artillery with gas shells.

On the night of 19/20 October, the division attacked. The footbridges were brought forward and the river crossed with ease but, the divisional history commented, the &quot;railway embankment on the far side was a much greater natural obstacle&quot; due to heavy rain and was &quot;heavily wired&quot; and defended. The 113th and 114th Brigades crossed the river, each supported by a tank, while the 115th was held in reserve to deal with German counter-attacks. Despite heavy German resistance and the tanks becoming bogged down in mud, the troops were able to seize the rail line by 02:30. The divisional history commended the 14th Welsh for their efforts during this action, the first to secure a bridgehead and then rolling up the German line to secure the right flank of the attack. Major-General Cubitt described the attack: having &quot;formed up in boggy ground, [the men] crossed a difficult river (for the fourth time since 21st August), attacked up a glacis swept by machine gun fire, stormed a precipitous railway embankment 40 to 50 feet high and in pouring rain, very slippery and deep going, in the hours of darkness, established [themselves] on the final objective&quot;. Elements of the division&#x27;s pioneers joined in the assault on the heights beyond the river and aided in the capture of the position. Despite several counter-attacks, the division held the high ground. The attack inflicted at least 225 casualties and resulted in the capture of 212 prisoners, a battery of artillery pieces and mortars.

With a bridgehead across the Selle secured, the 33rd Division (again supported by the 38th&#x27;s artillery) continued the advance with the 38th close behind. During this time, elements of the division supply train were stricken by an outbreak of Spanish flu. Following the 33rd, the division passed through the village of Forest, Croix-Caluyau and Englefontaine, before halting in front of the Forêt de Mormal. Here the division paused until 4 November and was subjected to artillery and aerial bombardments as well as minor skirmishes with German infantry. At 06:15 on 4 November, over a front, the 115th Brigade pushed forward subjected to a heavy German artillery bombardment. The brigade cleared fenced-off orchards before pushing into the forest against stiff resistance. They were followed by the 113th Brigade, who then leapfrogged ahead to achieve the division&#x27;s second objective inside the forest. A lull in the fighting followed as the artillery was moved forward. Afterwards, the 114th Brigade attacked reaching the division&#x27;s final objective, a road running through the forest, before nightfall. In heavy rain and complete darkness, the 13th Welsh carried on the advance. They surrounded the hamlets of Sarbaras and Tete Noir, capturing a garrison of 65 men, before pushing on towards Berliamont and taking 60 more prisoners. The division had breached the forest, allowing the 33rd Division to continue again advancing eastwards – this time to cross the Sambre. During this 24-hour period, the division had advanced , further than the flanking divisions, taken 522 prisoners, captured 23 artillery pieces and suffered at least 411 casualties.

On 7 November, the division relieved the 33rd in the pursuit of the Germans. Taking over the line near Dourlers, the division pushed east. By 11:00 on 11 November, the leading brigade was east of Dimechaux with advanced patrols in contact with German forces at Hestrud on the Belgian border. From the start of the Hundred Day Offensive until the signing of the armistice on 11 November, the division had advanced , taken 3,102 prisoners, seized 520 machine guns and captured 50 mortars and 43 artillery pieces. The division&#x27;s own losses during this period amounted to 8,681 men.

Historian Gary Sheffield commented that, since the division was &quot;employed on trench-holding duties from September 1917 to July 1918&quot;, it likely &quot;was not regarded by GHQ as an elite &#x27;storm&#x27; formation&quot;. He noted, &quot;judged by the results of their attacks during the Hundred Days&quot; the division &quot;was in a select band of elite divisions&quot; akin to the Australian, Canadian and a limited number of other British formations. Sheffield credited Cubitt, &quot;a hard-bitten, ruthless &#x27;fire-eater&#x27;&quot;, for the improved performance of the division during this period, along with the various breaks the division had away from the line when they were able to train and assimilate new knowledge that resulted in &quot;devolution of command&quot; which allowed command flexibility among lower ranks. In addition, Sheffield cited improved staff work and tactical doctrine and high morale, which had led to the ability of the division to carry out effective combined arms operations.

===Epilogue===

After the conclusion of fighting, the division was based around Aulnoye-Aymeries in France. The division was not chosen to be part of the British Army of the Rhine, the British occupation force to be based in the Rhineland. Instead, it was demobilised over a period of months. The first 3,000 soldiers were sent home during December, and the division ceased to exist by March 1919. Prior to the division&#x27;s disbandment, the remaining men were visited by Edward Prince of Wales (later Edward VIII).

During the course of the war, 4,419 of the division&#x27;s men were killed, 23,268 were wounded, and 1,693 reported missing. For acts of valour, five soldiers were (in some instances posthumously) awarded the Victoria Cross. In addition, the following awards (in several cases, multiple times) were bestowed: 86 Distinguished Service Orders, 447 Military Crosses, 254 Distinguished Conduct Medals, and 1,150 Military Medals; 453 men were mentioned in dispatches.

===Battle Insignia===
The practice of wearing battalion specific insignia (often called battle patches) in the B.E.F. began in mid 1915 with the arrival of units of Kitchener&#x27;s Armies and was widespread after the Somme Battles of 1916. The patches shown were adopted by the division during late 1917, and were designed to a brigade scheme of a simple shape for each brigade and a colour for the battalion (the colours and design changed for the 115th brigade). Originally worn at the top of both sleeves, the battle patch was retained on the left when the division sign began to be worn on the right.
==Second World War==

===Background===
During the 1930s, tensions increased between Germany and the United Kingdom and its allies. In late 1937 and throughout 1938, German demands for the annexation of Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia led to an international crisis. To avoid war, the British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain met with German Chancellor Adolf Hitler in September and brokered the Munich Agreement. The agreement averted a war and allowed Germany to annex the Sudetenland. Although Chamberlain had intended the agreement to lead to further peaceful resolution of issues, relations between both countries soon deteriorated. On 15 March 1939, Germany breached the terms of the agreement by invading and occupying the remnants of the Czech state.

On 29 March, British Secretary of State for War Leslie Hore-Belisha announced plans to increase the Territorial Army (TA), the reserve of the regular army made up of part-time volunteers, from 130,000 to 340,000 men and double the number of TA divisions. The plan was for existing units to recruit over their establishments, aided by an increase in pay for Territorials, the removal of restrictions on promotion which had hindered recruiting, the construction of better-quality barracks, and an increase in supper rations. The units would then form second-line divisions from cadres which could be increased. The 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division was created as a Second-Line unit, a duplicate of the First-Line 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division. In April, limited conscription was introduced. This resulted in 34,500 20-year-old militiamen being conscripted into the regular army, initially to be trained for six months before deployment to the forming second-line units. It was envisioned that the duplicating process and recruiting the required numbers of men would take no more than six months. Some TA divisions had made little progress by the time the Second World War began; others were able to complete this work within a matter of weeks. Issues arose from the lack of central guidance, in addition to the lack of facilities, equipment, and instructors.

===Formation and home defence===
The 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division became active on 18 September 1939; its constituent units had already formed and had been administered by the 53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division. The 38th was again composed of the 113th, 114th and 115th Infantry Brigades, and was placed under the initial command of Major-General Geoffrey Raikes.

In May, Major-General A. E. Williams assumed command. The division was initially assigned to Western Command, and by early 1940 was spread out along the River Severn in England and Wales. By summer, the division was under the command of III Corps and was based in North West England, around Liverpool, to conduct manoeuvres and training.

The war-time deployment of the Territorial Army envisioned it being deployed piecemeal, to reinforce the regular army already deployed to the European mainland, as equipment became available. The plan envisioned the deployment of the whole force in waves, as divisions completed their training, with the final divisions being deployed a year after the outbreak of war. As a result, the division did not leave the United Kingdom as the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) was evacuated from France during May and June 1940. On 28 October, Major-General Noel Irwin, who had commanded the 2nd Infantry Division during the latter stages of the fighting in France, was given command of the 38th.

In April 1941, the division was assigned to IV Corps and had moved to Sussex, the 18th Infantry Division having replaced them around Liverpool. In Sussex, the division was held in reserve and placed behind the 47th (London) Infantry Division and the 55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division which were defending the coast between Bognor Regis – in the west – to Beachy Head in the east. Michael Glover and Jonathan Riley note that while in reserve, the Royal Welch Fusiliers battalions of the 115th Brigade took part in coastal defence duties.

On 15 November 1941, Major-General Arthur Dowler took command of the division. On 1 December 1941, the division was placed on the lower establishment, having been earmarked for a static home defence role. During 1942, the division was assigned to V Corps and had shifted west to defend the Dorset coastline. On 27 and 28 February, the anti-aircraft platoon of the 4th Battalion, Monmouthshire Regiment, supported Operation Biting, the commando raid on Bruneval, France. On 23 April 1942, Major-General D. C. Butterworth was given command of the division. In July, the division lost the 10th Royal Welch Fusiliers to the Parachute Regiment. The division spent 1943 and early 1944 moving around the country spending time in Kent, Hertfordshire and Northumberland, and were assigned to II and XII Corps. In February 1944, 38th Division provided part of the &#x27;enemy&#x27; force in Exercise Eagle, a 12-day pre-invasion training exercise held on the Yorkshire Wolds for VIII Corps, which was to form part of 21st Army Group in the forthcoming Allied invasion of Normandy (Operation Overlord). By March, the 115th Infantry Brigade had formed &quot;&#x27;B&#x27; Marshalling Area&quot; and was aiding the movement of troops in preparation for Overlord.
By 1944, there were five lower establishment divisions allocated to home defence duties: the 38th, the 45th, the 47th (London), the 55th (West Lancashire) and the 61st Infantry divisions. These five divisions had a combined total of 17,845 men. Of this number, around 13,000 were available as replacements for the 21st Army Group fighting in France. The remaining 4,800 men were considered ineligible for service abroad at that time for a variety of reasons, including a lack of training, or being medically unfit. Over the next six months, up to 75 per cent of these men would be deployed to reinforce 21st Army Group after the completion of their training and certification of fitness. Specifically, the vast majority of the 1st Brecknockshire Battalion, South Wales Borderers were deployed to Normandy at the end of June as replacements to reinforce 21st Army Group, and by mid-July so had the 2nd Battalion, Herefordshire Light Infantry, resulting in that battalion being disbanded. Historian Stephen Hart commented that, by September, 21st Army Group &quot;had bled Home Forces dry of draftable riflemen&quot; after the losses suffered during the Battle of Normandy, leaving the army in Britain, with the exception of the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division, with just &quot;young lads, old men and the unfit&quot;.

Compounding the loss of men to reinforce 21st Army Group, on 3 July the 115th Infantry Brigade was withdrawn from the division. The brigade was earmarked for an operation to liberate the Channel Islands and was re-designated Force 135. Ultimately such an operation did not take place and the brigade was deployed to mainland Europe. During August, the 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division began to disperse. On 15 August, the divisional headquarters ceased commanding any subordinate units and by the end of the month the division was disbanded.

===Training===

During 1944, the British Army suffered a severe shortage of manpower. In an effort to downsize the army and consolidate as many men within as few formations as possible to maintain fighting strength and efficiency, the War Office began disbanding divisions, including the 80th Infantry (Reserve) Division. As part of this restructure, the decision was made to retain division numbers familiar to the British public. On 1 September 1944, the 38th Division was recreated as the 38th Infantry (Reserve) Division to replace the 80th as Western Command&#x27;s training formation. The new 38th Division was commanded by Major-General Lionel Howard Cox, who had previously commanded the 80th Division. At this point, the divisional insignia was worn only by the permanent members of the division.

The 38th, along with the 45th Holding, the 47th Infantry (Reserve) and the 48th Infantry (Reserve) Division, were used to complete the training of new army recruits. At the division, the soldiers were given five weeks of further training at the section, platoon and company level, before undertaking a final three-day exercise. Troops would then be ready to be sent overseas to join other formations.

Undertaking this role, for example, the 5th Battalion, King&#x27;s Shropshire Light Infantry – between 1944 and 1945 – trained over 4,000 replacements for other battalions within the regiment as well as the North Staffordshire Regiment. Having fulfilled its purpose, the division was disbanded at the end of the war. When the TA was reformed in 1947, the division was not re-raised.

==General officers commanding==

The division had the following commanders during the First World War:

The division had the following commanders during the Second World War:
==Orders of battle==


==See also==

* British Army Order of Battle (September 1939)
* Independent Company
* David Jones – poet and author of &quot;In Parenthesis&quot; based on his war-time experiences.
* Mametz Wood Memorial
* Johnnie Williams – captain of the Welsh rugby union team who was killed during the fighting at Mametz Wood.
* Hedd Wyn – poet who was killed during the Battle of Passchendaele.

==Notes==
 Footnotes

 Citations
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Lt-Gen H.G. Martin, &quot;The History of the Fifteenth Scottish Division 1939–1945&quot;, Edinburgh: Blackwood, 1948/Uckfield: Naval &amp; Military Press, 2014, ISBN 978-1-78331-085-2.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16057562" start="4" end="25" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="38th (Welsh) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057562" start="41" end="54" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="43rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057562" start="66" end="96" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057562" start="110" end="142" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="38th Infantry (Reserve) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="151" end="163" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="191" end="196" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="201" end="218" title="World War II" label="Second World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="233" end="241" title="Division (military)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="277" end="294" title="Herbert Kitchener" label="Herbert Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435813" start="302" end="310" title="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="417" end="435" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409751" start="772" end="787" title="baptism by fire" label="baptism by fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="818" end="837" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634717" start="1024" end="1048" title="Battle of Bazentin Ridge" label="Battle of Bazentin Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872039" start="1238" end="1261" title="Battle of Pilckem Ridge" label="Battle of Pilckem Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="1282" end="1303" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Third Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="1419" end="1442" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="1469" end="1491" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q489438" start="1566" end="1571" title="Ancre" label="Ancre"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="1597" end="1612" title="Hindenburg Line" label="Hindenburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q954049" start="1647" end="1652" title="Selle (Somme tributary)" label="Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q828519" start="1794" end="1821" title="Occupation of the Rhineland" label="Occupation of the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1957" end="1964" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="1973" end="2001" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="2065" end="2081" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345596" start="2208" end="2238" title="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="2492" end="2507" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="2527" end="2545" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644448" start="2712" end="2744" title="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division (United Kingdom)" label="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2993" end="3008" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q792340" start="3029" end="3052" title="German invasion of Belgium (1914)" label="Germany invaded Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160895" start="3106" end="3129" title="Treaty of London (1839)" label="Treaty of London (1839)"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="3197" end="3216" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="3351" end="3368" title="Herbert Kitchener" label="Herbert Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="3383" end="3409" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788796" start="3481" end="3492" title="war cabinet" label="war cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="3538" end="3560" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="parliamentary approval"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3593" end="3605" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794124" start="3651" end="3663" title="Army Council (1904)" label="Army Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="3852" end="3869" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="4622" end="4649" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="4650" end="4668" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245075" start="4964" end="4977" title="Monmouthshire (historic)" label="Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="5006" end="5015" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5017" end="5023" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="5028" end="5038" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662119" start="5193" end="5214" title="Llewelyn Wyn Griffith" label="Llewelyn Wyn Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547420" start="5630" end="5635" title="113th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="113th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547458" start="5637" end="5642" title="114th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="114th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547514" start="5647" end="5661" title="115th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="115th Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q752760" start="5702" end="5723" title="Royal Welch Fusiliers" label="Royal Welsh Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492283" start="5735" end="5756" title="South Wales Borderers" label="South Wales Borderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980559" start="5771" end="5785" title="Welch Regiment" label="Welsh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="5815" end="5828" title="Major General (United Kingdom)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099477" start="5829" end="5842" title="Ivor Philipps" label="Ivor Philipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454744" start="6368" end="6390" title="Saint David&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint David&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634823" start="6680" end="6693" title="31st Division (United Kingdom)" label="31st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="6832" end="6843" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025821" start="6867" end="6875" title="Pwllheli" label="Pwllheli"/>
<link wikidata="Q527467" start="6877" end="6887" title="Colwyn Bay" label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q996492" start="6889" end="6898" title="Llandudno" label="Llandudno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020203" start="6903" end="6907" title="Rhyl" label="Rhyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q609161" start="6947" end="6958" title="Abergavenny" label="Abergavenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="6998" end="7012" title="Recruit training" label="basic training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413045" start="7019" end="7026" title="Military parade" label="drilled"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="7094" end="7104" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="7255" end="7269" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="7638" end="7648" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q233913" start="7653" end="7666" title="Mary, Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood" label="Princess Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182980" start="7690" end="7702" title="Crawley Down" label="Crawley Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="7818" end="7829" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="7876" end="7884" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q738194" start="7976" end="7984" title="Larkhill Garrison" label="Larkhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="8562" end="8573" title="British Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="8587" end="8592" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348392" start="8614" end="8631" title="Pembroke Yeomanry" label="Pembroke Yeomanry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799162" start="8661" end="8668" title="Colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="8719" end="8739" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="8777" end="8790" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="8846" end="8863" title="Brigadier-general (United Kingdom)" label="Brigadier-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446566" start="8940" end="8961" title="Minister of Munitions" label="Minister of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931779" start="9042" end="9051" title="seniority" label="seniority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042235" start="9432" end="9440" title="XI Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638341" start="9482" end="9511" title="46th (North Midland) Division" label="46th (North Midland) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="9584" end="9592" title="Hand grenade" label="grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614132" start="9668" end="9683" title="Guards Division (United Kingdom)" label="Guards Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595720" start="9688" end="9711" title="19th (Western) Division" label="19th (Western) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="9836" end="9854" title="Nord-Pas-de-Calais" label="Nord-Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030579" start="9923" end="9932" title="Festubert" label="Festubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q993185" start="9934" end="9942" title="Givenchy-lès-la-Bassée" label="Givenchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631169" start="9944" end="9953" title="La Gorgue" label="La Gorgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q458711" start="9955" end="9963" title="Laventie" label="Laventie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025314" start="9968" end="9982" title="Neuve Chapelle" label="Neuve Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="10221" end="10228" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586821" start="10229" end="10241" title="Goronwy Owen (politician)" label="Goronwy Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="10289" end="10307" title="no man&amp;#x27;s land" label="no man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="10382" end="10393" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="10698" end="10721" title="mentioned in dispatches" label="mentioned in dispatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641785" start="10780" end="10813" title="61st (2nd South Midland) Division" label="61st (2nd South Midland) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042534" start="10869" end="10879" title="XVII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XVII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q223130" start="10887" end="10897" title="Third Army (United Kingdom)" label="Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="10915" end="10934" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q37646" start="11167" end="11179" title="River Somme" label="Somme valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971489" start="11198" end="11206" title="II Corps (United Kingdom)" label="II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q230071" start="11355" end="11368" title="Fourth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourth Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315239" start="11412" end="11424" title="Reserve Army (United Kingdom)" label="Reserve Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q317235" start="11457" end="11464" title="Bapaume" label="Bapaume"/>
<link wikidata="Q131329" start="11606" end="11611" title="Arras" label="Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454155" start="11629" end="11651" title="First Day on the Somme" label="first day on the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042561" start="11946" end="11954" title="XV Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q141976" start="11980" end="11988" title="Fricourt" label="Fricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q397026" start="11993" end="11999" title="Mametz, Somme" label="Mametz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644073" start="12025" end="12037" title="7th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631096" start="12073" end="12086" title="21st Division (United Kingdom)" label="21st Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932457" start="12763" end="12785" title="Lehr Infantry Regiment" label="Lehr Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q197613" start="12790" end="12813" title="17th Reserve Division (German Empire)" label="163rd Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="13114" end="13123" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="13339" end="13350" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481674" start="13545" end="13561" title="Enfilade and defilade" label="and their flanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="14257" end="14275" title="Lieutenant General (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant General"/>
<link wikidata="Q957699" start="14276" end="14287" title="Henry Horne, 1st Baron Horne" label="Henry Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q304673" start="14318" end="14325" title="platoon" label="platoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="14661" end="14668" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q312564" start="14669" end="14681" title="Douglas Haig, 1st Earl Haig" label="Douglas Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="15641" end="15648" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075633" start="16537" end="16554" title="Charles Blackader" label="Charles Blackader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735848" start="16598" end="16611" title="Herbert Watts" label="Herbert Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q678146" start="16845" end="16856" title="bombardment" label="bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17092" end="17108" title="Barrage (artillery)#moving barrage" label="creeping barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q909879" start="17222" end="17234" title="smoke screen" label="smoke screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="17657" end="17665" title="bayonets" label="bayonets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="19915" end="19928" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45183" start="20129" end="20141" title="flamethrower" label="flamethrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q991861" start="20504" end="20514" title="Gommecourt, Pas-de-Calais" label="Gommecourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474468" start="20532" end="20561" title="48th (South Midland) Division" label="48th (South Midland) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634717" start="20892" end="20906" title="Battle of Bazentin Ridge" label="Bazentin Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662093" start="21201" end="21213" title="Llewelyn Alberic Emilius Price-Davies" label="Price-Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335316" start="21796" end="21809" title="Ypres Salient" label="Ypres Salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q335752" start="22051" end="22066" title="Rudolph Lambart, 10th Earl of Cavan" label="Rudolph Lambart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042220" start="22068" end="22077" title="XIV Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XIV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q90754" start="22277" end="22284" title="redoubt" label="redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="22430" end="22449" title="hand-to-hand combat" label="hand-to-hand combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q221553" start="22739" end="22752" title="29th Division (United Kingdom)" label="29th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="22881" end="22892" title="Sulfur mustard" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872039" start="23130" end="23153" title="Battle of Pilckem Ridge" label="Battle of Pilckem Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q223199" start="23534" end="23562" title="3rd Guards Infantry Division (German Empire)" label="3rd Guards Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q223465" start="23591" end="23611" title="3rd Reserve Division (German Empire)" label="3rd Reserve Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170370" start="23616" end="23630" title="111th Infantry Division (German Empire)" label="111th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q92069" start="23675" end="23684" title="Pillbox (military)" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="23689" end="23695" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="23861" end="23876" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="24463" end="24481" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Arthur Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138128" start="24578" end="24600" title="James Llewellyn Davies" label="James Llewellyn Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="24612" end="24626" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="25342" end="25366" title="51st (Highland) Division" label="51st (Highland) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402739" start="25745" end="25761" title="Field hospital" label="dressing station"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005869" start="26430" end="26439" title="Ivor Rees" label="Ivor Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q193925" start="28863" end="28874" title="Armentières" label="Armentières"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057168" start="29493" end="29516" title="1st Division (Portugal)" label="1st Portuguese Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="29677" end="29693" title="German spring offensive" label="Spring Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208493" start="29870" end="29879" title="Leie" label="River Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635252" start="30690" end="30703" title="33rd Division (United Kingdom)" label="33rd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q152008" start="31820" end="31837" title="Operation Michael" label="Operation Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872822" start="32143" end="32165" title="battle of annihilation" label="battle of annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471075" start="32405" end="32408" title="2nd Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638515" start="32417" end="32430" title="47th (1/2nd London) Division" label="47th (London)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30940" start="32509" end="32515" title="Albert, Somme" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635405" start="32641" end="32654" title="34th Division (United Kingdom)" label="34th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088364" start="32689" end="32706" title="Battle of the Lys (1918)" label="Battle of the Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632247" start="32823" end="32836" title="25th Division (United Kingdom)" label="25th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548766" start="33104" end="33127" title="12th (Eastern) Division" label="12th (Eastern) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q386004" start="33171" end="33182" title="Bouzincourt" label="Bouzincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q45739" start="33187" end="33193" title="Aveluy" label="Aveluy"/>
<link wikidata="Q489438" start="33401" end="33413" title="Ancre" label="Ancre valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455448" start="33505" end="33525" title="Royal Australian Artillery" label="Australian artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788737" start="34422" end="34435" title="Thomas Cubitt (British Army officer)" label="Thomas Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q911448" start="34883" end="34899" title="Battle of Amiens (1918)" label="Battle of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130507" start="34931" end="34953" title="Hundred Days Offensive" label="Hundred Days Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q795615" start="35195" end="35203" title="Thiepval" label="Thiepval"/>
<link wikidata="Q781662" start="35298" end="35312" title="Beaumont-Hamel" label="Beaumont-Hamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q489920" start="36041" end="36062" title="Ovillers-la-Boisselle" label="Ovillers-la-Boisselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063735" start="36362" end="36388" title="Second Battle of the Somme (1918)" label="Second Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q45755" start="36464" end="36481" title="Bazentin" label="Bazentin le Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q313484" start="36545" end="36554" title="Longueval" label="Longueval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729939" start="36577" end="36588" title="Henry Weale" label="Henry Weale"/>
<link wikidata="Q373396" start="36651" end="36660" title="Lewis Gun" label="Lewis Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q157281" start="37611" end="37617" title="Ginchy" label="Ginchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156676" start="37636" end="37644" title="Lesbœufs" label="Lesbœufs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026341" start="37690" end="37696" title="Morval, Pas-de-Calais" label="Morval"/>
<link wikidata="Q710754" start="37819" end="37835" title="Sailly-Saillisel" label="Sailly-Saillisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q119887" start="37840" end="37860" title="Étricourt-Manancourt" label="Étricourt-Manancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q838591" start="37950" end="37963" title="Canal du Nord" label="Canal du Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117354" start="38580" end="38592" title="Gouzeaucourt" label="Gouzeaucourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81992" start="38641" end="38646" title="Épehy" label="Épehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024435" start="38650" end="38659" title="Trescault" label="Trescault"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="38709" end="38724" title="Hindenburg Line" label="Hindenburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q203234" start="38805" end="38820" title="Battle of Épehy" label="Battle of Épehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004378" start="38932" end="38953" title="William Allison White" label="William Allison White"/>
<link wikidata="Q596175" start="40128" end="40138" title="Le Catelet" label="Le Catelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q869374" start="40139" end="40145" title="Nauroy" label="Nauroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q748060" start="40343" end="40352" title="Masnières" label="Masnières"/>
<link wikidata="Q274740" start="40353" end="40363" title="Beaurevoir" label="Beaurevoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q696526" start="40375" end="40391" title="Villers-Outréaux" label="Villers-Outréaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="40896" end="40900" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115803" start="41358" end="41371" title="Jack Williams (VC)" label="Jack Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q507920" start="42695" end="42702" title="Prémont" label="Prémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068397" start="42703" end="42708" title="Esnes" label="Esnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064628" start="43227" end="43232" title="Clary, Nord" label="Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q954049" start="43441" end="43446" title="Selle (Somme tributary)" label="Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636294" start="43539" end="43558" title="Battle of the Selle" label="Battle of the Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q658080" start="43732" end="43743" title="Troisvilles" label="Troisvilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046194" start="43748" end="43754" title="Bertry" label="Bertry"/>
<link wikidata="Q948008" start="44959" end="44965" title="glacis" label="glacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="45760" end="45783" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="outbreak of Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064134" start="45856" end="45869" title="Croix-Caluyau" label="Croix-Caluyau"/>
<link wikidata="Q736452" start="45874" end="45887" title="Englefontaine" label="Englefontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078922" start="45920" end="45935" title="Forêt de Mormal" label="Forêt de Mormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="46237" end="46245" title="orchards" label="orchards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46751" end="46759" title="Sarbaras" label="Sarbaras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46764" end="46773" title="Tete Noir" label="Tete Noir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46833" end="46843" title="Berliamont" label="Berliamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q208267" start="47002" end="47008" title="Sambre" label="Sambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q468266" start="47295" end="47303" title="Dourlers" label="Dourlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066930" start="47388" end="47397" title="Dimechaux" label="Dimechaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q533279" start="47453" end="47460" title="Hestrud" label="Hestrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525924" start="47787" end="47801" title="Gary Sheffield (historian)" label="Gary Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824047" start="48170" end="48180" title="Australian Corps" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665617" start="48182" end="48190" title="Canadian Corps" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="48683" end="48691" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="48701" end="48707" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="48777" end="48790" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q43411" start="48884" end="48900" title="Aulnoye-Aymeries" label="Aulnoye-Aymeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="48958" end="48983" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q828519" start="49020" end="49042" title="Occupation of the Rhineland" label="based in the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="49278" end="49284" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="49285" end="49300" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="49635" end="49662" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="49669" end="49683" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q339016" start="49691" end="49718" title="Distinguished Conduct Medal" label="Distinguished Conduct Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584344" start="49731" end="49745" title="Military Medal" label="Military Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q714999" start="50450" end="50468" title="Causes of World War II" label="tensions increased"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="50477" end="50484" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="50493" end="50507" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="50516" end="50522" title="Allies of World War II" label="allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="50595" end="50606" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5791104" start="50635" end="50655" title="international crisis" label="international crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="50683" end="50697" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="50698" end="50717" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="50734" end="50744" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="50745" end="50757" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="50788" end="50804" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="50857" end="50862" title="Annexation" label="annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010024" start="51118" end="51149" title="Second Czechoslovak Republic" label="the remnants of the Czech state"/>
<link wikidata="Q122522" start="51200" end="51219" title="Leslie Hore-Belisha" label="Leslie Hore-Belisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="51252" end="51268" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144991" start="51279" end="51286" title="Military reserve force" label="reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="51393" end="51405" title="Division (military)" label="TA divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345596" start="51861" end="51891" title="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="51911" end="51923" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="52304" end="52320" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534851" start="52854" end="52869" title="Geoffrey Raikes" label="Geoffrey Raikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372763" start="52894" end="52908" title="Aubrey Williams (British Army officer)" label="A. E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987739" start="52965" end="52980" title="Western Command (United Kingdom)" label="Western Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="53025" end="53037" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971311" start="53109" end="53118" title="III Corps (United Kingdom)" label="III Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="53136" end="53154" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="53646" end="53673" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="53684" end="53705" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuated from France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047013" start="53761" end="53771" title="Noel Irwin" label="Noel Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975536" start="53945" end="53953" title="IV Corps (United Kingdom)" label="IV Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="53971" end="53977" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557606" start="53983" end="54005" title="18th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="18th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748736" start="54151" end="54191" title="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q890621" start="54231" end="54243" title="Bognor Regis" label="Bognor Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q812895" start="54263" end="54274" title="Beachy Head" label="Beachy Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798501" start="54481" end="54494" title="Arthur Dowler" label="Arthur Dowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907724" start="54693" end="54700" title="V Corps (United Kingdom)" label="V Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="54736" end="54742" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934281" start="54825" end="54847" title="Monmouthshire Regiment" label="Monmouthshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q304403" start="54859" end="54875" title="Operation Biting" label="Operation Biting"/>
<link wikidata="Q831290" start="54898" end="54906" title="Saint-Jouin-Bruneval" label="Bruneval"/>
<link wikidata="Q95614055" start="54948" end="54965" title="Donald Butterworth" label="D. C. Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642567" start="55032" end="55058" title="6th (Royal Welch) Parachute Battalion" label="10th Royal Welch Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q197217" start="55066" end="55084" title="Parachute Regiment (United Kingdom)" label="Parachute Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="55168" end="55172" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="55174" end="55187" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="55192" end="55206" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353530" start="55236" end="55245" title="XII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600864" start="55395" end="55410" title="Yorkshire Wolds" label="Yorkshire Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316746" start="55415" end="55425" title="VIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="VIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="55453" end="55468" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="55507" end="55515" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="55517" end="55535" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638232" start="55799" end="55803" title="45th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="45th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641812" start="55859" end="55882" title="61st Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="61st Infantry divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738082" start="56608" end="56636" title="Herefordshire Light Infantry" label="Herefordshire Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972841" start="56767" end="56778" title="Commander-in-Chief, Home Forces" label="Home Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640242" start="56923" end="56955" title="52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division" label="52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="57173" end="57217" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="an operation to liberate the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="57791" end="57801" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644448" start="57844" end="57876" title="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division (United Kingdom)" label="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794901" start="58200" end="58217" title="Lionel Howard Cox" label="Lionel Howard Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474468" start="58438" end="58470" title="48th (South Midland) Division" label="48th Infantry (Reserve) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497253" start="58608" end="58615" title="Section (military unit)" label="section"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="58629" end="58636" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q357104" start="58681" end="58689" title="Military exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064425" start="58972" end="59000" title="North Staffordshire Regiment" label="North Staffordshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969479" start="59363" end="59408" title="British Army Order of Battle (September 1939)" label="British Army Order of Battle (September 1939)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016500" start="59411" end="59430" title="Independent Company" label="Independent Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q725689" start="59433" end="59444" title="David Jones (artist-poet)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010393" start="59472" end="59486" title="In Parenthesis" label="In Parenthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16509295" start="59530" end="59550" title="Mametz Wood Memorial" label="Mametz Wood Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182987" start="59553" end="59569" title="Johnny Williams (rugby player 1882–1916)" label="Johnnie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="59587" end="59609" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Welsh rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388537" start="59663" end="59671" title="Hedd Wyn" label="Hedd Wyn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139727" wikidata="Q2289248" url="?curid=1139727" title="Norte Grande (Azores)">
<text>Norte Grande is a civil parish in the municipality of Velas on the Portuguese island of São Jorge in the Azores; owing to the existence of an ecumenical faith community throughout its history, the parish has also taken on the name of its religious invocation (&quot;Nossa Senhora dos Neves&quot;, or &quot;Neves&quot; for short). The population in 2011 was 532, in an area of 31.85 km2.

==History==

The parish of Norte Grande it has been one of the largest populations on the island; by 1570, its importance along the north coast justified the construction of a road into the areas around Neves.

It was around the primitive parochial church of Norte Grande (the Church of Our Lady of the Snows), that the townsfolk encircled officials responsible for collecting the medieval tithes in 1694. This event was part of the Taro Revolt, when tax collectors were sent to the island to collect a tithe for taro cultivated. Indignant Calhetense gathered in Norte Grande, then encircled those officials in the church, who had taken refuge from the angry farmers, who refused to pay the excessive charge on a staple.

==Geography==
Norte Grande straddles the interior crest and northern coast of São Jorge, approximately the middle of the island. Apart from an interior that is covered in spatter cones, the parish is dotted by sea level debris fields called &quot;fajãs&quot;. During the settlement period these became sites of colonization, since the northern coast is wall of cliffs, historically accessible by foot or pack-animal. There are few settlements in the relatively sparse interior, apart from the two primary fajãs (Fajã da Aeira and Fajã do Ouvidor), only two many settlements are observable: Outeiro da Cruz and Neves. Between these settlements and the southern border are plains of agricultural and forested land, in addition to many inactive volcanic cones.

==Economy==
The parish is home to a milk processing factory, used in the production of the island&#x27;s epitimous Queijo de São Jorge, a protected denomination (DOP) of cheeses.

==Culture==

Norte Grande is the seat of the &quot;Sociedade Filarmónica Recreio Nortense&quot;, founded in 1931, one of the premier philharmonic bands on the island.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2289248" start="0" end="12" title="Norte Grande (Azores)" label="Norte Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131296" start="18" end="30" title="Freguesia (Portugal)" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633408" start="38" end="50" title="Concelho" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010468" start="54" end="59" title="Velas, Azores" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="67" end="77" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="88" end="97" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="105" end="111" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686507" start="821" end="832" title="Taro Revolt" label="Taro Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369860" start="1984" end="2003" title="Queijo de São Jorge" label="Queijo de São Jorge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139731" wikidata="Q6795547" url="?curid=1139731" title="Maxillary">
<text>Maxillary means &quot;related to the maxilla (upper jaw bone)&quot;. Terms containing &quot;maxillary&quot; include:

*Maxillary artery
*Maxillary nerve
*Maxillary prominence
*Maxillary sinus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182895" start="37" end="44" title="maxilla" label="maxilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q180284" start="52" end="55" title="jaw" label="jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q498171" start="119" end="135" title="Maxillary artery" label="Maxillary artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897537" start="137" end="152" title="Maxillary nerve" label="Maxillary nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795554" start="154" end="174" title="Maxillary prominence" label="Maxillary prominence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498170" start="176" end="191" title="Maxillary sinus" label="Maxillary sinus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139735" wikidata="Q5865727" url="?curid=1139735" title="History of Northumberland">
<text>Northumberland, England&#x27;s northernmost county, is a land where Roman occupiers once guarded a walled frontier, Anglian invaders fought with Celtic natives, and Norman lords built castles to suppress rebellion and defend a contested border with Scotland. The present-day county is a vestige of an independent kingdom that once stretched from Edinburgh to the Humber, hence its name, meaning literally &#x27;north of the Humber&#x27;. Reflecting its tumultuous past, Northumberland has more castles than any other county in England, and the greatest number of recognised battle sites. Once an economically important region that supplied much of the coal that powered the industrial revolution, Northumberland is now a primarily rural county with a small and gradually shrinking population.

==Prehistory==

As attested by many instances of rock art, the Northumberland region has a rich prehistory. Archeologists have studied a Mesolithic structure at Howick, which dates to 7500 BC and was identified as Britain&#x27;s oldest house until it lost this title in 2010 when the discovery of the even older Star Carr house in North Yorkshire was announced, which dates to 8770 BC. They have also found tools, ornaments, building structures and cairns dating to the bronze and iron ages, when the area was occupied by Brythonic Celtic peoples who had migrated from continental Europe, most likely the Votadini whose territory stretched from Edinburgh and the Firth of Forth to Northumberland. It is not clear where the boundary between the Votadini and the other large tribe, the Brigantes, was, although it probably frequently shifted as a result of wars and as smaller tribes and communities changed allegiances. Unlike neighbouring tribes, Votadini farms were surrounded by large walls, banks and ditches and the people made offerings of fine metal objects, but never wore massive armlets. There are also at least three very large hillforts in their territory (Yeavering Bell, Eildon Hill and Traprain Law, the latter two now in Scotland), each was located on the top of a prominent hill or mountain. The hillforts may have been used for over a thousand years by this time as places of refuge and as places for meetings for political and religious ceremonies. Duddo Five Stones in North Northumberland and the Goatstones near Hadrian&#x27;s Wall are stone circles dating from the Bronze Age.

==Roman occupation==

When Gnaeus Julius Agricola was appointed Roman governor of Britain in 78 AD, most of northern Britain was still controlled by native British tribes. During his governorship Agricola extended Roman control north of Eboracum (York) and into what is now Scotland. Roman settlements, garrisons and roads were established throughout the Northumberland region.

The northern frontier of the Roman occupation fluctuated between Pons Aelius (now Newcastle) and the Forth. Hadrian&#x27;s Wall was completed by about 130 AD, to define and defend the northern boundary of Roman Britain. By 142, the Romans had completed the Antonine Wall, a more northerly defensive border lying between the Forth and Clyde. However, by 164 they abandoned the Antonine Wall to consolidate defences at Hadrian&#x27;s Wall.

Two important Roman roads in the region were the Stanegate and Dere Street, the latter extending through the Cheviot Hills to locations well north of the Tweed. Located at the intersection of these two roads, Coria (Corbridge), a Roman supply-base, was the most northerly large town in the Roman Empire. The Roman forts of Vercovicium (Housesteads) on Hadrian&#x27;s Wall, and Vindolanda (Chesterholm) built to guard the Stanegate, had extensive civil settlements surrounding them.

The Celtic peoples living in the region between the Tyne and the Forth were known to the Romans as the Votadini. When not under direct Roman rule, they functioned as a friendly client kingdom, a somewhat porous buffer against the more warlike Picts to the north.

The gradual Roman withdrawal from Britain in the 5th century led to a poorly documented age of conflict and chaos as different peoples contested territories in northern Britain.

=== Archaeology ===
Nearly 2000-year-old Roman boxing gloves were uncovered at Vindolanda in 2017 by the Vidolanda Trust experts led by Dr Andrew Birley. According to the Guardian, being similar in style and function to the full-hand modern boxing gloves, these two gloves found at Vindolanda look like leather bands date back to 120 AD. It is suggested that based on their difference from gladiator gloves warriors using this type of gloves had no purpose to kill each other. These gloves were probably used in a sport for promoting fighting skills. The gloves are currently displayed at Vindolanda&#x27;s museum.

==Anglian Kingdoms of Deira, Bernicia and Northumbria==
Conquests by Anglian invaders led to the establishment of the kingdoms of Deira and Bernicia. The first Anglian settlement was effected in 547 by Ida, who, accompanied by his six sons, pushed through the narrow strip of territory between the Cheviots and the sea, and set up a fortress at Bamburgh, which became the royal seat of the Bernician kings. About the end of the 6th century Bernicia was first united with the rival kingdom of Deira under the rule of Æthelfrith of Northumbria, and the district between the Humber and the Forth became known as the kingdom of Northumbria.

After Æthelfrith was killed in battle around 616, Edwin of Deira became king of Northumbria. Æthelfrith&#x27;s son Oswald fled northwest to the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata where he was converted to Christianity by the monks of Iona. Meanwhile, Paulinus, the first bishop of York, converted King Edwin to Roman Christianity and began an extensive program of conversion and baptism. By his time the kingdom must have reached the west coast, as Edwin is said to have conquered the islands of Anglesey and Man. Under Edwin the Northumbrian kingdom became the chief power in Britain. However, when Cadwallon ap Cadfan defeated Edwin at Hatfield Chase in 633, Northumbria was divided into the former kingdoms of Bernicia and Deira and Christianity suffered a temporary decline.

In 634, Oswald defeated Cadwallon ap Cadfan at the Battle of Heavenfield, resulting in the re-unification of Northumbria. Oswald re-established Christianity in the kingdom and assigned a bishopric at Hexham, where Wilfrid erected a famous early English church. Reunification was followed by a period of Northumbrian expansion into Pictish territory and growing dominance over the Celtic kingdoms of Dál Riata and Strathclyde to the west. Northumbrian encroachments were abruptly curtailed in 685, when Ecgfrith suffered complete defeat by a Pictish force at the Battle of Nechtansmere.

===Monastic culture===
When Saint Aidan came at the request of Oswald to preach to the Northumbrians he chose the island of Lindisfarne as the site of his church and monastery, and made it the head of the diocese which he founded in 635. For some years the see continued in peace, numbering among its bishops Saint Cuthbert, but in 793 Vikings landed on the island and burnt the settlement, killing many of the monks. The survivors, however, rebuilt the church and continued to live there until 883, when, through fear of a second invasion of the Danes, they fled inland, taking with them the body of Cuthbert and other holy relics.

Against this background, the monasteries of Northumbria developed some remarkably influential cultural products. Cædmon, a monk at Whitby Abbey, authored one of the earliest surviving examples of Old English poetry some time before 680. The Lindisfarne Gospels, an early example of insular art, is attributed to Eadfrith, the bishop of Lindisfarne from 698 to 721. Stenton (1971, p. 191) describes the book as follows.

In mere script it is no more than an admirable example of a noble style, and the figure drawing of its illustrations, though probably based on classical models, has more than a touch of &quot;naïveté&quot;. Its unique importance is due to the beauty and astonishing intricacy of its decoration. The nature of its ornament connects it very closely with a group of Irish manuscripts of which the &quot;Book of Kells&quot; is the most famous.
Bede&#x27;s writing, at the Northumbrian monasteries at Wearmouth and Jarrow, gained him a reputation as the most learned scholar of his age. His work is notable for both its breadth (encompassing history, theology, science and literature) and quality, exemplified by the rigorous use of citation. Bede&#x27;s most famous work is &quot;Ecclesiastical History of the English People&quot;, which is regarded as a highly influential early model of historical scholarship.

==Earldom of Northumbria==

The kingdom of Northumbria ceased to exist in 927, when it was incorporated into England as an earldom by Athelstan, the first king of a united England.. In 937, Athelstan&#x27;s victory over a combined Norse-Celtic force in the battle of Brunanburh secured England&#x27;s control of its northern territory.

The Scottish king Indulf captured Edinburgh in 954, which thenceforth remained in possession of the Scots. His successors made repeated attempts to extend their territory southwards. Malcolm II was finally successful, when, in 1018, he annihilated the Northumbrian army at Carham on the Tweed, and Eadulf the earl of Northumbria ceded all his territory to the north of that river as the price of peace. Henceforth Lothian, consisting of the former region of Northumbria between the Forth and the Tweed, remained in possession of the Scottish kings.

The term Northumberland was first recorded in its contracted modern sense in 1065 in an entry in the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; relating to a rebellion against Tostig Godwinson.

==Norman Conquest==

The vigorous resistance of Northumbria to William the Conqueror was punished by ruthless harrying, mostly south of the River Tees. As recounted by the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot;:
A.D. 1068. This year King William gave Earl Robert the earldom
over Northumberland; but the landsmen attacked him in the town of
Durham, and slew him, and nine hundred men with him. Soon
afterwards Edgar Etheling came with all the Northumbrians to
York; and the townsmen made a treaty with him: but King William
came from the South unawares on them with a large army, and put
them to flight, and slew on the spot those who could not escape;
which were many hundred men; and plundered the town. St. Peter&#x27;s
minster he made a profanation, and all other places also he
despoiled and trampled upon; and the ethelling went back again to
Scotland.
The Normans rebuilt the Anglian monasteries of Lindisfarne, Hexham and Tynemouth, and founded Norman abbeys at Newminster (1139), Alnwick (1147), Brinkburn (1180), Hulne, and Blanchland. Castles were built at Newcastle (1080), Alnwick (1096), Bamburgh (1131), Harbottle (1157), Prudhoe (1172), Warkworth (1205), Chillingham, Ford (1287), Dunstanburgh (1313), Morpeth, Langley (1350), Wark on Tweed and Norham (1121), the latter an enclave of the palatine bishops of Durham.

Northumberland county is not mentioned in the Domesday Survey, but the account of the issues of the county, as rendered by Odard the sheriff, is entered in the Great Roll of the Exchequer for 1131.

In 1237, Scotland renounced claims to Northumberland county in the Treaty of York.

During the reign of Edward I (1272–1307), the county of Northumberland was the district between the Tees and the Tweed, and had within it several scattered liberties subject to other powers: Durham, Sadberge, Bedlingtonshire, and Norhamshire belonging to the bishop of Durham; Hexhamshire to the archbishop of York; Tynedale to the king of Scotland; Emildon to the earl of Lancaster; and Redesdale to Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus. These franchises were exempt from the ordinary jurisdiction of the shire. Over time, some were incorporated within the county: Tynedale in 1495; Hexhamshire in 1572; and Norhamshire, Islandshire and Bedlingtonshire by the Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844.

* Council of the North

The county court for Northumberland was held at different times at Newcastle, Alnwick and Morpeth, until by statute of 1549 it was ordered that the court should thenceforth be held in the town and castle of Alnwick. Under the same statute the sheriffs of Northumberland, who had been in the habit of appropriating the issues of the county to their private use, were required thereafter to deliver in their accounts to the Exchequer in the same manner as the sheriffs of other counties.

==Border wars, reivers and rebels==

From the Norman Conquest until the union of England and Scotland under James I and VI, Northumberland was the scene of perpetual inroads and devastations by the Scots. Norham, Alnwick and Wark were captured by David I of Scotland in the wars of Stephen&#x27;s reign. In 1174, during his invasion of Northumbria, William I of Scotland, also known as William the Lion, was captured by a party of about four hundred mounted knights, led by Ranulf de Glanvill. This incident became known as the Battle of Alnwick. In 1295, Robert de Ros and the earls of Athol and Menteith ravaged Redesdale, Coquetdale and Tynedale. In 1314 the county was ravaged by king Robert Bruce. And so dire was the Scottish threat in 1382, that by special enactment the earl of Northumberland was ordered to remain on his estates to protect the border. In 1388, Henry Percy was taken prisoner and 1500 of his men slain at the battle of Otterburn, immortalised in the ballad of Chevy Chase.

Alnwick, Bamburgh and Dunstanburgh were garrisoned for the Lancastrian cause in 1462, but after the Yorkist victories of Hexham and Hedgley Moor in 1464, Alnwick and Dunstanburgh surrendered, and Bamburgh was taken by storm.

In September 1513, King James IV of Scotland was killed at the Battle of Flodden on Branxton Moor.

Roman Catholic support in Northumberland for Mary, Queen of Scots, led to the Rising of the North in 1569.

*Harbottle
*Border Reivers
*Peel tower

==Union and Civil War==
After uniting the English and Scottish thrones, James VI and I sharply curbed the lawlessness of the border reivers and brought relative peace to the region. There were Church of Scotland congregations in Northumberland in the 17th and 18th centuries.

During the Civil War of the 17th century, Newcastle was garrisoned for the king by the earl of Newcastle, but in 1644 it was captured by the Scots under the earl of Leven, and in 1646 Charles I was led there a captive under the charge of David Leslie.

Many of the chief Northumberland families were ruined in the Jacobite rebellion of 1715.

==Industrialisation==
The mineral resources of the area appear to have been exploited to some extent from remote times. It is certain that coal was used by the Romans in Northumberland, and some coal ornaments found at Angerton have been attributed to the 7th century. In a 13th-century grant to Newminster Abbey a road for the conveyance of sea coal from the shore about Blyth is mentioned, and the Blyth coal field was worked throughout the 14th and 15th centuries. The coal trade on the Tyne did not exist to any extent before the 13th century, but from that period it developed rapidly, and Newcastle acquired the monopoly of the river shipping and coal trade. Lead was exported from Newcastle in the 12th century, probably from Hexhamshire, the lead mines of which were very prosperous throughout the 16th and 17th centuries. In a charter from Richard I to Hugh de Puiset creating him earl of Northumberland, mines of silver and iron are mentioned. A salt pan is mentioned at Warkworth in the 12th century; in the 13th century the salt industry flourished at the mouth of the river Blyth, and in the 15th century formed the principal occupation of the inhabitants of North and South Shields. In the reign of Elizabeth I, glass factories were set up at Newcastle by foreign refugees, and the industry spread rapidly along the Tyne. Tanning, both of leather and of nets, was largely practised in the 13th century, and the salmon fisheries in the Tyne were famous in the reign of Henry I.

*John Smeaton designed the Coldstream Bridge and a bridge at Hexham.
*Stephenson&#x27;s &quot;Rocket&quot;
* Invention of the steam turbine by Charles Algernon Parsons

==See also==
* Northumbria
* Northumbria&#x27;s golden age
* Earl of Northumberland
* History of England
* Kingdom of England
* Timeline of Northumbria and Northumberland

==References==
* Stenton, F. M. (1971). &quot;Anglo-Saxon England&quot;. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
* Trevelyan, G. M. (1959). &quot;A shortened history of England&quot;. New York City: Pelican.
* Waters, I. (1999). Northumberland: England&#x27;s Border Country. &quot;Contemporary Review, 275&quot;(1605), 203–210.

==Further reading==

==External links==
* Northumbrian Rock Art on the British Rock Art Collection
* Brigantium
* The Gododdin (BBC)
* History of Bamburgh
* Northumberland Rock Art
* History of the Northumbrian Smallpipes
* Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 1052–1069
* Keys To The Past – archaeological website covering Northumberland and County Durham
* Glassworks on the Tyne
* Photographs of Northumberland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="0" end="14" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="16" end="23" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q659" start="31" end="36" title="north" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="44" end="50" title="county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="68" end="73" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="346" end="355" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="363" end="369" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="494" end="500" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="674" end="695" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="843" end="851" title="rock art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="857" end="871" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="931" end="941" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041582" start="955" end="961" title="Howick house" label="Howick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299200" start="1106" end="1121" title="Star Carr house" label="Star Carr house"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1264" end="1270" title="Bronze Age" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1275" end="1279" title="Iron Age" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="1316" end="1325" title="Celtic Britons" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="1326" end="1330" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q534149" start="1399" end="1407" title="Votadini" label="Votadini"/>
<link wikidata="Q500393" start="1578" end="1587" title="Brigantes" label="Brigantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051018" start="1962" end="1976" title="Yeavering Bell" label="Yeavering Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049397" start="1978" end="1989" title="Eildon Hill" label="Eildon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119359" start="1994" end="2006" title="Traprain Law" label="Traprain Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341252" start="2261" end="2278" title="Duddo Five Stones" label="Duddo Five Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533466" start="2307" end="2321" title="the Goatstones" label="the Goatstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="2327" end="2346" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935728" start="2351" end="2363" title="stone circle" label="stone circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="2421" end="2443" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269118" start="2458" end="2483" title="Roman governors of Britain" label="Roman governor of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="2641" end="2645" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227963" start="2838" end="2849" title="Pons Aelius" label="Pons Aelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="2855" end="2864" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="2874" end="2879" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="2881" end="2900" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2978" end="2991" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="3030" end="3043" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="3097" end="3102" title="Firth of Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="3107" end="3112" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510781" start="3261" end="3270" title="Stanegate" label="Stanegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q933249" start="3275" end="3286" title="Dere Street" label="Dere Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q383335" start="3321" end="3334" title="Cheviot Hills" label="Cheviot Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="3366" end="3371" title="River Tweed" label="Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819299" start="3421" end="3426" title="Coria (Corbridge)" label="Coria"/>
<link wikidata="Q122953" start="3428" end="3437" title="Corbridge" label="Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3502" end="3514" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812832" start="3535" end="3546" title="Vercovicium" label="Vercovicium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="3589" end="3599" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510781" start="3633" end="3642" title="Stanegate" label="Stanegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q534149" start="3798" end="3806" title="Votadini" label="Votadini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446134" start="3872" end="3886" title="Roman client kingdoms in Britain" label="client kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4179" end="4184" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="4217" end="4227" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130005" start="4277" end="4290" title="Andrew Birley" label="Andrew Birley"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="4823" end="4830" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q506008" start="4884" end="4889" title="Deira (kingdom)" label="Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q623751" start="4894" end="4902" title="Bernicia" label="Bernicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437743" start="4956" end="4959" title="Ida of Bernicia" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="5099" end="5107" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q272196" start="5270" end="5280" title="Æthelfrith" label="Æthelfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="5378" end="5389" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="5442" end="5456" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin of Deira"/>
<link wikidata="Q336016" start="5507" end="5513" title="Oswald of Northumbria" label="Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="5536" end="5542" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="5554" end="5563" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="5619" end="5623" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q506645" start="5636" end="5644" title="Paulinus of York" label="Paulinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="5656" end="5670" title="bishop of York" label="bishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="5881" end="5889" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="5894" end="5897" title="Isle of Man" label="Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969259" start="5962" end="5969" title="Britain in the Middle Ages" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q962398" start="5985" end="6004" title="Cadwallon ap Cadfan" label="Cadwallon ap Cadfan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758473" start="6023" end="6037" title="Battle of Hatfield Chase" label="Hatfield Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q956923" start="6216" end="6237" title="Battle of Heavenfield" label="Battle of Heavenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="6352" end="6361" title="Diocese" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q947400" start="6365" end="6371" title="Hexham" label="Hexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q719721" start="6379" end="6386" title="Wilfrid" label="Wilfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q225890" start="6578" end="6589" title="Kingdom of Strathclyde" label="Strathclyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q453676" start="6667" end="6675" title="Ecgfrith of Northumbria" label="Ecgfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q961243" start="6727" end="6749" title="Battle of Dun Nechtain" label="Battle of Nechtansmere"/>
<link wikidata="Q132148" start="6780" end="6791" title="Aidan of Lindisfarne" label="Saint Aidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="6876" end="6887" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="6957" end="6964" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="7009" end="7012" title="Episcopal see" label="see"/>
<link wikidata="Q504518" start="7061" end="7075" title="Cuthbert of Lindisfarne" label="Saint Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="7088" end="7095" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q381292" start="7499" end="7505" title="Cædmon" label="Cædmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469493" start="7517" end="7529" title="Whitby Abbey" label="Whitby Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="7582" end="7593" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q80935" start="7627" end="7646" title="Lindisfarne Gospels" label="Lindisfarne Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q612118" start="7668" end="7679" title="insular art" label="insular art"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="8206" end="8219" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="8246" end="8250" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101170" start="8302" end="8311" title="Wearmouth-Jarrow" label="Wearmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q782155" start="8316" end="8322" title="Jarrow" label="Jarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q661541" start="8582" end="8626" title="Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum" label="Ecclesiastical History of the English People"/>
<link wikidata="Q170017" start="8850" end="8859" title="Athelstan of England" label="Athelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="8888" end="8895" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246615" start="8973" end="8993" title="battle of Brunanburh" label="battle of Brunanburh"/>
<link wikidata="Q363132" start="9071" end="9077" title="Indulf of Scotland" label="Indulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="9087" end="9096" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q332136" start="9236" end="9246" title="Malcolm II" label="Malcolm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609630" start="9326" end="9332" title="Carham" label="Carham"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="9467" end="9474" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="9710" end="9731" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="9770" end="9786" title="Tostig Godwinson" label="Tostig Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="9852" end="9873" title="William the Conqueror" label="William the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703402" start="9899" end="9907" title="Harrying of the North" label="harrying"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="9929" end="9939" title="River Tees" label="River Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="10647" end="10654" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17643670" start="10754" end="10764" title="Newminster Abbey" label="Newminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002826" start="10773" end="10780" title="Alnwick" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968406" start="10789" end="10798" title="Brinkburn Priory" label="Brinkburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17646138" start="10807" end="10812" title="Hulne Priory" label="Hulne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543086" start="10818" end="10828" title="Blanchland" label="Blanchland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865660" start="10852" end="10861" title="History of Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320427" start="10870" end="10877" title="Alnwick Castle" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026185" start="10886" end="10894" title="Bamburgh Castle" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q776558" start="10903" end="10912" title="Harbottle" label="Harbottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090114" start="10921" end="10928" title="Prudhoe" label="Prudhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q922422" start="10937" end="10946" title="Warkworth Castle" label="Warkworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072990" start="10955" end="10966" title="Chillingham Castle" label="Chillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571383" start="10968" end="10972" title="Ford, Northumberland" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q515105" start="10981" end="10993" title="Dunstanburgh Castle" label="Dunstanburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q736785" start="11002" end="11009" title="Morpeth, Northumberland" label="Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969643" start="11011" end="11018" title="Langley Castle" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17546463" start="11027" end="11040" title="Wark on Tweed Castle" label="Wark on Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q388705" start="11045" end="11051" title="Norham Castle" label="Norham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="11074" end="11081" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="11109" end="11115" title="Durham, England" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="11164" end="11179" title="Domesday Survey" label="Domesday Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="11296" end="11305" title="Exchequer" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230310" start="11384" end="11398" title="Treaty of York" label="Treaty of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="11421" end="11429" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q515022" start="11501" end="11505" title="River Tees" label="Tees"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="11514" end="11519" title="River Tweed" label="Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883346" start="11557" end="11566" title="Liberty (division)" label="liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992329" start="11592" end="11598" title="County Palatine of Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276916" start="11600" end="11608" title="Sadberge (wapentake)" label="Sadberge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249694" start="11610" end="11625" title="Bedlingtonshire" label="Bedlingtonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051200" start="11631" end="11642" title="Norhamshire" label="Norhamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="11660" end="11676" title="bishop of Durham" label="bishop of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22950131" start="11678" end="11689" title="Hexhamshire" label="Hexhamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="11697" end="11715" title="archbishop of York" label="archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116195" start="11717" end="11725" title="Tynedale" label="Tynedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="11733" end="11749" title="king of Scotland" label="king of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11751" end="11758" title="Emildon" label="Emildon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277330" start="11766" end="11783" title="earl of Lancaster" label="earl of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305796" start="11789" end="11798" title="Redesdale" label="Redesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863369" start="11802" end="11838" title="Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus" label="Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177107" start="12062" end="12096" title="Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844" label="Counties (Detached Parts) Act 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176544" start="12101" end="12121" title="Council of the North" label="Council of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137280" start="12127" end="12139" title="county court" label="county court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756885" start="12366" end="12392" title="High Sheriff of Northumberland" label="sheriffs of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="12545" end="12554" title="Exchequer" label="Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="12718" end="12732" title="James VI and I" label="James I and VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q993658" start="12815" end="12821" title="Norham" label="Norham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002826" start="12823" end="12830" title="Alnwick" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018205" start="12835" end="12839" title="Wark on Tweed" label="Wark"/>
<link wikidata="Q216787" start="12857" end="12876" title="David I of Scotland" label="David I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60849" start="12892" end="12899" title="Stephen of England" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312594" start="12959" end="12980" title="William I of Scotland" label="William I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053636" start="13084" end="13102" title="Ranulf de Glanvill" label="Ranulf de Glanvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870275" start="13138" end="13155" title="Battle of Alnwick (1174)" label="Battle of Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13166" end="13179" title="Robert de Ros (Athol)" label="Robert de Ros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305796" start="13224" end="13233" title="Redesdale" label="Redesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337301" start="13235" end="13245" title="Coquetdale" label="Coquetdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116195" start="13250" end="13258" title="Tynedale" label="Tynedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="13294" end="13311" title="Robert I of Scotland" label="king Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q471421" start="13480" end="13491" title="Henry Hotspur Percy" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648673" start="13544" end="13563" title="battle of Otterburn" label="battle of Otterburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985773" start="13585" end="13606" title="ballad of Chevy Chase" label="ballad of Chevy Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q515105" start="13631" end="13643" title="Dunstanburgh Castle" label="Dunstanburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635231" start="13730" end="13736" title="Battle of Hexham" label="Hexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748450" start="13741" end="13753" title="Battle of Hedgeley Moor" label="Hedgley Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="13859" end="13879" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300742" start="13898" end="13915" title="Battle of Flodden" label="Battle of Flodden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863571" start="13919" end="13927" title="Branxton, Northumberland" label="Branxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="13980" end="14000" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q427513" start="14013" end="14032" title="Rising of the North" label="Rising of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q776558" start="14044" end="14053" title="Harbottle" label="Harbottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642413" start="14055" end="14069" title="Border Reivers" label="Border Reivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898745" start="14071" end="14081" title="Peel tower" label="Peel tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="14155" end="14169" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="14276" end="14294" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="14371" end="14380" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326343" start="14447" end="14464" title="earl of Newcastle" label="earl of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326311" start="14517" end="14530" title="earl of Leven" label="earl of Leven"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="14544" end="14553" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259456" start="14598" end="14610" title="David Leslie (Scottish general)" label="David Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="14674" end="14682" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17643670" start="14999" end="15015" title="Newminster Abbey" label="Newminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q886899" start="15075" end="15080" title="Blyth, Northumberland" label="Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="15552" end="15561" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q965843" start="15565" end="15579" title="Hugh de Puiset" label="Hugh de Puiset"/>
<link wikidata="Q244326" start="15659" end="15667" title="Salt pan (evaporation)" label="salt pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272671" start="15784" end="15795" title="River Blyth, Northumberland" label="river Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="15916" end="15927" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="16039" end="16046" title="Tanning (leather)" label="Tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="16128" end="16134" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="16185" end="16192" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="16196" end="16208" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142562" start="16222" end="16239" title="Coldstream Bridge" label="Coldstream Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q947400" start="16256" end="16262" title="Hexham" label="Hexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q777026" start="16265" end="16301" title="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s Rocket" label="Stephenson&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Rocket&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q189859" start="16321" end="16334" title="steam turbine" label="steam turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q150910" start="16338" end="16362" title="Charles Algernon Parsons" label="Charles Algernon Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="16379" end="16390" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934151" start="16393" end="16422" title="Northumbria&amp;#x27;s golden age" label="Northumbria&amp;#x27;s golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277389" start="16425" end="16447" title="Earl of Northumberland" label="Earl of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="16450" end="16468" title="History of England" label="History of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="16471" end="16489" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805857" start="16492" end="16534" title="Timeline of Northumbria and Northumberland" label="Timeline of Northumbria and Northumberland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139736" wikidata="Q1668871" url="?curid=1139736" title="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts">
<text>The Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts (LIPA) is a performing arts higher education institution in Liverpool, founded by Paul McCartney and Mark Featherstone-Witty and opened in 1996. LIPA offers 20 full-time BA (Hons) degrees in a range of fields across the performing arts, as well as three Foundation Certificate programmes of study in acting and popular music. LIPA offers full-time, one-year master&#x27;s-level degree courses in Acting and Costume Design and Making. It is a member of the Federation of Drama Schools.

The &quot;Education Guardian&quot; has previously ranked LIPA No. 1 in the UK for several of its degree courses, and it is regularly ranked as one of the top 10 specialist institutions. 

In September 2003, LIPA launched LIPA 4–19, a part-time performing arts academy for 4-to-19-year-olds. LIPA started its own primary free school in 2014 and its own sixth form free college in 2016.

==History==
===Formation===
LIPA was founded by Paul McCartney and Mark Featherstone-Witty. McCartney had known since 1985 that the building which had housed his old school, the Liverpool Institute High School for Boys, was becoming increasingly derelict after the school&#x27;s closure and wished to find a productive use for it; Featherstone-Witty had set up the Brit School in London and was looking for an opportunity to open another school. McCartney and Featherstone-Witty were introduced to each other by record producer George Martin. The process of setting up the facility and the school took seven years and cost £20m.

===1996–today===
LIPA was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 7 June 1996, and marked its 10th birthday in January 2006 with a performance at the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall and a new book, &quot;LIPA – The First Ten Years in Pictures&quot;, written by Featherstone-Witty.

LIPA was designated as a higher education institution (HEI) in 2006. As a performing arts HEI, LIPA is attended by the highest number of international students in the UK. LIPA has been awarded the Gold Standard from Investors in People – the only HEI to have achieved this level in the UK. LIPA also has the highest concentration of Fellows and Associates recognised by the Higher Education Academy.

In March 2012, LIPA announced that it had purchased the former building of the Liverpool College of Art for £3.7 million, to expand its teaching accommodation. Building work started on the Art School in 2014, and was completed in August 2016. Under the Free School programme, LIPA opened a primary school nearby in 2014, and a Sixth Form College in September 2016, both of which became oversubscribed.

Featherstone-Witty resigned as LIPA secretary in March 2015.

A 2017 survey of students who graduated in 2014 showed that 91% were in work, and 83% of those were working in the performing arts.

==Admissions==
Undergraduate tuition fees were £9,250 in 2023/24, with International tuition fees at £19,500 for 2023/24.

==Current courses==
LIPA qualifications are validated by Liverpool John Moores University.

===Foundation Certificates===
*Foundation Acting (Musical Theatre)
*Foundation Acting (Stage &amp; Screen)
*Foundation Certificate in Popular Music and Music Technology

===Undergraduate (Degree)===
*BA (Honours) Acting
*BA (Honours) Acting (Screen &amp; Digital)
*BA (Honours) Acting (Contemporary Performance)
*BA (Honours) Acting (Musical Theatre)
*BA (Honours) Acting (Musicianship)
*BA (Honours) Creative Technologies &amp; Performance
*BA (Honours) Dance
*BA (Honours) Music (Popular, Contemporary &amp; Commercial)
*BA (Honours) Music (Song Writing &amp; Performance)
*BA (Honours) Music (Song Writing &amp; Production)
*BA (Honours) Music (Contemporary Pop Voice &amp; Performance)
*BA (Honours) Music (Session Musicianship)
*BA (Honours) Music (Production)
*BA (Honours) Management
*BA (Honours) Management (Live Events)
*BA (Honours) Management (Music Industry Management)
*BA (Honours) Management (Theatre and Screen)
*BA (Honours) Sound Technology
*BA (Honours) Theatre and Performance Design
*BA (Honours) Theatre and Production Technology

===Master&#x27;s (Degree)===
*Master of Arts in Acting 
*Master of Arts in Costume Design and Making
*Master of Arts in Music Industry Management

==Companions==
LIPA does not issue its own degrees, so rather than issuing Honorary degrees like other British universities, it awards &quot;Companionships&quot; to individuals in recognition of their contributions to the world of art and entertainment. Prospective companions often visit LIPA to give masterclasses to students, or to participate in question and answer sessions.

Companionships awarded by the institution are:

*2001: Joan Armatrading +; Benny Gallagher; Malcolm McLaren
*2002: Stephen Bayley; Anthony Field; Thelma Holt; Tony Wilson
*2003: Barbara Dickson; Anthony Everitt; Nickolas Grace; Andy McCluskey
*2004: The Bangles; Ken Campbell (actor); Tim Firth; Terry Marshall; Arlene Phillips; Willy Russell; Jon Webster
*2005: Guy Chambers; Robin Gibb; Alec McCowen; Tim Wheeler
*2006: Lynda Bellingham; Sir Ken Robinson; Jörg Sennheiser; Terence Stamp; David Stark
*2007: Anita Dobson; Alan McGee; David Pugh; Ralph Koltai; Steve Levine; Ben Elton
*2008: John Hurt; Trevor Horn; Cathy Dennis; Ann Harrison; Nitin Sawhney; Lea Anderson
*2009: Will Young; Joe McGann; Pippa Ailion; John Fox; Richard Hudson; Natricia Bernard; Tony Platt
*2010: Alan Moulder; LaVelle Smith Jnr; Dave Pammenter; Christopher Oram; Jonathan Pryce; Heather Knight; Midge Ure; Mark Summers was also presented as an Honoured Friend.
*2011: Colin Eccleston; David Bell; Paule Constable; Caroline Elleray; Chris Johnson; Steve Nestar; Billy Ocean; Hannah Waddingham; Spencer Leigh was also presented as an Honoured Friend.
*2012: Matthew Bourne; Pam Schweitzer; Kevin Godley; Gary lloyd; Michael Harrison; Jason Barnes; Owen Lewis; Victor Greenberg was also presented as an Honoured Friend
*2013: Keith Johnstone; Mark Ronson; Stephen Mear; Xenon Schoepe; Andy Hayles; Seymour Stein; Rowena Morgan was also presented as an Honoured Friend
*2014: Don Black; Samuel West; Adrian Jackson; Nick Starr; Colin Richmond; Patrick Woodroffe; Briony Albert; Giles Martin. Janice Long and Suzahn Fiering were presented as Honoured Friends.
*2015: Gemma Bodinetz; Fran Healy; Noddy Holder; Conor Murphy; Hugh Padgham; Scott Rodger; James Thompson; Sharon Watson. John T Rago was also presented as an Honoured Friend
*2016: Martin Levan; Tim Prentki; David Babani; Darren Henley; Christopher Manoe; Alan Lane; Christopher Shutt; Tom Robinson. Tetsuo Hamada; Paul Whiting were also presented as honoured friends
*2017: Woody Harrelson; Chris Difford; John Caird; Jon Burton; Kay Hilton; Jo Collins; Mary Ward; Jon Driscoll. Tony Wood was also presented as an honoured friend.
*2018: Toyah Willcox; Nile Rodgers; John Leonard; Paul Burger; Ali Campbell; Felice Ross; Dean Lee.
*2019: Stephen Fry; Rowan Atkinson; Mike Batt; Lucy Carter; Sue Gill; Steve Lewis; Tom Pye; Kenrick Sandy; Andrew Scheps. Cliff Cooper was made an Honoured Friend of LIPA.

+ denotes a Companion who is also a LIPA Patron.

==Notable alumni==

* Leanne Best, film and television actress
* Alyssa Bonagura (2009) American singer/songwriter
* Gabrielle Brooks, actress
* Jan Burton, music producer
* Peter Caulfield, actor
* Circa Waves, indie rock band (Joe Falconer, Sam Rourke)
* Clean Cut Kid, indie pop band
* Crawlers, indie rock band
* Dan Croll, singer-songwriter
* Mike Crossey, music producer and mix engineer
* Douglas Dare, singer-songwriter
* The Daydream Club, music duo
* Mark Franks, singer in The Overtones
* Fickle Friends, indie pop band (Natassja Shiner, Sam Morris)
* Mads Hauge, songwriter and producer
* Kate Havnevik, Norwegian singer-songwriter
* Her&#x27;s, indie rock duo
* Dag Holtan-Hartwig, Norwegian singer-songwriter
* Lynette Howell Taylor, producer A Star Is Born (2018 film)
* Holly Humberstone, singer-songwriter
* David Hutchinson, founder and Artistic Director of Selladoor Worldwide 
* Christian Ingebrigtsen, Norwegian singer-songwriter and musician (A1)
* Seun Kuti, Afrobeat musician
* Rachel Leskovac, actress
* Jamie Lloyd, director 
* Jon Lolis, actor (&quot;Hollyoaks&quot;)
* Liam Lynch, US-based singer, writer &amp; director
* Eugene McGuinness, singer/songwriter signed to Domino records.
* Dawn O&#x27;Porter, writer, director and TV presenter
* Mikhael Paskalev, Norwegian singer-songwriter
* Hannah Peel, artist, producer, composer
* Pixey band members
* Connor Ratliff, American comedian and actor
* Jessica Reynolds, actress
* The Staves, folk trio (Jessica Staveley-Taylor)
* Iselin Solheim, Norwegian singer and songwriter
* Stealing Sheep, folk band (Rebecca Hawley)
* St. Lucia (musician), indie pop band (Jean-Philip Grobler, Patti Beranek)
* Lisa Stokke, Norwegian singer and actress
* Sandi Thom, Scottish singer-songwriter
* Liz White, actress (&quot;Life on Mars&quot;)
* The Wombats, indie rock trio

==See also==
*Liverpool Knowledge Quarter
*Liverpool Institute High School for Boys

==References==
==External links==
*LIPA &#x27;Our Story&#x27;
*LIPA website
*LIPA 4:19 Primary School
*LIPA Sixth Form College
*LIPA Alumni page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1668871" start="4" end="43" title="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts" label="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668871" start="45" end="49" title="Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts" label="LIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="56" end="71" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="104" end="113" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="126" end="140" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767581" start="145" end="168" title="Mark Featherstone-Witty" label="Mark Featherstone-Witty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="214" end="216" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="218" end="222" title="Honours Degree#British" label="Hons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="402" end="415" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058444" start="500" end="527" title="Federation of Drama Schools" label="Federation of Drama Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="540" end="558" title="The Guardian" label="Education Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q895809" start="882" end="892" title="sixth form" label="sixth form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="964" end="978" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767581" start="983" end="1006" title="Mark Featherstone-Witty" label="Mark Featherstone-Witty"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242531" start="1094" end="1134" title="Liverpool Institute High School for Boys" label="Liverpool Institute High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q796940" start="1281" end="1292" title="Brit School" label="Brit School"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="1444" end="1457" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1582" end="1600" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183048" start="1688" end="1715" title="Liverpool Philharmonic Hall" label="Liverpool Philharmonic Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1841" end="1869" title="higher education institution" label="higher education institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188092" start="2032" end="2051" title="Investors in People" label="Investors in People"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843651" start="2190" end="2214" title="Higher Education Academy" label="Higher Education Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835519" start="2296" end="2320" title="Liverpool College of Art" label="Liverpool College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500295" start="2470" end="2491" title="Free school (England)" label="Free School programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627967" start="2995" end="3027" title="Liverpool John Moores University" label="Liverpool John Moores University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281422" start="4533" end="4546" title="Master class" label="masterclasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="4667" end="4683" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106948" start="4687" end="4702" title="Benny Gallagher" label="Benny Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q325377" start="4704" end="4719" title="Malcolm McLaren" label="Malcolm McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608681" start="4727" end="4741" title="Stephen Bayley" label="Stephen Bayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772506" start="4743" end="4756" title="Anthony Field" label="Anthony Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781071" start="4758" end="4769" title="Thelma Holt" label="Thelma Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q478601" start="4771" end="4782" title="Tony Wilson" label="Tony Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q807398" start="4790" end="4805" title="Barbara Dickson" label="Barbara Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985778" start="4824" end="4838" title="Nickolas Grace" label="Nickolas Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q526645" start="4840" end="4854" title="Andy McCluskey" label="Andy McCluskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="4862" end="4873" title="The Bangles" label="The Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738579" start="4875" end="4887" title="Ken Campbell" label="Ken Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803492" start="4897" end="4906" title="Tim Firth" label="Tim Firth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4908" end="4922" title="Terry Marshall" label="Terry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792165" start="4924" end="4939" title="Arlene Phillips" label="Arlene Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q761466" start="4941" end="4954" title="Willy Russell" label="Willy Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029010" start="4975" end="4987" title="Guy Chambers" label="Guy Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188482" start="4989" end="4999" title="Robin Gibb" label="Robin Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q492176" start="5001" end="5013" title="Alec McCowen" label="Alec McCowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3991382" start="5015" end="5026" title="Tim Wheeler" label="Tim Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q276106" start="5034" end="5050" title="Lynda Bellingham" label="Lynda Bellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q718012" start="5052" end="5068" title="Sir Ken Robinson" label="Sir Ken Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q167221" start="5070" end="5085" title="Sennheiser" label="Jörg Sennheiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="5087" end="5100" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132612" start="5121" end="5133" title="Anita Dobson" label="Anita Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076831" start="5135" end="5145" title="Alan McGee" label="Alan McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819557" start="5147" end="5157" title="David Pugh and Dafydd Rogers" label="David Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347107" start="5173" end="5185" title="Steve Levine" label="Steve Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q436712" start="5187" end="5196" title="Ben Elton" label="Ben Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q200405" start="5204" end="5213" title="John Hurt" label="John Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="5215" end="5226" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q440551" start="5228" end="5240" title="Cathy Dennis" label="Cathy Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396434" start="5256" end="5269" title="Nitin Sawhney" label="Nitin Sawhney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15972317" start="5271" end="5283" title="Lea Anderson" label="Lea Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q348906" start="5291" end="5301" title="Will Young" label="Will Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639494" start="5303" end="5313" title="Joe McGann" label="Joe McGann"/>
<link wikidata="Q63700016" start="5315" end="5327" title="Pippa Ailion" label="Pippa Ailion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24936647" start="5329" end="5337" title="Welfare State International" label="John Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326582" start="5339" end="5353" title="Richard Hudson (linguist)" label="Richard Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980229" start="5355" end="5371" title="Natricia Bernard" label="Natricia Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823191" start="5373" end="5383" title="Tony Platt" label="Tony Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390322" start="5391" end="5403" title="Alan Moulder" label="Alan Moulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786359" start="5405" end="5422" title="LaVelle Smith Jnr" label="LaVelle Smith Jnr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112994" start="5440" end="5456" title="Christopher Oram" label="Christopher Oram"/>
<link wikidata="Q312702" start="5458" end="5472" title="Jonathan Pryce" label="Jonathan Pryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q355382" start="5490" end="5499" title="Midge Ure" label="Midge Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769905" start="5501" end="5513" title="Mark Summers" label="Mark Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154822" start="5592" end="5607" title="Paule Constable" label="Paule Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q356745" start="5656" end="5667" title="Billy Ocean" label="Billy Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648978" start="5669" end="5686" title="Hannah Waddingham" label="Hannah Waddingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576117" start="5688" end="5701" title="Spencer Leigh (radio presenter)" label="Spencer Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139570" start="5751" end="5765" title="Matthew Bourne" label="Matthew Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346874" start="5783" end="5795" title="Kevin Godley" label="Kevin Godley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847148" start="5809" end="5825" title="Mike Harrison (musician)" label="Michael Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5841" end="5851" title="Owen Lewis (sound engineer)" label="Owen Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q461331" start="5918" end="5933" title="Keith Johnstone" label="Keith Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q425821" start="5935" end="5946" title="Mark Ronson" label="Mark Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609975" start="5948" end="5960" title="Stephen Mear" label="Stephen Mear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275956" start="5990" end="6003" title="Seymour Stein" label="Seymour Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238931" start="6067" end="6076" title="Don Black (lyricist)" label="Don Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389078" start="6078" end="6089" title="Samuel West" label="Samuel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q498460" start="6091" end="6105" title="Adrian Jackson (musician)" label="Adrian Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147858" start="6135" end="6152" title="Patrick Woodroffe" label="Patrick Woodroffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q723009" start="6169" end="6181" title="Giles Martin" label="Giles Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154279" start="6183" end="6194" title="Janice Long" label="Janice Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q739915" start="6273" end="6283" title="Fran Healy (musician)" label="Fran Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q387655" start="6285" end="6297" title="Noddy Holder" label="Noddy Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q578710" start="6299" end="6311" title="Conor Murphy" label="Conor Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q968524" start="6313" end="6325" title="Hugh Padgham" label="Hugh Padgham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6341" end="6355" title="James Thompson (professor)" label="James Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775995" start="6432" end="6444" title="Martin Levan" label="Martin Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224964" start="6473" end="6486" title="Darren Henley" label="Darren Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q723493" start="6537" end="6549" title="Tom Robinson" label="Tom Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201279" start="6626" end="6641" title="Woody Harrelson" label="Woody Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106399" start="6643" end="6656" title="Chris Difford" label="Chris Difford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224764" start="6658" end="6668" title="John Caird (director)" label="John Caird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270460" start="6670" end="6680" title="Jon Burton" label="Jon Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179386" start="6694" end="6704" title="Jo Collins" label="Jo Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214820" start="6717" end="6729" title="Jon Driscoll" label="Jon Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q449360" start="6790" end="6803" title="Toyah Willcox" label="Toyah Willcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q497759" start="6805" end="6817" title="Nile Rodgers" label="Nile Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6819" end="6831" title="John Leonard (sound designer)" label="John Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404513" start="6833" end="6844" title="Paul Burger" label="Paul Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375809" start="6846" end="6858" title="Ali Campbell" label="Ali Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="6890" end="6901" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760" start="6903" end="6917" title="Rowan Atkinson" label="Rowan Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q705596" start="6919" end="6928" title="Mike Batt" label="Mike Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21934026" start="6990" end="7003" title="Andrew Scheps" label="Andrew Scheps"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="7097" end="7103" title="Patronage" label="Patron"/>
<link wikidata="Q20974081" start="7128" end="7139" title="Leanne Best" label="Leanne Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738757" start="7171" end="7186" title="Alyssa Bonagura" label="Alyssa Bonagura"/>
<link wikidata="Q84086450" start="7223" end="7239" title="Gabrielle Brooks" label="Gabrielle Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161622" start="7251" end="7261" title="Jan Burton" label="Jan Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173213" start="7280" end="7295" title="Peter Caulfield (actor)" label="Peter Caulfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205953" start="7305" end="7316" title="Circa Waves" label="Circa Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072940" start="7363" end="7376" title="Clean Cut Kid" label="Clean Cut Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806018" start="7395" end="7403" title="Crawlers (band)" label="Crawlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166246" start="7423" end="7432" title="Dan Croll" label="Dan Croll"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931595" start="7454" end="7466" title="Mike Crossey" label="Mike Crossey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875914" start="7502" end="7514" title="Douglas Dare" label="Douglas Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410735" start="7536" end="7553" title="The Daydream Club" label="The Daydream Club"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7567" end="7578" title="The Overtones#Mark Franks" label="Mark Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296293" start="7590" end="7603" title="The Overtones" label="The Overtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895505" start="7606" end="7620" title="Fickle Friends" label="Fickle Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099532" start="7669" end="7679" title="Mads Hauge" label="Mads Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q434798" start="7707" end="7720" title="Kate Havnevik" label="Kate Havnevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q62571383" start="7752" end="7762" title="Her&amp;#x27;s" label="Her&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q106620798" start="7781" end="7799" title="Slopes (musician)" label="Dag Holtan-Hartwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q61954712" start="7831" end="7852" title="Lynette Howell Taylor" label="Lynette Howell Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286391" start="7863" end="7889" title="A Star Is Born (2018 film)" label="A Star Is Born (2018 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96217225" start="7892" end="7909" title="Holly Humberstone" label="Holly Humberstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232157" start="7931" end="7947" title="David Hutchinson (producer)" label="David Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448586" start="7982" end="8001" title="Selladoor Worldwide" label="Selladoor Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584096" start="8005" end="8027" title="Christian Ingebrigtsen" label="Christian Ingebrigtsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q279634" start="8071" end="8073" title="A1 (band)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111214" start="8077" end="8086" title="Seun Kuti" label="Seun Kuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279307" start="8108" end="8123" title="Rachel Leskovac" label="Rachel Leskovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147131" start="8135" end="8146" title="Jamie Lloyd (director)" label="Jamie Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271145" start="8160" end="8169" title="Jon Lolis" label="Jon Lolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585857" start="8184" end="8193" title="Hollyoaks" label="Hollyoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372139" start="8203" end="8213" title="Liam Lynch (musician)" label="Liam Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q740163" start="8256" end="8273" title="Eugene McGuinness" label="Eugene McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178794" start="8321" end="8339" title="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter" label="Dawn O&amp;#x27;Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714516" start="8377" end="8393" title="Mikhael Paskalev" label="Mikhael Paskalev"/>
<link wikidata="Q14159493" start="8425" end="8436" title="Hannah Peel" label="Hannah Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821655" start="8467" end="8472" title="Pixey" label="Pixey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863946" start="8488" end="8502" title="Connor Ratliff" label="Connor Ratliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q116847765" start="8534" end="8550" title="Jessica Reynolds" label="Jessica Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766423" start="8562" end="8572" title="The Staves" label="The Staves"/>
<link wikidata="Q23042593" start="8612" end="8626" title="Iselin Solheim" label="Iselin Solheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162543" start="8662" end="8676" title="Stealing Sheep" label="Stealing Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204945" start="8707" end="8727" title="St. Lucia (musician)" label="St. Lucia (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242449" start="8783" end="8794" title="Lisa Stokke" label="Lisa Stokke"/>
<link wikidata="Q431466" start="8827" end="8837" title="Sandi Thom" label="Sandi Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q442142" start="8868" end="8877" title="Liz White (actress)" label="Liz White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071501" start="8894" end="8906" title="Life on Mars (UK TV series)" label="Life on Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347289" start="8916" end="8927" title="The Wombats" label="The Wombats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658494" start="8960" end="8987" title="Liverpool Knowledge Quarter" label="Liverpool Knowledge Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242531" start="8989" end="9029" title="Liverpool Institute High School for Boys" label="Liverpool Institute High School for Boys"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139737" wikidata="Q4031105" url="?curid=1139737" title="38th Division">
<text>38th Division or 38th Infantry Division may refer to:

==Infantry divisions==
* 38th Division (German Empire)
* 38th Landwehr Division (German Empire); see German Army order of battle, Western Front (1918)
* 38th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)
* 38th SS-Grenadier-Division &quot;Nibelungen&quot;
* 38th Infantry Division Puglie, Kingdom of Italy
* 38th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)
* 38th Infantry Division (Poland)
* 38th Infantry Division (Russian Empire)
* 38th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)
* 38th Guards Mechanised Division, Soviet Union
* 38th Guards Rifle Division, later 38th Guards Motor Rifle Division, Soviet Union
* 38th (Welsh) Infantry Division, United Kingdom
* 38th Infantry Division (United States)
* 38th Division (Yugoslav Partisans)
* 38th Infantry Division &quot;Dravska&quot;, Royal Yugoslav Army

==Armoured divisions==

* 38th Tank Division (Soviet Union), part of 20th Mechanized Corps
* 38th Division (Israel)

==Aviation divisions==
* 38th Air Division, United States Air Force

==See also==
* 38th Brigade (disambiguation)
* 38th Regiment (disambiguation)
* 38th Wing (disambiguation)
* 38 Squadron (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4031105" start="0" end="13" title="38th Division" label="38th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031105" start="17" end="39" title="38th Division" label="38th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q228031" start="80" end="109" title="38th Division (German Empire)" label="38th Division (German Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="112" end="150" title="38th Landwehr Division (German Empire)" label="38th Landwehr Division (German Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551043" start="156" end="205" title="German Army order of battle, Western Front (1918)" label="German Army order of battle, Western Front (1918)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719892" start="208" end="242" title="38th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="38th Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)"/>
<link wikidata="Q228043" start="245" end="294" title="38th SS-Grenadier-Division &amp;quot;Nibelungen&amp;quot;" label="38th SS-Grenadier-Division &amp;quot;Nibelungen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598961" start="297" end="326" title="38th Infantry Division Puglie" label="38th Infantry Division Puglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q704529" start="347" end="385" title="38th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)" label="38th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816422" start="388" end="419" title="38th Infantry Division (Poland)" label="38th Infantry Division (Poland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031103" start="422" end="461" title="38th Infantry Division (Russian Empire)" label="38th Infantry Division (Russian Empire)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031107" start="464" end="498" title="38th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)" label="38th Rifle Division (Soviet Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485534" start="501" end="532" title="38th Guards Mechanised Division" label="38th Guards Mechanised Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q28650607" start="549" end="575" title="38th Guards Rifle Division" label="38th Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057562" start="632" end="662" title="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="38th (Welsh) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636022" start="681" end="719" title="38th Infantry Division (United States)" label="38th Infantry Division (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783052" start="722" end="756" title="38th Division (Yugoslav Partisans)" label="38th Division (Yugoslav Partisans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639062" start="759" end="801" title="38th Infantry Division Dravska" label="38th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Dravska&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="850" end="883" title="38th Tank Division (Soviet Union)" label="38th Tank Division (Soviet Union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029902" start="893" end="914" title="20th Mechanized Corps (Soviet Union)" label="20th Mechanized Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896099" start="917" end="939" title="38th Division (Israel)" label="38th Division (Israel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635988" start="966" end="983" title="38th Air Division" label="38th Air Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636003" start="1025" end="1054" title="38th Brigade (disambiguation)" label="38th Brigade (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636045" start="1057" end="1087" title="38th Regiment (disambiguation)" label="38th Regiment (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636062" start="1090" end="1116" title="38th Wing (disambiguation)" label="38th Wing (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635981" start="1119" end="1147" title="38 Squadron (disambiguation)" label="38 Squadron (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139739" wikidata="Q2451615" url="?curid=1139739" title="Rosais">
<text>Rosais (literally, archaic Portuguese for &quot;rosaries&quot;) is a civil parish in the municipality of Velas in the Portuguese archipelago of the Azores. The population in 2011 was 743, in an area of 24.23 km².

==History==
Although Rosais was first mentioned in written documents in 1568, it existed as a settlement before then. It was considered the &quot;granary&quot; or &quot;breadbasket&quot; of São Jorge, due to the area&#x27;s fertility. To this day the area supports rich pastures.

==Geography==
The parish of Rosais is located on the island of São Jorge and extends approximately from Figueiras to Ponta dos Rosais. The parish had approximately 820 inhabitants according to the 2001 census. It contains the localities Arrifana, Canada da Trás, Canada das Faias, Fajã de João Dias, Quarteiro, and Rosais.

The western corner of the island is essentially a plateau, with tall cliffs extending until the Ponta dos Rosais, where the Ponta dos Rosais Lighthouse stands as a beacon. The rest of the parish consists mostly of pastures, although it also contains the wooded area &quot;Parque Florestal das Sete Fontes&quot; (Forest Park of the Seven Springs). Sete Fontes contains green spaces and animal pens and hosts an annual festival honoring the Flemish emigrants who first settled São Jorge and the Azores.

Although many of the cliffs are sheer drops, there are volcanic debris fields along the coast that give rise to São Jorge&#x27;s &quot;fajãs&quot;. Of particular note is Fajã de João Dias, a small enclave of buildings where many of the early settlers established homes, located five minutes by foot from the cliff tops.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2451615" start="0" end="6" title="Rosais" label="Rosais"/>
<link wikidata="Q181970" start="19" end="26" title="archaism" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="27" end="37" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="48" end="56" title="rosary" label="rosaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131296" start="69" end="81" title="Freguesia (Portugal)" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633408" start="89" end="101" title="concelho" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010468" start="105" end="110" title="Velas, Azores" label="Velas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="118" end="128" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="148" end="154" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="360" end="367" title="granary" label="granary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="484" end="491" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q743362" start="558" end="567" title="São Jorge Island" label="São Jorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q10351277" start="612" end="628" title="Ponta dos Rosais" label="Ponta dos Rosais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431425" start="776" end="793" title="Fajã de João Dias" label="Fajã de João Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546366" start="943" end="970" title="Ponta dos Rosais Lighthouse" label="Ponta dos Rosais Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q242485" start="1258" end="1265" title="Flemish people" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431439" start="1456" end="1460" title="fajã" label="fajã"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431425" start="1491" end="1508" title="Fajã de João Dias" label="Fajã de João Dias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139741" wikidata="Q6633817" url="?curid=1139741" title="List of places in Northumberland">
<text>This is a list of places in [[Northumberland]], in England. The area covered is the ceremonial county, hence the exclusion of places traditionally regarded as being in Northumberland which are now in Tyne and Wear for administrative and ceremonial purposes, for places in Tyne and Wear see List of places in Tyne and Wear.

==A==
Abberwick, Acklington, Acomb, Acton, Akeld, Allendale, Allenheads, Alnham, Alnmouth, Alnwick, Alwinton, Amble, Ancroft Northmoor, Anick, Ancroft, Apperley Dene, Ashington, Aydon, Ayle

==B==
Bamburgh, Bardon Mill, Barrasford, Bassington, Baybridge, Beaconhill, Beadnell, Beal, Beanley, Bearsbridge, Beauclerc, Bebside, Bedlington, Belford, Bellingham, Bellshill, Belsay, Beltingham, Benthall, Berrington, Berwick Hill, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Biddlestone, Bilton, Bilton Banks, Bingfield, Birtley, Birling, Black Heddon, Blanchland, Blyth, Bolam, Bolam West Houses, Bolton, Bomarsund, Bothal, Boulmer, Bowsden, Bradford (Adderstone with Lucker), Bradford (Belsay), Branch End, Brandon, Branton, Branxton, Bridge End (Sandhoe), Bridge End (Warden), Brinkburn, Broomhaugh, Broomhill, Broomley, Brownieside, Brunton, Burradon, Burton, Butteryhaugh, Byrness, Bywell, Bywell Saint Andrews, Bywell Saint Peters

==C==
Callaly, Cambo, Cambois, Capheaton, Carr Shield, Carter Bar, Carterway Heads, Cartington, Catton, Causey Park Bridge, Charlton, Chathill, Chatton, Chesterwood, Cheswick, Cheswick Buildings, Chillingham, Chollerford, Chollerton, Choppington, Christon Bank, Clennell, Clifton, Coalcleugh, Coanwood, Cottonshopeburnfoot, Collingwood, Colpitts Grange, Colwell, Corbridge, Cornhill-on-Tweed, Coupland, Cowpen, Cramlington, Craster, Cresswell, Crookham

==D==
Dalton (nr Hexham), Dalton (nr Ponteland), Dissington (nr Ponteland), Duddo, Dunstan,

==E==
Eachwick, Earle, East Cramlington, East Ord, Eglingham, Elsdon, Embleton, Ellington, Eshott, Etal

==F==
Fallodon, Falstone, Felton, Ford, Ford Forge

==G==
Glanton, Goswick, Great Bavington, Greenhaugh, Greenhead, Gubeon, Guidepost, Guyzance

==H==
Hadston, Haltwhistle, Harbottle, Hartley, Harnham, Haydon Bridge, Hazon, Hexham, High Angerton, High Buston, High Callerton, High Church, High Newton-by-the-Sea, Highfields, Holburn, Holystone, Holywell, Horsley (nr Prudhoe), Horsley (nr Redesdale), Horton, Housedon Hill, Housesteads, Howdon, Howtel, Howick, Hartburn, Humshaugh

==I==
Ilderton, Ingram

==K==
Kielder, Kilham, Kirkharle, Kirkwhelpington, Kirkley

==L==
Langley, Linton, Little Bavington, Longframlington, Longhirst, Longhorsley, Low Alwinton, Low Angerton, Low Brunton, Low Buston, Low Cocklaw, Low Newton-by-the-Sea, Lowick, Lucker, Lynemouth

==M==
Marshall Meadows, Meldon, Middle Ord, Middleton, Mindrum, Morpeth, Mitford, Murton

==N==
Nesbit, Netherton, Netherwitton, New Bewick, Newbiggin by the Sea, New Hartley, Newton-by-the-Sea, North Blyth, North Charlton, North Seaton

==O==
Ogle, Old Bewick, Once Brewed, Otterburn

==P==
Pegswood, Pigdon, Ponteland, Powburn, Prudhoe

==R==
Radcliffe, Ramshope, Red Row, Redesdale, Ridsdale, Riverside, Rochester, Rothbury

==S==
Scremerston, Scots Gap, Seahouses, Seaton Delaval, Seaton Sluice, Seghill, Sheepwash, Shilbottle, Shipley, Snitter, South Beach, South Broomhill, South Charlton, Stakeford, Stannington, Stobswood, Stocksfield, Stonehaugh

==T==
Throphill, Tranwell, Tranwell Woods, Tughall, Twizell Castle

==U==
Ulgham,
Unthank (near Alnham),
Unthank (near Haltwhistle)

==V==
Vindolanda

==W==
Wall, Wallington, Wark on Tweed, Wark on Tyne, Warkworth, West Chevington, West Woodburn, Whalton, Widdrington, Whittingham, Wooler, Wylam

==Y==
Yarrow, Yeavering, Yetlington

==Places of interest==
*Cheviot Hills
*Churnsike Lodge
*Coquet Island
*Cragside
*Dunstanburgh Castle
*Farne Islands
*Hadrian&#x27;s Wall
*Hexham Abbey
*Kielder Water
*Lindisfarne
*North Pennines AONB
*Northumberland National Park
*Prudhoe Castle

==See also==
*List of settlements in Northumberland by population
*List of places in England</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6633817" start="10" end="46" title="List of places in Northumberland" label="list of places in [[Northumberland]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="84" end="101" title="ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23080" start="200" end="213" title="Tyne and Wear" label="Tyne and Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="218" end="232" title="metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties of England" label="administrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633892" start="290" end="321" title="List of places in Tyne and Wear" label="List of places in Tyne and Wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663934" start="330" end="339" title="Abberwick" label="Abberwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q675592" start="341" end="351" title="Acklington" label="Acklington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536739" start="353" end="358" title="Acomb, Northumberland" label="Acomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677655" start="360" end="365" title="Acton, Northumberland" label="Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q780359" start="367" end="372" title="Akeld" label="Akeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274755" start="374" end="383" title="Allendale, Northumberland" label="Allendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732016" start="385" end="395" title="Allenheads" label="Allenheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424619" start="397" end="403" title="Alnham" label="Alnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424908" start="405" end="413" title="Alnmouth" label="Alnmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002826" start="415" end="422" title="Alnwick" label="Alnwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424561" start="424" end="432" title="Alwinton" label="Alwinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940839" start="434" end="439" title="Amble" label="Amble"/>
<link wikidata="Q595470" start="441" end="458" title="Ancroft Northmoor" label="Ancroft Northmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764506" start="460" end="465" title="Anick" label="Anick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933241" start="467" end="474" title="Ancroft" label="Ancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781037" start="476" end="489" title="Apperley Dene" label="Apperley Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q202348" start="491" end="500" title="Ashington" label="Ashington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831079" start="502" end="507" title="Aydon" label="Aydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831351" start="509" end="513" title="Ayle" label="Ayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q805983" start="521" end="529" title="Bamburgh" label="Bamburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858460" start="531" end="542" title="Bardon Mill" label="Bardon Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863252" start="544" end="554" title="Barrasford" label="Barrasford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868158" start="556" end="566" title="Bassington" label="Bassington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874387" start="568" end="577" title="Baybridge, Northumberland" label="Baybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876009" start="579" end="589" title="Beaconhill" label="Beaconhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689370" start="591" end="599" title="Beadnell" label="Beadnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876117" start="601" end="605" title="Beal, Northumberland" label="Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876293" start="607" end="614" title="Beanley" label="Beanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876774" start="616" end="627" title="Bearsbridge" label="Bearsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877435" start="629" end="638" title="Beauclerc" label="Beauclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q659062" start="640" end="647" title="Bebside" label="Bebside"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249694" start="649" end="659" title="Bedlington" label="Bedlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617115" start="661" end="668" title="Belford, Northumberland" label="Belford"/>
<link wikidata="Q451687" start="670" end="680" title="Bellingham, Northumberland" label="Bellingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884172" start="682" end="691" title="Bellshill, Northumberland" label="Bellshill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490155" start="693" end="699" title="Belsay" label="Belsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884749" start="701" end="711" title="Beltingham" label="Beltingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890383" start="713" end="721" title="Benthall, Northumberland" label="Benthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894723" start="723" end="733" title="Berrington, Northumberland" label="Berrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896001" start="735" end="747" title="Berwick Hill" label="Berwick Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="749" end="767" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424901" start="769" end="780" title="Biddlestone" label="Biddlestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913638" start="782" end="788" title="Bilton, Northumberland" label="Bilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14093350" start="790" end="802" title="Bilton Banks, Northumberland" label="Bilton Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914188" start="804" end="813" title="Bingfield" label="Bingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772082" start="815" end="822" title="Birtley, Northumberland" label="Birtley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916558" start="824" end="831" title="Birling, Northumberland" label="Birling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920918" start="833" end="845" title="Black Heddon" label="Black Heddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543086" start="847" end="857" title="Blanchland" label="Blanchland"/>
<link wikidata="Q886899" start="859" end="864" title="Blyth, Northumberland" label="Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q636158" start="866" end="871" title="Bolam, Northumberland" label="Bolam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938903" start="873" end="890" title="Bolam West Houses" label="Bolam West Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940136" start="892" end="898" title="Bolton, Northumberland" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940390" start="900" end="909" title="Bomarsund, Northumberland" label="Bomarsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948621" start="911" end="917" title="Bothal" label="Bothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949701" start="919" end="926" title="Boulmer" label="Boulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969174" start="928" end="935" title="Bowsden" label="Bowsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954552" start="937" end="945" title="Bradford, Adderstone with Lucker" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="972" end="980" title="Bradford, Belsay" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956354" start="991" end="1001" title="Branch End" label="Branch End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643672" start="1003" end="1010" title="Brandon, Northumberland" label="Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q668494" start="1012" end="1019" title="Branton, Northumberland" label="Branton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863571" start="1021" end="1029" title="Branxton, Northumberland" label="Branxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966228" start="1053" end="1063" title="Bridge End, Northumberland" label="Bridge End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296258" start="1074" end="1083" title="Brinkburn" label="Brinkburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975320" start="1085" end="1095" title="Broomhaugh" label="Broomhaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975327" start="1097" end="1106" title="Broomhill, Northumberland" label="Broomhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975340" start="1108" end="1116" title="Broomley" label="Broomley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976542" start="1118" end="1129" title="Brownieside" label="Brownieside"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979585" start="1131" end="1138" title="Brunton, Northumberland" label="Brunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000362" start="1140" end="1148" title="Burradon, Northumberland" label="Burradon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000779" start="1150" end="1156" title="Burton, Northumberland" label="Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003054" start="1158" end="1170" title="Butteryhaugh" label="Butteryhaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004269" start="1172" end="1179" title="Byrness" label="Byrness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808633" start="1181" end="1187" title="Bywell" label="Bywell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1189" end="1209" title="Bywell Saint Andrews" label="Bywell Saint Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1211" end="1230" title="Bywell Saint Peters" label="Bywell Saint Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507854" start="1238" end="1245" title="Callaly" label="Callaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025100" start="1247" end="1252" title="Cambo, Northumberland" label="Cambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q765941" start="1254" end="1261" title="Cambois" label="Cambois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696981" start="1263" end="1272" title="Capheaton" label="Capheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045985" start="1274" end="1285" title="Carr Shield" label="Carr Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569822" start="1287" end="1297" title="Carter Bar" label="Carter Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047275" start="1299" end="1314" title="Carterway Heads" label="Carterway Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361753" start="1316" end="1326" title="Cartington" label="Cartington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054170" start="1328" end="1334" title="Catton, Northumberland" label="Catton"/>
<link wikidata="Q547475" start="1336" end="1354" title="Causey Park Bridge" label="Causey Park Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086274" start="1356" end="1364" title="Charlton, Northumberland" label="Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087730" start="1366" end="1374" title="Chathill" label="Chathill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051531" start="1376" end="1383" title="Chatton" label="Chatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093887" start="1385" end="1396" title="Chesterwood" label="Chesterwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094035" start="1398" end="1406" title="Cheswick, Northumberland" label="Cheswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094037" start="1408" end="1426" title="Cheswick Buildings" label="Cheswick Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918969" start="1428" end="1439" title="Chillingham, Northumberland" label="Chillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675382" start="1441" end="1452" title="Chollerford" label="Chollerford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104366" start="1454" end="1464" title="Chollerton" label="Chollerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104873" start="1466" end="1477" title="Choppington" label="Choppington"/>
<link wikidata="Q42204832" start="1479" end="1492" title="Christon Bank" label="Christon Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131614" start="1494" end="1502" title="Clennell, Northumberland" label="Clennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133141" start="1504" end="1511" title="Clifton, Northumberland" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137854" start="1513" end="1523" title="Coalcleugh" label="Coalcleugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829803" start="1525" end="1533" title="Coanwood" label="Coanwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175775" start="1535" end="1554" title="Cottonshopeburnfoot" label="Cottonshopeburnfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q918787" start="1556" end="1567" title="Collingwood, Northumberland" label="Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149287" start="1569" end="1584" title="Colpitts Grange" label="Colpitts Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150320" start="1586" end="1593" title="Colwell, Northumberland" label="Colwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q122953" start="1595" end="1604" title="Corbridge" label="Corbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916410" start="1606" end="1623" title="Cornhill-on-Tweed" label="Cornhill-on-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691585" start="1625" end="1633" title="Coupland, Northumberland" label="Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179793" start="1635" end="1641" title="Cowpen" label="Cowpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q918787" start="1643" end="1654" title="Cramlington" label="Cramlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q646991" start="1656" end="1663" title="Craster" label="Craster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184520" start="1665" end="1674" title="Cresswell, Northumberland" label="Cresswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187896" start="1676" end="1684" title="Crookham, Northumberland" label="Crookham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1692" end="1710" title="Dalton, Hexham, Northumberland" label="Dalton (nr Hexham)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1712" end="1733" title="Dalton, Ponteland, Northumberland" label="Dalton (nr Ponteland)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1735" end="1760" title="Disington, Ponteland, Northumberland" label="Dissington (nr Ponteland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311675" start="1762" end="1767" title="Duddo" label="Duddo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1769" end="1776" title="Dunstan, Northumberland" label="Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23599310" start="1785" end="1793" title="Eachwick" label="Eachwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129421" start="1795" end="1800" title="Earle, Northumberland" label="Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q918787" start="1802" end="1818" title="East Cramlington" label="East Cramlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329084" start="1820" end="1828" title="East Ord" label="East Ord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195489" start="1830" end="1839" title="Eglingham" label="Eglingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617058" start="1841" end="1847" title="Elsdon, Northumberland" label="Elsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337102" start="1849" end="1857" title="Embleton, Northumberland" label="Embleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q594221" start="1859" end="1868" title="Ellington, Northumberland" label="Ellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697124" start="1870" end="1876" title="Eshott" label="Eshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402396" start="1878" end="1882" title="Etal, Northumberland" label="Etal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394664" start="1890" end="1898" title="Fallodon" label="Fallodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617135" start="1900" end="1908" title="Falstone" label="Falstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611142" start="1910" end="1916" title="Felton, Northumberland" label="Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571383" start="1918" end="1922" title="Ford, Northumberland" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467782" start="1924" end="1934" title="Ford Forge" label="Ford Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218224" start="1942" end="1949" title="Glanton" label="Glanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587606" start="1951" end="1958" title="Goswick" label="Goswick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1960" end="1975" title="Great Bavington" label="Great Bavington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604089" start="1977" end="1987" title="Greenhaugh" label="Greenhaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q680824" start="1989" end="1998" title="Greenhead, Northumberland" label="Greenhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2000" end="2006" title="Gubeon" label="Gubeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615438" start="2008" end="2017" title="Guide Post" label="Guidepost"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282946" start="2019" end="2027" title="Guyzance" label="Guyzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638103" start="2035" end="2042" title="Hadston" label="Hadston"/>
<link wikidata="Q748591" start="2044" end="2055" title="Haltwhistle" label="Haltwhistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q776558" start="2057" end="2066" title="Harbottle" label="Harbottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783557" start="2068" end="2075" title="Hartley, Northumberland" label="Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490155" start="2077" end="2084" title="Harnham, Northumberland" label="Harnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783796" start="2086" end="2099" title="Haydon Bridge" label="Haydon Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2101" end="2106" title="Hazon, Northumberland" label="Hazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q947400" start="2108" end="2114" title="Hexham" label="Hexham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2116" end="2129" title="High Angerton" label="High Angerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755007" start="2131" end="2142" title="High Buston" label="High Buston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2144" end="2158" title="High Callerton" label="High Callerton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2160" end="2171" title="High Church, Northumberland" label="High Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031866" start="2173" end="2195" title="High Newton-by-the-Sea" label="High Newton-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2197" end="2207" title="Highfields, Northumberland" label="Highfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q9293288" start="2209" end="2216" title="Holburn" label="Holburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710013" start="2218" end="2227" title="Holystone, Northumberland" label="Holystone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2229" end="2237" title="Holywell, Northumberland" label="Holywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617687" start="2239" end="2259" title="Horsley, Northumberland" label="Horsley (nr Prudhoe)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2261" end="2283" title="Horsley, Redesdale, Northumberland" label="Horsley (nr Redesdale)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9293939" start="2285" end="2291" title="Horton, Blyth" label="Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915765" start="2293" end="2306" title="Housedon Hill" label="Housedon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812832" start="2308" end="2319" title="Housesteads" label="Housesteads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921461" start="2321" end="2327" title="Howdon" label="Howdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922615" start="2329" end="2335" title="Howtel" label="Howtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294259" start="2337" end="2343" title="Howick, Northumberland" label="Howick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581975" start="2345" end="2353" title="Hartburn, Northumberland" label="Hartburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796076" start="2355" end="2364" title="Humshaugh" label="Humshaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478668" start="2372" end="2380" title="Ilderton, Northumberland" label="Ilderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617566" start="2382" end="2388" title="Ingram, Northumberland" label="Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064240" start="2396" end="2403" title="Kielder, Northumberland" label="Kielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332036" start="2405" end="2411" title="Kilham, Northumberland" label="Kilham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415674" start="2413" end="2422" title="Kirkharle" label="Kirkharle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098398" start="2424" end="2439" title="Kirkwhelpington" label="Kirkwhelpington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262154" start="2441" end="2448" title="Kirkley, Northumberland" label="Kirkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826897" start="2456" end="2463" title="Langley, Northumberland" label="Langley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2465" end="2471" title="Linton, Northumberland" label="Linton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2473" end="2489" title="Little Bavington" label="Little Bavington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199113" start="2491" end="2506" title="Longframlington" label="Longframlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225905" start="2508" end="2517" title="Longhirst" label="Longhirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617100" start="2519" end="2530" title="Longhorsley" label="Longhorsley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2532" end="2544" title="Low Alwinton" label="Low Alwinton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2546" end="2558" title="Low Angerton" label="Low Angerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762901" start="2560" end="2571" title="Low Brunton" label="Low Brunton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2583" title="Low Buston" label="Low Buston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692831" start="2585" end="2596" title="Low Cocklaw" label="Low Cocklaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031866" start="2598" end="2619" title="Low Newton-by-the-Sea" label="Low Newton-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617046" start="2621" end="2627" title="Lowick, Northumberland" label="Lowick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697744" start="2629" end="2635" title="Lucker, Northumberland" label="Lucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616702" start="2637" end="2646" title="Lynemouth" label="Lynemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19945963" start="2654" end="2670" title="Marshall Meadows Bay" label="Marshall Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822049" start="2672" end="2678" title="Meldon, Northumberland" label="Meldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841511" start="2680" end="2690" title="Middle Ord" label="Middle Ord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742186" start="2692" end="2701" title="Middleton, Northumberland" label="Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858346" start="2703" end="2710" title="Mindrum" label="Mindrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q736785" start="2712" end="2719" title="Morpeth, Northumberland" label="Morpeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11783587" start="2721" end="2728" title="Mitford, Northumberland" label="Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2730" end="2736" title="Murton, Northumberland" label="Murton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997168" start="2744" end="2750" title="Nesbit, Northumberland" label="Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100045" start="2752" end="2761" title="Netherton, Northumberland" label="Netherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453571" start="2763" end="2775" title="Netherwitton" label="Netherwitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q267021" start="2777" end="2787" title="New Bewick" label="New Bewick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097392" start="2789" end="2809" title="Newbiggin by the Sea" label="Newbiggin by the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008462" start="2811" end="2822" title="New Hartley" label="New Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031866" start="2824" end="2841" title="Newton-by-the-Sea" label="Newton-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054215" start="2843" end="2854" title="North Blyth" label="North Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054794" start="2856" end="2870" title="North Charlton" label="North Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2872" end="2884" title="North Seaton" label="North Seaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080091" start="2892" end="2896" title="Ogle, Northumberland" label="Ogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018290" start="2898" end="2908" title="Old Bewick" label="Old Bewick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882400" start="2910" end="2921" title="Once Brewed" label="Once Brewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009668" start="2923" end="2932" title="Otterburn, Northumberland" label="Otterburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339370" start="2940" end="2948" title="Pegswood" label="Pegswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q23600118" start="2950" end="2956" title="Pigdon" label="Pigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262154" start="2958" end="2967" title="Ponteland" label="Ponteland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235963" start="2969" end="2976" title="Powburn" label="Powburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090114" start="2978" end="2985" title="Prudhoe" label="Prudhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280023" start="2993" end="3002" title="Radcliffe, Northumberland" label="Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303913" start="3004" end="3012" title="Ramshope" label="Ramshope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3014" end="3021" title="Red Row" label="Red Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305796" start="3023" end="3032" title="Redesdale" label="Redesdale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3034" end="3042" title="Ridsdale, Northumberland" label="Ridsdale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3044" end="3053" title="Riverside, Northumberland" label="Riverside"/>
<link wikidata="Q609497" start="3055" end="3064" title="Rochester, Northumberland" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q578750" start="3066" end="3074" title="Rothbury" label="Rothbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439081" start="3082" end="3093" title="Scremerston" label="Scremerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993734" start="3095" end="3104" title="Scots Gap" label="Scots Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q681908" start="3106" end="3115" title="Seahouses" label="Seahouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734413" start="3117" end="3131" title="Seaton Delaval" label="Seaton Delaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262418" start="3133" end="3146" title="Seaton Sluice" label="Seaton Sluice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446250" start="3148" end="3155" title="Seghill" label="Seghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492484" start="3157" end="3166" title="Sheepwash, Northumberland" label="Sheepwash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628533" start="3168" end="3178" title="Shilbottle" label="Shilbottle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3180" end="3187" title="Shipley, Northumberland" label="Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451166" start="3189" end="3196" title="Snitter" label="Snitter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3198" end="3209" title="South Beach, Northumberland" label="South Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975327" start="3211" end="3226" title="South Broomhill" label="South Broomhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566790" start="3228" end="3242" title="South Charlton" label="South Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q576423" start="3244" end="3253" title="Stakeford" label="Stakeford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916930" start="3255" end="3266" title="Stannington, Northumberland" label="Stannington"/>
<link wikidata="Q952536" start="3268" end="3277" title="Stobswood" label="Stobswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618200" start="3279" end="3290" title="Stocksfield" label="Stocksfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q526502" start="3292" end="3302" title="Stonehaugh" label="Stonehaugh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3310" end="3319" title="Throphill" label="Throphill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835504" start="3321" end="3329" title="Tranwell" label="Tranwell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3331" end="3345" title="Tranwell Woods" label="Tranwell Woods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3347" end="3354" title="Tughall" label="Tughall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858638" start="3356" end="3370" title="Twizell Castle" label="Twizell Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538605" start="3378" end="3384" title="Ulgham" label="Ulgham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897607" start="3386" end="3407" title="Unthank, Alnham" label="Unthank (near Alnham)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897613" start="3409" end="3435" title="Unthank, Haltwhistle" label="Unthank (near Haltwhistle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233131" start="3443" end="3453" title="Vindolanda" label="Vindolanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801136" start="3461" end="3465" title="Wall, Northumberland" label="Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963113" start="3467" end="3477" title="Wallington, Northumberland" label="Wallington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018205" start="3479" end="3492" title="Wark on Tweed" label="Wark on Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q993650" start="3494" end="3506" title="Wark on Tyne" label="Wark on Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616632" start="3508" end="3517" title="Warkworth, Northumberland" label="Warkworth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3519" end="3534" title="West Chevington" label="West Chevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987013" start="3536" end="3549" title="West Woodburn" label="West Woodburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187087" start="3551" end="3558" title="Whalton" label="Whalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q952536" start="3560" end="3571" title="Widdrington Station and Stobswood" label="Widdrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4338665" start="3573" end="3584" title="Whittingham, Northumberland" label="Whittingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663783" start="3586" end="3592" title="Wooler, Northumberland" label="Wooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025063" start="3594" end="3599" title="Wylam" label="Wylam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3607" end="3613" title="Yarrow, Northumberland" label="Yarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039629" start="3615" end="3624" title="Yeavering" label="Yeavering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053044" start="3626" end="3636" title="Yetlington" label="Yetlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q383335" start="3662" end="3675" title="Cheviot Hills" label="Cheviot Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118313" start="3677" end="3692" title="Churnsike Lodge" label="Churnsike Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755722" start="3694" end="3707" title="Coquet Island, England" label="Coquet Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180627" start="3709" end="3717" title="Cragside" label="Cragside"/>
<link wikidata="Q515105" start="3719" end="3738" title="Dunstanburgh Castle" label="Dunstanburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q666887" start="3740" end="3753" title="Farne Islands" label="Farne Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="3755" end="3774" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q950037" start="3776" end="3788" title="Hexham Abbey" label="Hexham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630735" start="3790" end="3803" title="Kielder Water" label="Kielder Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="3805" end="3816" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332452" start="3818" end="3837" title="North Pennines AONB" label="North Pennines AONB"/>
<link wikidata="Q582205" start="3839" end="3867" title="Northumberland National Park" label="Northumberland National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4185858" start="3869" end="3883" title="Prudhoe Castle" label="Prudhoe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27990691" start="3899" end="3950" title="List of settlements in Northumberland by population" label="List of settlements in Northumberland by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858915" start="3952" end="3977" title="List of places in England" label="List of places in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139742" wikidata="Q7455910" url="?curid=1139742" title="Servitor">
<text>In certain universities (including some colleges of University of Oxford and the University of Edinburgh), a servitor was an undergraduate student who received free accommodation (and some free meals), and was exempted from paying fees for lectures. The term is still used at the University of Edinburgh, where it refers to the staff who are responsible for security, mail and reception (similar to porters at other universities) and are also on duty at formal occasions, when their functions include carrying the mace and ushering.

At Oxford, servitors were originally expected to act as servants to the fellows of their college. By 1852, this requirement had largely fallen into disuse, and the term had been replaced (often by clerk or Bible-clerk) at most colleges. The last recorded use of the term in Oxford was in 1867 (at Christ Church; the following year, the same people were called exhibitioners).

==See also==
* Sizar (University of Cambridge)
* Batteler (University of Oxford)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="11" end="23" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581649" start="40" end="48" title="Colleges of the University of Oxford" label="colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="52" end="72" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="81" end="104" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455910" start="109" end="117" title="Servitor" label="servitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="125" end="138" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231587" start="399" end="406" title="Porter (college)" label="porters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432431" start="514" end="518" title="Ceremonial mace" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919189" start="523" end="528" title="Usher (occupation)" label="usher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="606" end="613" title="Fellow#Oxford, Cambridge and Dublin" label="fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q738142" start="731" end="736" title="Clerk (position)" label="clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="831" end="844" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420210" start="894" end="906" title="exhibitioner" label="exhibitioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533398" start="926" end="931" title="Sizar" label="Sizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="933" end="956" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869697" start="960" end="968" title="Batteler" label="Batteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="970" end="990" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139745" wikidata="Q2521042" url="?curid=1139745" title="The Teeth of the Tiger">
<text>The Teeth of the Tiger is a thriller novel, written by Tom Clancy and released on August 11, 2003. Set in a post-9/11 world, it is the first book to feature The Campus, a covert intelligence agency created by President Jack Ryan before the end of his term as chief executive. While he does not appear in the book, his son Jack Ryan Jr., as well as his nephews Dominic and Brian Caruso, are featured as The Campus operatives. The book debuted at number one on the New York Times bestseller list, and would become Clancy&#x27;s last solely written novel before a seven-year break from writing fiction.

==Plot summary==
In Rome, a Mossad station chief is assassinated. The murder piques the interest of the Campus, an off-the-books intelligence agency created by former United States president Jack Ryan before the end of his presidential term. Situated in a high-rise office building that has direct line-of-sight between the main headquarters for the CIA and the NSA, the organization was created to &quot;identify, locate, and deal with terrorist threats&quot; in anticipation of the current administration&#x27;s neglect of the CIA and the NSA. A private trading and arbitrage company, Hendley Associates, serves as a legitimate front for the Campus by funding its operations via stock market trades influenced by the captured intelligence data, thus removing federal oversight and allowing free rein in its operations.

Jack Ryan Jr., son of the former president, soon discovers the Campus&#x27; operations. Wanting to serve his country in the post-9/11 world, he is hired by the agency as an analyst. Elsewhere, his cousin Brian Caruso is a U.S. Marine returning from Afghanistan to be decorated for his achievements in battle. His twin brother Dominic is an FBI agent who, while investigating a kidnapping of a little girl, finds her raped and killed. Caruso kills the suspect ostensibly in self defense after purposely getting noticed, and the suspect reacts by grabbing a knife at gun-point (thereby providing a &quot;threat&quot;).

The Caruso brothers are soon recruited into a Campus strike team, chosen for their ability to kill enemies in cold blood. However, Brian is unsure of the morality of carrying out preemptive assassinations, even against terrorists. This changes when cells of Islamic fundamentalists cross the U.S.-Mexico border and attack several suburban malls. Brian and Dominic happen to be at one of the malls when the attack occurs. Although they efficiently find and dispatch all four shooters, dozens of people are killed; similar massacres occur at most of the other targeted sites. When a child dies in his arms after the attack, Brian abandons his earlier moral qualms. The Campus decides the brothers are ready and implements a &quot;reconnaissance by fire&quot; strategy to flush out the terrorist leaders.

To carry out the assassinations, the brothers are issued a weapon utilizing succinylcholine, developed by a Columbia University professor whose brother died in the 9/11 attacks. The succinylcholine is delivered through a hypodermic needle disguised as a pen. Twisting the nib switches the tip from a normal tip to a sharp needle that delivers 7 milligrams of the substance. Only 5 milligrams are necessary for death. The substance causes complete paralysis at 30 to 50 seconds and death at 3 minutes, shutting down all the muscles within the victim (including the diaphragm), with the exception of the heart. However, it makes the murder look like a heart attack, thus raising no suspicion.

Disguised as tourists, the team travels across Europe, finding and murdering several major players in the terrorist organization. The first three murders go off fairly routinely, and for the third assassination, the brothers are joined by their cousin Jack. Although originally present as an observer, Jack is forced to kill the target himself when a random accident spills wine on the brothers&#x27; suits, spoiling their anonymous appearance. After murdering the terrorist (coincidentally in the same men&#x27;s room where the terrorist had killed the Mossad station chief), Jack uses his hotel key to gain access to his computer and downloads the entire contents for later analysis.

==Characters==
===The Campus===
* John Patrick &quot;Jack&quot; Ryan Jr.: Analyst and son of Jack Ryan
* Dominic &quot;Enzo&quot; Caruso: Operations officer and Jack&#x27;s cousin. He is an FBI special agent assigned in Birmingham, Alabama.
* Brian &quot;Aldo&quot; Caruso: Operations officer and Dominic&#x27;s twin brother. He is a Force Recon Marine who served in Afghanistan.
* Gerald Paul &quot;Gerry&quot; Hendley Jr.: Director of Hendley Associates / The Campus
* Jerome &quot;Jerry&quot; Rounds: Head of strategic planning / intelligence chief
* Sam Granger: Head of currency trading / operations chief
* Rick Bell: Analyst
* Tony Wills: Analyst and Jack&#x27;s training officer
* Pete Alexander: The Caruso twins&#x27; training officer

===The Organization===
* Mohammed Hassan al-Din (MoHa): Operations director, killed by Jack in Rome
* Uda bin Sali: Financier of the attacks, killed by Brian in London
* Anas Ali Atef: Recruiter, killed by Dominic in Munich
* Fa&#x27;ad Rahman Yasin: Messenger, killed by Brian in Vienna
* Mustafa: Leader of one of the four-man teams sent to attack four suburban malls across the United States
* The Emir: Leader of the Organization. He would later become the primary antagonist in the next novel &quot;Dead or Alive&quot;.

===Other characters===
* Ernesto: A senior member of the Cartel interfacing with Mohammed&#x27;s men
* David Greengold: Mossad chief of station based in Rome

== Controversy ==
The depiction of violence in a real setting elicited a minor controversy among Charlottesville and Albemarle County, Virginia residents at the time of its release, as reported by Charlottesville weekly newspaper &quot;The Hook&quot;. Charlottesville Fashion Square, a shopping mall in the Charlottesville area, serves as the setting of a massacre by a team of Islamic terrorists in the story. The scene includes accurate references to the mall&#x27;s contemporary tenant stores, as well as to the University of Virginia.

A spokesperson for Charlottesville Fashion Square told &quot;The Hook&quot; that the mall&#x27;s operators were not pleased with the mall&#x27;s inclusion in the book. Albemarle County Police chief John Miller indicated that he did not consider the novel a threat to the town.

==Reception==
Like &quot;Red Rabbit&quot;, Clancy&#x27;s &quot;The Teeth of the Tiger&quot; was poorly received by critics and reviews for &quot;The Teeth of the Tiger&quot; were &quot;tepid at best.&quot; &quot;The Washington Post&quot; described it as a &quot;bloated, boring, silly novel&quot; with &quot;inane dialogue, gossamer characterizations, endless repetition and bumper-sticker politics.&quot; The &quot;St. Louis Post-Dispatch&quot; panned it as well, saying that the most positive thing about the book was that it was &quot;mercifully briefer than its chronological predecessor in the Jack Ryan series.&quot; The &quot;San Antonio Express-News&quot; described the novel as &quot;an acceptable thriller&quot; that is &quot;an obvious attempt to reinvent the franchise [Clancy] has created.&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="28" end="36" title="thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q105167" start="55" end="65" title="Tom Clancy" label="Tom Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="113" end="117" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068314" start="219" end="228" title="Jack Ryan (character)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="459" end="493" title="the New York Times bestseller list" label="the New York Times bestseller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="621" end="625" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="629" end="635" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068314" start="792" end="801" title="Jack Ryan (character)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="951" end="954" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="963" end="966" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831917" start="1157" end="1186" title="trade (financial instrument)" label="trading and arbitrage company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424605" start="1295" end="1301" title="Trader (finance)" label="trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233466" start="1547" end="1556" title="post-9/11" label="post-9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1645" end="1656" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1672" end="1683" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1763" end="1766" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="1896" end="1908" title="Self-defense" label="self defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140370" start="2299" end="2321" title="Islamic fundamentalist" label="Islamic fundamentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="2333" end="2351" title="U.S.-Mexico border" label="U.S.-Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q264352" start="2769" end="2791" title="reconnaissance by fire" label="reconnaissance by fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q424378" start="2920" end="2935" title="Suxamethonium chloride" label="succinylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2952" end="2971" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="3291" end="3300" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="3408" end="3417" title="Thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068314" start="4316" end="4325" title="Jack Ryan (character)" label="Jack Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="4443" end="4462" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187943" start="4557" end="4575" title="United States Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance" label="Force Recon Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4590" end="4601" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5064" end="5068" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5130" end="5136" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="5186" end="5192" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="5250" end="5256" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015745" start="5473" end="5486" title="Dead or Alive (novel)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="5615" end="5621" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="5648" end="5652" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="5751" end="5766" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q488653" start="5771" end="5797" title="Albemarle County, Virginia" label="Albemarle County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740217" start="5890" end="5898" title="The Hook (newspaper)" label="The Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086239" start="5906" end="5936" title="Charlottesville Fashion Square" label="Charlottesville Fashion Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q847731" start="6032" end="6050" title="Islamic terrorism" label="Islamic terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="6169" end="6191" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136077" start="6497" end="6507" title="Red Rabbit" label="Red Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6684" end="6703" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495288" start="6888" end="6911" title="St. Louis Post-Dispatch" label="St. Louis Post-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946733" start="7105" end="7129" title="San Antonio Express-News" label="San Antonio Express-News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139747" wikidata="Q411048" url="?curid=1139747" title="Santo Amaro">
<text>Santo Amaro, Portuguese for &quot;Saint Amaro&quot;, may refer to the following places:
==Brazil==
*Santo Amaro, Bahia
*Santo Amaro da Imperatriz, Santa Catarina
*Santo Amaro das Brotas, Sergipe
*Santo Amaro do Maranhão, Maranhão
*Santo Amaro, a district in the city of São Paulo
*Santo Amaro, a subprefecture in the city of São Paulo
*Santo Amaro, São Paulo Metro station
*Santo Amaro, a neighborhood in Recife, Brazil

==Portugal==
*Santo Amaro, a civil parish in the municipality of Sousel
*, a civil parish in the municipality of Vila Nova de Foz Côa
*Santo Amaro, a civil parish in the municipality of São Roque do Pico, Pico, Azores 
*Santo Amaro, a civil parish in the municipality of Velas, São Jorge, Azores

==São Tomé and Príncipe==
*Santo Amaro, São Tomé and Príncipe

==See also==
*Amaro (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q411048" start="0" end="11" title="Santo Amaro" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q455169" start="34" end="45" title="Amaro (saint)" label="Saint Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q739789" start="100" end="111" title="Santo Amaro, Bahia" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q327210" start="120" end="145" title="Santo Amaro da Imperatriz" label="Santo Amaro da Imperatriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q371369" start="163" end="185" title="Santo Amaro das Brotas" label="Santo Amaro das Brotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q665255" start="196" end="219" title="Santo Amaro do Maranhão" label="Santo Amaro do Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420462" start="231" end="242" title="Santo Amaro (district of São Paulo)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223621" start="281" end="292" title="Subprefecture of Santo Amaro" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q111926727" start="336" end="347" title="Santo Amaro (São Paulo Metro)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10368145" start="374" end="385" title="Santo Amaro (Recife)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223685" start="435" end="446" title="Santo Amaro (Sousel)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q537471" start="534" end="554" title="Vila Nova de Foz Côa" label="Vila Nova de Foz Côa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191832" start="556" end="567" title="Santo Amaro (São Roque do Pico)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451546" start="641" end="652" title="Santo Amaro (Velas)" label="Santo Amaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223622" start="745" end="779" title="Santo Amaro, São Tomé and Príncipe" label="Santo Amaro, São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q455159" start="795" end="817" title="Amaro (disambiguation)" label="Amaro (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139751" wikidata="Q7995002" url="?curid=1139751" title="White Lightning (car)">
<text>The White Lightning was the world&#x27;s fastest electric car. On October 22, 1999, the car set a world land speed record for an electric-powered vehicle of over a distance of one mile at the Bonneville Salt Flats race track near Wendover, Utah.

Two electric motors with controllers and a complex 420 volt battery pack consisting of 6,120 nickel-metal hydride, AA sized batteries power the car. The two 150-kilowatt (201 hp) rated motors provide roughly the equivalent of 400 hp (298 kilowatts). Dempsey&#x27;s World Record Associates (DWRA) built the car, which Pat Rummerfield, known as the first fully recovered quadriplegic in the world, drove to world records.

In October 2003, the Buckeye Bullet surpassed White Lightning&#x27;s record. The Buckeye Bullet again surpassed the White Lightning&#x27;s record in October 2004, increasing the electric record to .

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7995002" start="4" end="19" title="White Lightning (car)" label="White Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="49" end="61" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642181" start="192" end="224" title="Bonneville Speedway" label="Bonneville Salt Flats race track"/>
<link wikidata="Q255781" start="230" end="244" title="Wendover, Utah" label="Wendover, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143978" start="564" end="579" title="Pat Rummerfield" label="Pat Rummerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q944758" start="616" end="628" title="quadriplegic" label="quadriplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983063" start="689" end="703" title="Buckeye Bullet" label="Buckeye Bullet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139752" wikidata="Q104840600" url="?curid=1139752" title="Stephanos">
<text>Stephanos or Stefanos, in Greek , is a masculine given name derived from the Greek word (&quot;stéphanos&quot;), meaning &quot;wreath, crown&quot; and by extension &quot;reward, honor, renown, fame&quot;, from the verb (&quot;stéphein&quot;), &quot;to encircle, to wreathe&quot;. In Ancient Greece, crowning wreaths (such as laurel wreaths) were given to the winners of contests. Originally, as the verb suggests, the noun had a more general meaning of any &quot;circle&quot;—including a circle of people, a circling wall around a city, and, in its earliest recorded use, the circle of a fight, which is found in the &quot;Iliad&quot; of Homer. The English equivalent is Stephen.

People or biblical figures with the given name include:
* Saint Stephen (Greek: Stéphanos) (c. 5 AD–c. 34 AD), considered the first Christian martyr
* Stephanos Byzantios, 6th century author of a geographical dictionary
* Stephanos of Alexandria (fl. c. 580–c. 640), Byzantine philosopher and teacher
* Stephanos of Tallinn (born 1940), primate of the Orthodox Church of Estonia since 1999
* Stephanos Bibas (born 1969), United States circuit judge and professor of law and criminology
* Stephanos Christopoulos (1876–after 1906), Greek wrestler and weightlifter
* Stefanos Dedas (born 1982), Greek professional basketball head coach
* Stefanos Dragoumis (1842–1923), Greek judge, writer and Prime Minister of Greece in 1910
* Stefanos Gennadis (1858-1922), Greek general
* Stefanos Kapino (born 1994), Greek football goalkeeper
* Stefanos Kasselakis (born 1988), Greek businessman, entrepreneur and politician
* Stephanos Mousouros, Ottoman-appointed Prince of Samos from 1896 to 1899
* Stephanos Papadopoulos (born 1976), Greek-American poet
* Stephanos Sahlikis (1330–after 1391), Cretan satirical poet
* Stephanos Stephanides (born 1951), Cypriot-born author, poet, translator, critic, ethnographer and documentary filmmaker
* Stephanos Theodosius (1924–2007), Bishop of the Calcutta diocese of the Malankara Orthodox Church
* Stefanos Tsitsipas (born 1998), Greek tennis player
* Stephanos Tzangarolas (1660-1675 – 1710), Greek painter

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104840600" start="0" end="9" title="Stephanos" label="Stephanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840600" start="13" end="21" title="Stephanos" label="Stefanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="26" end="31" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="283" end="297" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q734844" start="325" end="338" title="laurel wreath" label="laurel wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="623" end="628" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="638" end="643" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927100" start="671" end="678" title="Stephen" label="Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q161775" start="739" end="752" title="Saint Stephen" label="Saint Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="832" end="851" title="Stephanos Byzantios" label="Stephanos Byzantios"/>
<link wikidata="Q330289" start="903" end="926" title="Stephanos of Alexandria" label="Stephanos of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574480" start="984" end="1004" title="Stephanos of Tallinn" label="Stephanos of Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608476" start="1073" end="1088" title="Stephanos Bibas" label="Stephanos Bibas"/>
<link wikidata="Q439514" start="1169" end="1192" title="Stephanos Christopoulos" label="Stephanos Christopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450173" start="1246" end="1260" title="Stefanos Dedas" label="Stefanos Dedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44132" start="1317" end="1335" title="Stefanos Dragoumis" label="Stefanos Dragoumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16329063" start="1408" end="1425" title="Stefanos Gennadis" label="Stefanos Gennadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928459" start="1455" end="1470" title="Stefanos Kapino" label="Stefanos Kapino"/>
<link wikidata="Q122147820" start="1512" end="1531" title="Stefanos Kasselakis" label="Stefanos Kasselakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000586" start="1594" end="1613" title="Stephanos Mousouros" label="Stephanos Mousouros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608477" start="1669" end="1691" title="Stephanos Papadopoulos" label="Stephanos Papadopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136115" start="1727" end="1745" title="Stephanos Sahlikis" label="Stephanos Sahlikis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751078" start="1789" end="1810" title="Stephanos Stephanides" label="Stephanos Stephanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123443" start="1912" end="1932" title="Stephanos Theodosius" label="Stephanos Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q24450982" start="2012" end="2030" title="Stefanos Tsitsipas" label="Stefanos Tsitsipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107985224" start="2066" end="2087" title="Stephanos Tzangarolas" label="Stephanos Tzangarolas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139755" wikidata="Q563131" url="?curid=1139755" title="José Craveirinha">
<text>José Craveirinha (28 May 19226 February 2003) was a Mozambican journalist, story writer and poet, who is today considered the greatest poet of Mozambique. His poems, written in Portuguese, address such issues as racism and the Portuguese colonial domination of Mozambique. A supporter of the anti-Portuguese group FRELIMO during the colonial wars, he was imprisoned in the 1960s. He was one of the African pioneers of the Négritude movement, and published six books of poetry between 1964 and 1997. Craveirinha also wrote under the pseudonyms Mário Vieira, José Cravo, Jesuíno Cravo, J. Cravo, J.C., Abílio Cossa, and José G. Vetrinha.

==Biography==
Born in Lourenço Marques, Portuguese Mozambique, the child of a Portuguese father and mother of the Ronga ethnicity, Craveirinha was raised in the language and culture of Portugal.

As a journalist, he contributed to numerous Mozambican magazines and newspapers, including &quot;O Brado Africano&quot; (1918–74), &quot;Notícias&quot;, &quot;Tribuna&quot;, &quot;Notícias da Tarde&quot;, &quot;Voz de Moçambique&quot;, &quot;Notícias da Beira&quot;, &quot;Diário de Moçambique&quot;, and &quot;Voz Africana&quot;. He became familiar with other poets of the period through his journalism, notably Rui de Noronha (1909–1943), Marcelino dos Santos (1929–2020), and Noemia de Sousa (1926–2003). His works were primarily political in nature. Consistent themes in his work were African self-determination, images of the African landscape, and writing that reflected the influence of African languages.

Craveirinha began his political activity at the Lourenço Marques African Association in the 1950s, an organization tolerated by the colonial Portuguese government, and later became its chairperson. He became involved in clandestine politics in this period, and became a member of a cell of FRELIMO, the leading movement for the liberation of Mozambique from Portuguese rule. He was imprisoned in solitary confinement by the Portuguese PIDE police in 1965, a year after his publication of his first collection of poetry, &quot;Chigubo&quot;. He was released from prison in 1969.

When FRELIMO seized power in 1974, was appointed vice-director of the national press. He was the first president of Association of Mozambican Writers (&quot;Associação dos Escritores Moçambicanos&quot;), and served from 1982 and 1987. The association established the José Craveirinha Prize for Literature (&quot;Prémio José Craveirinha de Literatura&quot;) in 2003. Craveirinha was awarded the Prémio Camões, the world&#x27;s highest honour for Lusophone literature, in 1991. He is noted as the first African writer to win the prize. He was considered several times for the Nobel Prize for Literature. In 2003, Craveirinha was declared a &quot;national hero&quot; by President Joaquim Chissano of Mozambique, who praised Craveirinha&#x27;s literary contribution to the fight against colonialism.

Despite his literary acclaim, Craveirinha was hesitant to have his works appear in print, and a large body of his work from the pre- and post-colonial periods remains unpublished. His wife Maria died in October 1977. Craveirinha wrote numerous poems after her death that were first published under the title &quot;Maria&quot; in 1988, and in a much fuller form in a second edition in 1998.

Craveirinha also played football and coached other athletes. He arranged an athletic scholarship in the United States for Maria de Lurdes Mutola, who won a gold medal in track and field at the Olympics in 2000, and his son Stelio also held the national long jump record.

Craveirinha died at the age of 80 while undergoing treatment in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 2003.

==Prizes==
*“Prémio Cidade de Lourenço Marques”, 1959
*“Prémio Reinaldo Ferreira”, Centro de Arte e Cultura da Beira, 1961
*“Prémio de Ensaio”, Centro de Arte e Cultura da Beira, 1961
*“Prémio Alexandre Dáskalos”, Casa dos Estudantes do Império, Lisbon, Portugal, 1962
*“Prémio Nacional de Poesia de Itália”, Italy, 1975
*“Prémio Lotus”, Associação de Escritores Afro-Asiáticos, 1983
*“Nachingwea Medal” of the government of Mozambique, 1985
*Medalha de Mérito, Secretaria de Estado da Cultura de São Paulo, Brazil, 1987
*&quot;Grau de Oficial Grão-Mestre&quot;, Ordem Nacional do Cruzeiro do Sul, Brazil, 1990
*&quot;Prémio Camões&quot;, Associação de Escritores Afro-Asiáticos, 1991
*&quot;Prémio Vida Literária&quot;, AEMO – Associação de Escritores Moçambicanos, 1997
*&quot;Grau de Comendador da Ordem Infante Dom Henrique&quot;, Portugal, 1997
*&quot;Ordem de Amizade e Paz&quot;, Moçambique, 1997
*&quot;Prémio Consagração Fundac – Rui de Noronha&quot;, Mozambique, 1999
*&quot;Prémio Voices of Africa&quot;, Ordfront/Leopard Publishing House – Sweden, 2002
*“Grau de Doutor Honoris Causa”, Eduardo Mondlane University – Mozambique, 2002
*“Medalha de Ouro da Comuna de Concesio (Brescia)”
*“Medalha de Ouro do Município de Aljezur”, Portugal
*“Medalha de Ouro do Primeiro Grau do Município de Sintra”, Portugal

==Books published==
*&quot;Chigubo&quot; (poetry). Lisbon: Casa dos Estudantes do Império, 1964; 2d ed. Maputo: INLD, 1980.
*&quot;Cantico a un dio di Catrame&quot; (poetry, bilingual Portuguese–Italian). Translation and preface by Joyce Lussu. Milan, Italy: Lerici, 1966.
*&quot;Karingana ua Karingana&quot; (poetry, “Era uma vez”). Lourenço Marques [Maputo]: Académica, 1974; 2d ed. Maputo: INLD, 1982.
*&quot;Cela 1&quot; (poetry). Maputo: INLD, 1980.
*&quot;Izbranie&quot; (selected works, in Russian). Moscow, USSR: Molodoya Gvardiya, 1984.
*&quot;Maria&quot; (poetry). Lisbon, Portugal: ALAC (África Literatura Arte e Cultura), 1988.
*&quot;Voglio essere tamburo&quot; (poetry). Venezia, Italia: Centro Internazionale della grafica di Venezia – Coop, 1991.
*&quot;Babalaze das Hienas&quot; (poetry). Maputo: AEMO, 1997.
*&quot;Hamina e outros contos&quot; (poetry). Maputo: Njira, 1997.
*&quot;Contacto e outras crónicas&quot;. Maputo: Centro Cultural Português, 1999
*&quot;Poesia Toda&quot; (poetry). Lisboa, Portugal: Caminho, 2000.
*&quot;Obra Poética&quot; (poetry). Maputo: UEM, 2002.
*&quot;Dikter&quot; (poetry). Stockholm: Ordfront, 2002.
*&quot;Poemas da Prisão&quot; (poetry). Maputo: Njira, 2003.
*&quot;Poesia Erótica&quot; (poetry). Maputo: Texto Editores, 2004.

==Footnotes==
:A.Later published with the spelling altered to &quot;Xigubo&quot;. The term is from the Ronga language and refers to a warrior dance of the Ronga ethnic group.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="0" end="16" title="José Craveirinha" label="José Craveirinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="135" end="139" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="177" end="187" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="212" end="218" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="238" end="246" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="314" end="321" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="398" end="404" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q852544" start="422" end="431" title="Négritude" label="Négritude"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="543" end="555" title="José Craveirinha" label="Mário Vieira"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="557" end="567" title="José Craveirinha" label="José Cravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="569" end="582" title="José Craveirinha" label="Jesuíno Cravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="584" end="592" title="José Craveirinha" label="J. Cravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="594" end="598" title="José Craveirinha" label="J.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="600" end="612" title="José Craveirinha" label="Abílio Cossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q563131" start="618" end="634" title="José Craveirinha" label="José G. Vetrinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="677" end="698" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Portuguese Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520717" start="751" end="756" title="Ronga" label="Ronga"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="822" end="830" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="930" end="946" title="O Brado Africano" label="O Brado Africano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1246" end="1260" title="Rui de Noronha" label="Rui de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893287" start="1274" end="1294" title="Marcelino dos Santos" label="Marcelino dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q431989" start="1312" end="1327" title="Noemia de Sousa" label="Noemia de Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="1430" end="1448" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1595" end="1631" title="Lourenço Marques African Association" label="Lourenço Marques African Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q504564" start="1837" end="1844" title="FRELIMO" label="FRELIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q958917" start="1982" end="1986" title="PIDE" label="PIDE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2242" end="2275" title="Association of Mozambican Writers" label="Association of Mozambican Writers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2393" end="2430" title="José Craveirinha Prize for Literature" label="José Craveirinha Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q752134" start="2520" end="2533" title="Prémio Camões" label="Prémio Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="2700" end="2726" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q208355" start="2803" end="2819" title="Joaquim Chissano" label="Joaquim Chissano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="3338" end="3346" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3418" end="3431" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q228807" start="3436" end="3458" title="Maria de Lurdes Mutola" label="Maria de Lurdes Mutola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="3484" end="3499" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="3507" end="3515" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="3650" end="3662" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="3664" end="3676" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="3934" end="3940" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3997" end="4002" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957164" start="4074" end="4090" title="Nachingwea Medal" label="Nachingwea Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4196" end="4202" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q752134" start="4306" end="4319" title="Camões Prize" label="Prémio Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="4575" end="4585" title="Mozambique" label="Moçambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q890884" start="4786" end="4813" title="Eduardo Mondlane University" label="Eduardo Mondlane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="5252" end="5257" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5259" end="5264" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20049754" start="5287" end="5309" title="Karingana ua Karingana" label="Karingana ua Karingana"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5514" end="5520" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5522" end="5526" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520717" start="6394" end="6408" title="Ronga language" label="Ronga language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139759" wikidata="Q6558768" url="?curid=1139759" title="Lisenser Spitze">
<text>The Lisenser Spitze (3230 m) is a mountain in the Stubai Alps of Austria.

==External links==
* Information on Lisenser Spitze (in German)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6558768" start="4" end="19" title="Lisenser Spitze" label="Lisenser Spitze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="34" end="42" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q679261" start="50" end="61" title="Stubai Alps" label="Stubai Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="65" end="72" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1139762" wikidata="Q6633818" url="?curid=1139762" title="List of places in Nottinghamshire">
<text>This is a list of settlements in the [[ceremonial counties of England|ceremonial county]] of [[Nottinghamshire]], England.

==A==
Alverton,
Annesley,
Annesley Woodhouse,
Arnold,
Askham,
Aslockton,
Aspley,
Attenborough,
Averham,
Awsworth

==B==
Babbington,
Babworth,
Bagthorpe,
Bakersfield,
Balderton,
Barnby in the Willows,
Barnstone,
Barton in Fabis,
Bassingfield,
Bathley,
Beauvale Newthorpe,
Beckingham,
Beeston,
Besthorpe,
Bestwood Village,
Bevercotes,
Bilborough,
Bilby,
Bilsthorpe,
Bilsthorpe Moor,
Bingham,
Bircotes,
Bleasby,
Blidworth,
Blidworth Bottoms,
Blyth,
Bole,
Bolham,
Bothamsall,
Boughton,
Bracebridge,
Bradmore,
Bramcote,
Bramcote Hills,
Brinkley,
Brinsley,
Brough,
Broxtowe,
Budby,
Bulcote,
Bulwell,
Bunny,
Burton Joyce,
Butler&#x27;s Hill

==C==
Calverton,
Car Colston,
Carburton,
Carlton,
Carlton in Lindrick,
Carlton-on-Trent,
Carrington,
Caunton,
Caythorpe,
Chilwell,
Church Laneham,
Church Warsop,
Clarborough, 
Clayworth,
Clifton,
Clipston,
Clipstone,
Coates,
Coddington,
Collingham,
Colston Bassett,
Colwick,
Cossall,
Costock,
Costhorpe,
Cotgrave,
Cotham,
Cottam, 
Cromwell,
Cropwell Bishop,
Cropwell Butler,
Cuckney,
Cuckney Hill

==D==
Darlton, 
Dorket Head,
Dunkirk, 
Dunham

==E==
Eakring, 
East Bridgford, 
East Drayton, 
East Leake, 
East Markham, 
East Stoke, 
Easthorpe, 
Eastwood, 
Eaton, 
Edingley, 
Edwalton, 
Edwinstowe, 
Egmanton, 
Elkesley, 
Elston, 
Elton on the Hill, 
Epperstone, 
Everton

==F==
Farndon, 
Farnsfield, 
Felley,
Fenton,
Fiskerton, 
Flawborough, 
Fledborough, 
Flintham, 
Forest Town

==G==
Gamston (Bassetlaw),
Gamston (Rushcliffe), 
Gateford, 
Gedling, 
Giltbrook, 
Girton, 
Gonalston, 
Gotham, 
Goverton, 
Granby, 
Grassthorpe, 
Greasley,
Gringley-on-the-Hill, 
Grove, 
Gunthorpe

==H==
Halam, 
Halloughton, 
Harby, 
Hardwick Village, 
Harlequin, 
Harworth,
Hassop, 
Haughton, 
Hawksworth, 
Hawton, 
Hayton,
Haywood Oaks, 
Headon, 
Hickling, 
High Marnham, 
Hockerton, 
Hodsock, 
Holbeck, 
Holbeck Woodhouse, 
Holme, 
Holme Pierrepont, 
Hoveringham, 
Hucknall, 
Huthwaite,
Hyson Green

==J==
Jacksdale

==K==
Kelham, 
Kersall, 
Keyworth, 
Kilton, 
Kilvington, 
Kimberley, 
Kings Clipstone, 
Kingston on Soar, 
Kinoulton, 
Kirkby-in-Ashfield, 
Kirkby Woodhouse, 
Kirklington, 
Kirton, 
Knapthorpe, 
Kneesall, 
Kneeton

==L==
Lambley, 
Laneham, 
Langar, 
Langford, 
Langold, 
Laxton, 
Leen Valley,
Lenton, 
Lenton Abbey, 
Lidgett, 
Linby, 
Lindhurst, 
Little Carlton, 
Little Green, 
Little Gringley, 
Littleborough, 
Lound, 
Low Marnham, 
Lowdham

==M==
Mansfield, 
Mansfield Woodhouse, 
Manton,
Maplebeck, 
Mapperley, 
Market Warsop, 
Markham Moor, 
Mattersey, 
Mattersey Thorpe, Maythorne, 
Meadows,
Meden Vale, 
Milton, 
Misson, 
Misterton, 
Misterton Carr, 
Moorgreen, 
Moorhouse, 
Morton

==N==
Nether Headon, 
Nether Langwith, 
Netherfield, 
New Balderton, 
New Brinsley, 
New Ollerton, 
Newark-on-Trent, 
Newington, 
Newstead, 
Newthorpe,
Newton, 
Normanton, 
Normanton on Soar, 
Normanton on Trent, 
Normanton-on-the-Wolds, 
North Carlton
North Clifton, 
North Leverton with Habblesthorpe, 
North Muskham, 
North Wheatley, 
Norton, 
Norwell, 
Norwell Woodhouse, 
Nottingham, 
Nuncargate,
Nuthall
==O==
Old Basford, 
Old Clipstone, 
Oldcotes, 
Ollerton, 
Ompton, 
Ordsall, 
Orston, 
Osberton, 
Ossington, 
Owthorpe, 
Oxton

==P==
Papplewick, 
Perlethorpe, 
Pleasley, 
Pleasley Hill, 
Plumtree

==R==
Radcliffe on Trent, 
Radford, 
Ragnall, 
Rainworth, 
Rampton, 
Ranby, 
Ranskill, 
Ratcliffe on Soar, 
Ravenshead, 
Rayton, 
Redhill, 
Rempstone,
Retford, 
Rhodesia, 
Rolleston, 
Ruddington, 
Rylands

==S==
Saundby, 
Saxondale, 
Scaftworth, 
Scarrington, 
Scofton, 
Screveton, 
Scrooby, 
Selston, 
Serlby, 
Shelford, 
Shelton, 
Sherwood, 
Shireoaks, 
Sibthorpe, 
Skegby (Ashfield), 
Skegby (Bassetlaw), 
Sneinton, 
Sookholme, 
South Clifton, 
South Leverton, 
South Muskham, 
South Scarle, 
South Wheatley, 
Southwell, 
Spalford, 
Spion Kop, 
Stanford on Soar, 
Stanley, 
Stanton Hill, 
Stanton-on-the-Wolds, 
Stapleford, 
Staunton in the Vale, 
Staythorpe, 
Stoke Bardolph, 
Stokeham, 
Strelley, 
Sturton le Steeple, 
Styrrup, 
Sutton Bonington,
Sutton-cum-Granby,
Sutton-in-Ashfield, 
Sutton on Trent, 
Sutton cum Lound, 
Swingate,
Syerston

==T==
Teversal, 
Thoresby, 
Thorney, 
Thoroton, 
Thorpe-by-Newark, 
Thorpe in the Glebe, 
Thrumpton (Bassetlaw), 
Thrumpton (Rushcliffe), 
Thurgarton, 
Tiln, 
Tithby, 
Tollerton,
Torworth, 
Toton,
Treswell, 
Trowell, 
Tuxford

==U==
Underwood, 
Upper Broughton, Upper Saxondale, 
Upton (Bassetlaw), 
Upton (Newark and Sherwood)

==W==
Walesby, 
Walkeringham, 
Wallingwells, 
Warsop Vale, 
Watnall, 
Wellow, 
West Bridgford, 
West Drayton, 
West Leake, 
West Markham, 
West Stockwith, 
Westhorpe, 
Weston, 
Westville, 
Whaley Thorns, 
Whatton-in-the-Vale, 
Welham, 
White Houses, 
Whitemoor, 
Wicketwood Hill, 
Widmerpool, 
Wigsley, 
Wigthorpe, 
Wilford, 
Willoughby on the Wolds, 
Winkburn, 
Winthorpe, 
Wiseton, 
Wollaton, 
Woodbeck, 
Woodborough,
Woodthorpe,
Worksop, 
Wysall

==Z==
Zouch

==See also==
*List of Nottingham suburbs within the city
*List of civil parishes in Nottinghamshire
*List of settlements in Nottinghamshire by population
* List of places in England </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6633818" start="10" end="112" title="List of places in Nottinghamshire" label="list of settlements in the [[ceremonial counties of England|ceremonial county]] of [[Nottinghamshire]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="114" end="121" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146298" start="130" end="138" title="Alverton" label="Alverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627150" start="140" end="148" title="Annesley" label="Annesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769031" start="150" end="168" title="Annesley Woodhouse" label="Annesley Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q694780" start="170" end="176" title="Arnold, Nottinghamshire" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298166" start="178" end="184" title="Askham, Nottinghamshire" label="Askham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957196" start="186" end="195" title="Aslockton" label="Aslockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808160" start="197" end="203" title="Aspley, Nottingham" label="Aspley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296578" start="205" end="217" title="Attenborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456874" start="219" end="226" title="Averham" label="Averham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446068" start="228" end="236" title="Awsworth" label="Awsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837589" start="244" end="254" title="Babbington" label="Babbington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298437" start="256" end="264" title="Babworth" label="Babworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842140" start="266" end="275" title="Bagthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Bagthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849275" start="277" end="288" title="Bakersfield, Nottingham" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517257" start="290" end="299" title="Balderton" label="Balderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743765" start="301" end="322" title="Barnby in the Willows" label="Barnby in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861981" start="324" end="333" title="Barnstone" label="Barnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548060" start="335" end="350" title="Barton in Fabis" label="Barton in Fabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868155" start="352" end="364" title="Bassingfield" label="Bassingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164628" start="366" end="373" title="Bathley" label="Bathley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877962" start="375" end="393" title="Beauvale" label="Beauvale Newthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568462" start="395" end="405" title="Beckingham, Nottinghamshire" label="Beckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q814121" start="407" end="414" title="Beeston, Nottinghamshire" label="Beeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897070" start="416" end="425" title="Besthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Besthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897125" start="427" end="443" title="Bestwood Village" label="Bestwood Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404552" start="445" end="455" title="Bevercotes" label="Bevercotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907620" start="457" end="467" title="Bilborough" label="Bilborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907630" start="469" end="474" title="Bilby, Nottinghamshire" label="Bilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913610" start="476" end="486" title="Bilsthorpe" label="Bilsthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104654214" start="488" end="503" title="Bilsthorpe Moor" label="Bilsthorpe Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q783269" start="505" end="512" title="Bingham, Nottinghamshire" label="Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454217" start="514" end="522" title="Bircotes" label="Bircotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925757" start="524" end="531" title="Bleasby, Nottinghamshire" label="Bleasby"/>
<link wikidata="Q591927" start="533" end="542" title="Blidworth" label="Blidworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926442" start="544" end="561" title="Blidworth Bottoms" label="Blidworth Bottoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753237" start="563" end="568" title="Blyth, Nottinghamshire" label="Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q681625" start="570" end="574" title="Bole, Nottinghamshire" label="Bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939416" start="576" end="582" title="Bolham, Nottinghamshire" label="Bolham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948626" start="584" end="594" title="Bothamsall" label="Bothamsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949421" start="596" end="604" title="Boughton, Nottinghamshire" label="Boughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281091" start="606" end="617" title="Bracebridge, Nottinghamshire" label="Bracebridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q969180" start="619" end="627" title="Bradmore, Nottinghamshire" label="Bradmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956139" start="629" end="637" title="Bramcote" label="Bramcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204152" start="639" end="653" title="Bramcote Hills" label="Bramcote Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968421" start="655" end="663" title="Brinkley, Nottinghamshire" label="Brinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891558" start="665" end="673" title="Brinsley" label="Brinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975764" start="675" end="681" title="Brough, Nottinghamshire" label="Brough"/>
<link wikidata="Q42353349" start="683" end="691" title="Broxtowe, Nottingham" label="Broxtowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984094" start="693" end="698" title="Budby" label="Budby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205270" start="700" end="707" title="Bulcote" label="Bulcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383991" start="709" end="716" title="Bulwell" label="Bulwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997838" start="718" end="723" title="Bunny, Nottinghamshire" label="Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869023" start="725" end="737" title="Burton Joyce" label="Burton Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002540" start="739" end="757" title="Butler&amp;#x27;s Hill" label="Butler&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475716" start="765" end="774" title="Calverton, Nottinghamshire" label="Calverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037215" start="776" end="787" title="Car Colston" label="Car Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038108" start="789" end="798" title="Carburton" label="Carburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736123" start="800" end="807" title="Carlton, Nottinghamshire" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196849" start="809" end="828" title="Carlton in Lindrick" label="Carlton in Lindrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102779" start="830" end="846" title="Carlton-on-Trent" label="Carlton-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046428" start="848" end="858" title="Carrington, Nottingham" label="Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054549" start="860" end="867" title="Caunton" label="Caunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055447" start="869" end="878" title="Caythorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Caythorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099264" start="880" end="888" title="Chilwell" label="Chilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116636" start="890" end="904" title="Church Laneham" label="Church Laneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116733" start="906" end="919" title="Church Warsop" label="Church Warsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126097" start="921" end="932" title="Clarborough" label="Clarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130400" start="935" end="944" title="Clayworth" label="Clayworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133138" start="946" end="953" title="Clifton, Nottinghamshire" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396254" start="955" end="963" title="Clipston on the Wolds" label="Clipston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520804" start="965" end="974" title="Clipstone" label="Clipstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138608" start="976" end="982" title="Coates, Nottinghamshire" label="Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979001" start="984" end="994" title="Coddington, Nottinghamshire" label="Coddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983467" start="996" end="1006" title="Collingham, Nottinghamshire" label="Collingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149376" start="1008" end="1023" title="Colston Bassett" label="Colston Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818059" start="1025" end="1032" title="Colwick" label="Colwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514128" start="1034" end="1041" title="Cossall" label="Cossall"/>
<link wikidata="Q771171" start="1043" end="1050" title="Costock" label="Costock"/>
<link wikidata="Q101989327" start="1052" end="1061" title="Costhorpe" label="Costhorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q728638" start="1063" end="1071" title="Cotgrave" label="Cotgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175349" start="1073" end="1079" title="Cotham, Nottinghamshire" label="Cotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175559" start="1081" end="1087" title="Cottam, Nottinghamshire" label="Cottam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012208" start="1090" end="1098" title="Cromwell, Nottinghamshire" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685274" start="1100" end="1115" title="Cropwell Bishop" label="Cropwell Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484453" start="1117" end="1132" title="Cropwell Butler" label="Cropwell Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192346" start="1134" end="1141" title="Cuckney" label="Cuckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192349" start="1143" end="1155" title="Cuckney Hill" label="Cuckney Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903489" start="1163" end="1170" title="Darlton" label="Darlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298036" start="1173" end="1184" title="Dorket Head" label="Dorket Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315380" start="1186" end="1193" title="Dunkirk, Nottingham" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315240" start="1196" end="1202" title="Dunham, Nottinghamshire" label="Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318484" start="1210" end="1217" title="Eakring" label="Eakring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327942" start="1220" end="1234" title="East Bridgford" label="East Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177674" start="1237" end="1249" title="East Drayton" label="East Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807493" start="1252" end="1262" title="East Leake" label="East Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967854" start="1265" end="1277" title="East Markham" label="East Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569395" start="1280" end="1290" title="East Stoke, Nottinghamshire" label="East Stoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433341" start="1293" end="1302" title="Easthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Easthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736112" start="1305" end="1313" title="Eastwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331327" start="1316" end="1321" title="Eaton, Nottinghamshire" label="Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812785" start="1324" end="1332" title="Edingley" label="Edingley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341409" start="1335" end="1343" title="Edwalton" label="Edwalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q994882" start="1346" end="1356" title="Edwinstowe" label="Edwinstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793839" start="1359" end="1367" title="Egmanton" label="Egmanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667855" start="1370" end="1378" title="Elkesley" label="Elkesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367753" start="1381" end="1387" title="Elston" label="Elston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367890" start="1390" end="1407" title="Elton on the Hill" label="Elton on the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383852" start="1410" end="1420" title="Epperstone" label="Epperstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417389" start="1423" end="1430" title="Everton, Nottinghamshire" label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435993" start="1438" end="1445" title="Farndon, Nottinghamshire" label="Farndon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436048" start="1448" end="1458" title="Farnsfield" label="Farnsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442462" start="1461" end="1467" title="Felley" label="Felley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443604" start="1469" end="1475" title="Fenton, Nottinghamshire" label="Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455196" start="1477" end="1486" title="Fiskerton, Nottinghamshire" label="Fiskerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252839" start="1489" end="1500" title="Flawborough" label="Flawborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129677" start="1503" end="1514" title="Fledborough" label="Fledborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459592" start="1517" end="1525" title="Flintham" label="Flintham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469122" start="1528" end="1539" title="Forest Town, Nottinghamshire" label="Forest Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658408" start="1547" end="1566" title="Gamston, Bassetlaw" label="Gamston (Bassetlaw)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520407" start="1568" end="1588" title="Gamston, Rushcliffe" label="Gamston (Rushcliffe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527055" start="1591" end="1599" title="Gateford" label="Gateford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221505" start="1602" end="1609" title="Gedling, Nottinghamshire" label="Gedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562631" start="1612" end="1621" title="Giltbrook" label="Giltbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264938" start="1624" end="1630" title="Girton, Nottinghamshire" label="Girton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581342" start="1633" end="1642" title="Gonalston" label="Gonalston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015255" start="1645" end="1651" title="Gotham, Nottinghamshire" label="Gotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589813" start="1654" end="1662" title="Goverton" label="Goverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594171" start="1665" end="1671" title="Granby, Nottinghamshire" label="Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597597" start="1674" end="1685" title="Grassthorpe" label="Grassthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992557" start="1688" end="1696" title="Greasley" label="Greasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609491" start="1698" end="1718" title="Gringley-on-the-Hill" label="Gringley-on-the-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611367" start="1721" end="1726" title="Grove, Nottinghamshire" label="Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619470" start="1729" end="1738" title="Gunthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Gunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231743" start="1746" end="1751" title="Halam, Nottinghamshire" label="Halam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870336" start="1754" end="1765" title="Halloughton" label="Halloughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764376" start="1768" end="1773" title="Harby, Nottinghamshire" label="Harby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656467" start="1776" end="1792" title="Hardwick Village" label="Hardwick Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658639" start="1795" end="1804" title="Harlequin, Nottinghamshire" label="Harlequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677930" start="1807" end="1815" title="Harworth" label="Harworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625516" start="1817" end="1823" title="Hassop" label="Hassop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682463" start="1826" end="1834" title="Haughton, Nottinghamshire" label="Haughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151641" start="1837" end="1847" title="Hawksworth, Nottinghamshire" label="Hawksworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685680" start="1850" end="1856" title="Hawton" label="Hawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655010" start="1859" end="1865" title="Hayton, Nottinghamshire" label="Hayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47459331" start="1867" end="1879" title="Haywood Oaks" label="Haywood Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q20886689" start="1882" end="1888" title="Headon, Bassetlaw" label="Headon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430294" start="1891" end="1899" title="Hickling, Nottinghamshire" label="Hickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969288" start="1902" end="1914" title="High Marnham" label="High Marnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875522" start="1917" end="1926" title="Hockerton" label="Hockerton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1929" end="1936" title="Hodsock#Hodsock village" label="Hodsock"/>
<link wikidata="Q729013" start="1939" end="1946" title="Holbeck, Nottinghamshire" label="Holbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878622" start="1949" end="1966" title="Holbeck Woodhouse" label="Holbeck Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q954119" start="1969" end="1974" title="Holme, Nottinghamshire" label="Holme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139437" start="1977" end="1993" title="Holme Pierrepont" label="Holme Pierrepont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917108" start="1996" end="2007" title="Hoveringham" label="Hoveringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="2010" end="2018" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950805" start="2021" end="2030" title="Huthwaite" label="Huthwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962294" start="2032" end="2043" title="Hyson Green" label="Hyson Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116857" start="2051" end="2060" title="Jacksdale" label="Jacksdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385585" start="2068" end="2074" title="Kelham" label="Kelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334052" start="2077" end="2084" title="Kersall" label="Kersall"/>
<link wikidata="Q366623" start="2087" end="2095" title="Keyworth" label="Keyworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238483" start="2098" end="2104" title="Kilton, Nottinghamshire" label="Kilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523768" start="2107" end="2117" title="Kilvington" label="Kilvington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464975" start="2120" end="2129" title="Kimberley, Nottinghamshire" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24575532" start="2132" end="2147" title="Kings Clipstone" label="Kings Clipstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948631" start="2150" end="2166" title="Kingston on Soar" label="Kingston on Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878961" start="2169" end="2178" title="Kinoulton" label="Kinoulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q738869" start="2181" end="2199" title="Kirkby-in-Ashfield" label="Kirkby-in-Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q738869" start="2202" end="2218" title="Kirkby Woodhouse" label="Kirkby Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415774" start="2221" end="2232" title="Kirklington, Nottinghamshire" label="Kirklington"/>
<link wikidata="Q595930" start="2235" end="2241" title="Kirton, Nottinghamshire" label="Kirton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104961764" start="2244" end="2254" title="Knapthorpe" label="Knapthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421920" start="2257" end="2265" title="Kneesall" label="Kneesall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421923" start="2268" end="2275" title="Kneeton" label="Kneeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027459" start="2283" end="2290" title="Lambley, Nottinghamshire" label="Lambley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485484" start="2293" end="2300" title="Laneham" label="Laneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485701" start="2303" end="2309" title="Langar, Nottinghamshire" label="Langar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486020" start="2312" end="2320" title="Langford, Nottinghamshire" label="Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486398" start="2323" end="2330" title="Langold" label="Langold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753339" start="2333" end="2339" title="Laxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Laxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516333" start="2342" end="2353" title="Leen Valley, Nottinghamshire" label="Leen Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523383" start="2355" end="2361" title="Lenton, Nottingham" label="Lenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523384" start="2364" end="2376" title="Lenton Abbey" label="Lenton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q994882" start="2379" end="2386" title="Lidgett, Nottinghamshire" label="Lidgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884334" start="2389" end="2394" title="Linby" label="Linby"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973008" start="2397" end="2406" title="Lindhurst" label="Lindhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23662782" start="2409" end="2423" title="Little Carlton (Nottinghamshire)" label="Little Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037215" start="2426" end="2438" title="Little Green, Nottinghamshire" label="Little Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062207" start="2441" end="2456" title="Little Gringley" label="Little Gringley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652900" start="2459" end="2472" title="Littleborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Littleborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992017" start="2475" end="2480" title="Lound, Nottinghamshire" label="Lound"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969289" start="2483" end="2494" title="Low Marnham" label="Low Marnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693101" start="2497" end="2504" title="Lowdham" label="Lowdham"/>
<link wikidata="Q841979" start="2512" end="2521" title="Mansfield" label="Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737424" start="2524" end="2543" title="Mansfield Woodhouse" label="Mansfield Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288645" start="2546" end="2552" title="Manton, Nottinghamshire" label="Manton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328073" start="2554" end="2563" title="Maplebeck" label="Maplebeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754156" start="2566" end="2575" title="Mapperley" label="Mapperley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195003" start="2578" end="2591" title="Market Warsop" label="Market Warsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771022" start="2594" end="2606" title="Markham Moor" label="Markham Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786051" start="2609" end="2618" title="Mattersey" label="Mattersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105079615" start="2621" end="2637" title="Mattersey Thorpe" label="Mattersey Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q125449373" start="2639" end="2648" title="Maythorne, Nottinghamshire" label="Maythorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750788" start="2651" end="2658" title="The Meadows, Nottingham" label="Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805262" start="2660" end="2670" title="Meden Vale" label="Meden Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860931" start="2673" end="2679" title="Milton, Nottinghamshire" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175095" start="2682" end="2688" title="Misson, Nottinghamshire" label="Misson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267677" start="2691" end="2700" title="Misterton, Nottinghamshire" label="Misterton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2703" end="2717" title="Misterton, Nottinghamshire#Misterton Carr" label="Misterton Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q104771453" start="2720" end="2729" title="Moorgreen" label="Moorgreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350656" start="2732" end="2741" title="Moorhouse, Nottinghamshire" label="Moorhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914816" start="2744" end="2750" title="Morton, Nottinghamshire" label="Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q102737633" start="2758" end="2771" title="Nether Headon" label="Nether Headon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803742" start="2774" end="2789" title="Nether Langwith" label="Nether Langwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q596268" start="2792" end="2803" title="Netherfield, Nottinghamshire" label="Netherfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517257" start="2806" end="2819" title="New Balderton" label="New Balderton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891558" start="2822" end="2834" title="New Brinsley" label="New Brinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088291" start="2837" end="2849" title="New Ollerton" label="New Ollerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49940" start="2852" end="2867" title="Newark-on-Trent" label="Newark-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q105335228" start="2870" end="2879" title="Newington, Nottinghamshire" label="Newington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019849" start="2882" end="2890" title="Newstead, Nottinghamshire" label="Newstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019989" start="2893" end="2902" title="Newthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Newthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020060" start="2904" end="2910" title="Newton, Nottinghamshire" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433341" start="2913" end="2922" title="Normanton, Nottinghamshire" label="Normanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262175" start="2925" end="2942" title="Normanton on Soar" label="Normanton on Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779735" start="2945" end="2963" title="Normanton on Trent" label="Normanton on Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187924" start="2966" end="2988" title="Normanton-on-the-Wolds" label="Normanton-on-the-Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196849" start="2991" end="3004" title="North Carlton, Nottinghamshire" label="North Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578779" start="3005" end="3018" title="North Clifton" label="North Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055943" start="3021" end="3054" title="North Leverton with Habblesthorpe" label="North Leverton with Habblesthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056170" start="3057" end="3070" title="North Muskham" label="North Muskham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057384" start="3073" end="3087" title="North Wheatley" label="North Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060555" start="3090" end="3096" title="Norton, Nottinghamshire" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061436" start="3099" end="3106" title="Norwell, Nottinghamshire" label="Norwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23765422" start="3109" end="3126" title="Norwell Woodhouse" label="Norwell Woodhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="3129" end="3139" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q131675859" start="3142" end="3152" title="Nuncargate" label="Nuncargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070448" start="3154" end="3161" title="Nuthall" label="Nuthall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083438" start="3168" end="3179" title="Old Basford" label="Old Basford"/>
<link wikidata="Q24575532" start="3182" end="3195" title="Kings Clipstone" label="Old Clipstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085529" start="3198" end="3206" title="Oldcotes" label="Oldcotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867326" start="3209" end="3217" title="Ollerton" label="Ollerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872785" start="3220" end="3226" title="Ompton" label="Ompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100932" start="3229" end="3236" title="Ordsall, Nottinghamshire" label="Ordsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104190" start="3239" end="3245" title="Orston" label="Orston"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350652" start="3248" end="3256" title="Scofton" label="Osberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107521" start="3259" end="3268" title="Ossington" label="Ossington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115004" start="3271" end="3279" title="Owthorpe" label="Owthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="3282" end="3287" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037177" start="3295" end="3305" title="Papplewick" label="Papplewick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169143" start="3308" end="3319" title="Perlethorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Perlethorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797132" start="3322" end="3330" title="Pleasley" label="Pleasley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3333" end="3346" title="Pleasley#Pleasley Hill" label="Pleasley Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205484" start="3349" end="3357" title="Plumtree, Nottinghamshire" label="Plumtree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648766" start="3365" end="3383" title="Radcliffe on Trent" label="Radcliffe on Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280145" start="3386" end="3393" title="Radford, Nottingham" label="Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990056" start="3396" end="3403" title="Ragnall" label="Ragnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576984" start="3406" end="3415" title="Rainworth" label="Rainworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405774" start="3418" end="3425" title="Rampton, Nottinghamshire" label="Rampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290760" start="3428" end="3433" title="Ranby, Nottinghamshire" label="Ranby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179656" start="3436" end="3444" title="Ranskill" label="Ranskill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515984" start="3447" end="3464" title="Ratcliffe on Soar" label="Ratcliffe on Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296532" start="3467" end="3477" title="Ravenshead" label="Ravenshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350652" start="3480" end="3486" title="Scofton" label="Rayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305901" start="3489" end="3496" title="Redhill, Nottinghamshire" label="Redhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264086" start="3499" end="3508" title="Rempstone" label="Rempstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462685" start="3510" end="3517" title="Retford" label="Retford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321054" start="3520" end="3528" title="Rhodesia, Nottinghamshire" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361106" start="3531" end="3540" title="Rolleston, Nottinghamshire" label="Rolleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361806" start="3543" end="3553" title="Ruddington" label="Ruddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q814121" start="3556" end="3563" title="Rylands, Nottinghamshire" label="Rylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427435" start="3571" end="3578" title="Saundby" label="Saundby"/>
<link wikidata="Q571232" start="3581" end="3590" title="Saxondale, Nottinghamshire" label="Saxondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073436" start="3593" end="3603" title="Scaftworth" label="Scaftworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256202" start="3606" end="3617" title="Scarrington" label="Scarrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350652" start="3620" end="3627" title="Scofton" label="Scofton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557378" start="3630" end="3639" title="Screveton" label="Screveton"/>
<link wikidata="Q864742" start="3642" end="3649" title="Scrooby" label="Scrooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448829" start="3652" end="3659" title="Selston" label="Selston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454966" start="3662" end="3668" title="Serlby" label="Serlby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493607" start="3671" end="3679" title="Shelford, Nottinghamshire" label="Shelford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395674" start="3682" end="3689" title="Shelton, Nottinghamshire" label="Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495481" start="3692" end="3700" title="Sherwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881915" start="3703" end="3712" title="Shireoaks" label="Shireoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341624" start="3715" end="3724" title="Sibthorpe" label="Sibthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534318" start="3727" end="3744" title="Skegby" label="Skegby (Ashfield)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103091182" start="3747" end="3765" title="Skegby, Bassetlaw" label="Skegby (Bassetlaw)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547597" start="3768" end="3776" title="Sneinton" label="Sneinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22350648" start="3779" end="3788" title="Sookholme" label="Sookholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908575" start="3791" end="3804" title="South Clifton" label="South Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261568" start="3807" end="3821" title="South Leverton" label="South Leverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952905" start="3824" end="3837" title="South Muskham" label="South Muskham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14367270" start="3840" end="3852" title="South Scarle" label="South Scarle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794213" start="3855" end="3869" title="South Wheatley, Nottinghamshire" label="South Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433341" start="3872" end="3881" title="Southwell, Nottinghamshire" label="Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325299" start="3884" end="3892" title="Spalford" label="Spalford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577691" start="3895" end="3904" title="Spion Kop, Nottinghamshire" label="Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105970" start="3907" end="3923" title="Stanford on Soar" label="Stanford on Soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119187" start="3926" end="3933" title="Stanley, Nottinghamshire" label="Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600248" start="3936" end="3948" title="Stanton Hill" label="Stanton Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460341" start="3951" end="3971" title="Stanton-on-the-Wolds" label="Stanton-on-the-Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730163" start="3974" end="3984" title="Stapleford, Nottinghamshire" label="Stapleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845737" start="3987" end="4007" title="Staunton in the Vale" label="Staunton in the Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499797" start="4010" end="4020" title="Staythorpe" label="Staythorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618442" start="4023" end="4037" title="Stoke Bardolph" label="Stoke Bardolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379412" start="4040" end="4048" title="Stokeham" label="Stokeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623203" start="4051" end="4059" title="Strelley, Nottinghamshire" label="Strelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629169" start="4062" end="4080" title="Sturton le Steeple" label="Sturton le Steeple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629834" start="4083" end="4090" title="Styrrup" label="Styrrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183761" start="4093" end="4109" title="Sutton Bonington" label="Sutton Bonington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650206" start="4111" end="4128" title="Sutton-cum-Granby" label="Sutton-cum-Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119187" start="4130" end="4148" title="Sutton-in-Ashfield" label="Sutton-in-Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q601196" start="4151" end="4166" title="Sutton on Trent" label="Sutton on Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288538" start="4169" end="4185" title="Sutton cum Lound" label="Sutton cum Lound"/>
<link wikidata="Q9348644" start="4188" end="4196" title="Swingate, Nottinghamshire" label="Swingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660481" start="4198" end="4206" title="Syerston" label="Syerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707125" start="4214" end="4222" title="Teversal" label="Teversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973010" start="4225" end="4233" title="Thoresby, Nottinghamshire" label="Thoresby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854489" start="4236" end="4243" title="Thorney, Nottinghamshire" label="Thorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q777193" start="4246" end="4254" title="Thoroton" label="Thoroton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748602" start="4257" end="4273" title="Thorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Thorpe-by-Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796728" start="4276" end="4295" title="Thorpe in the Glebe" label="Thorpe in the Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100932" start="4298" end="4319" title="Ordsall, Nottinghamshire" label="Thrumpton (Bassetlaw)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578375" start="4322" end="4344" title="Thrumpton" label="Thrumpton (Rushcliffe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208569" start="4347" end="4357" title="Thurgarton" label="Thurgarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802939" start="4360" end="4364" title="Tiln, Nottinghamshire" label="Tiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225505" start="4367" end="4373" title="Tithby" label="Tithby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840808" start="4376" end="4385" title="Tollerton, Nottinghamshire" label="Tollerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465168" start="4387" end="4395" title="Torworth" label="Torworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996002" start="4398" end="4403" title="Toton" label="Toton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838860" start="4405" end="4413" title="Treswell" label="Treswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786573" start="4416" end="4423" title="Trowell" label="Trowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596889" start="4426" end="4433" title="Tuxford" label="Tuxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883904" start="4441" end="4450" title="Underwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611273" start="4453" end="4468" title="Upper Broughton" label="Upper Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898907" start="4470" end="4485" title="Upper Saxondale" label="Upper Saxondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899347" start="4488" end="4505" title="Upton, Bassetlaw" label="Upton (Bassetlaw)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899356" start="4508" end="4535" title="Upton, Newark and Sherwood" label="Upton (Newark and Sherwood)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961844" start="4543" end="4550" title="Walesby, Nottinghamshire" label="Walesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180614" start="4553" end="4565" title="Walkeringham" label="Walkeringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536544" start="4568" end="4580" title="Wallingwells" label="Wallingwells"/>
<link wikidata="Q105761075" start="4583" end="4594" title="Warsop Vale" label="Warsop Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974744" start="4597" end="4604" title="Watnall" label="Watnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977471" start="4607" end="4613" title="Wellow, Nottinghamshire" label="Wellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079944" start="4616" end="4630" title="West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire" label="West Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095899" start="4633" end="4645" title="West Drayton, Nottinghamshire" label="West Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240002" start="4648" end="4658" title="West Leake" label="West Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458647" start="4661" end="4673" title="West Markham" label="West Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704544" start="4676" end="4690" title="West Stockwith" label="West Stockwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433341" start="4693" end="4702" title="Westhorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Westhorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904398" start="4705" end="4711" title="Weston, Nottinghamshire" label="Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989772" start="4714" end="4723" title="Westville, Nottinghamshire" label="Westville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990556" start="4726" end="4739" title="Whaley Thorns" label="Whaley Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118744" start="4742" end="4761" title="Whatton-in-the-Vale" label="Whatton-in-the-Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q24031566" start="4764" end="4770" title="Welham, Nottinghamshire" label="Welham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100932" start="4773" end="4785" title="Ordsall, Nottinghamshire" label="White Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259156" start="4788" end="4797" title="Whitemoor, Nottinghamshire" label="Whitemoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027459" start="4800" end="4815" title="Lambley, Nottinghamshire" label="Wicketwood Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628978" start="4818" end="4828" title="Widmerpool" label="Widmerpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157785" start="4831" end="4838" title="Wigsley" label="Wigsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q101989069" start="4841" end="4850" title="Wigthorpe" label="Wigthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001702" start="4853" end="4860" title="Wilford" label="Wilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q964232" start="4863" end="4886" title="Willoughby on the Wolds" label="Willoughby on the Wolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025452" start="4889" end="4897" title="Winkburn" label="Winkburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886799" start="4900" end="4909" title="Winthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Winthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325232" start="4912" end="4919" title="Wiseton" label="Wiseton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030327" start="4922" end="4930" title="Wollaton" label="Wollaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416339" start="4933" end="4941" title="Woodbeck" label="Woodbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039689" start="4944" end="4955" title="Woodborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033491" start="4957" end="4967" title="Woodthorpe, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281091" start="4969" end="4976" title="Worksop" label="Worksop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697643" start="4979" end="4985" title="Wysall" label="Wysall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074625" start="4993" end="4998" title="Zouch" label="Zouch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5022" end="5056" title="Nottingham#Within the city" label="Nottingham suburbs within the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896433" start="5058" end="5099" title="List of civil parishes in Nottinghamshire" label="List of civil parishes in Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662374" start="5101" end="5153" title="List of settlements in Nottinghamshire by population" label="List of settlements in Nottinghamshire by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858915" start="5156" end="5181" title="List of places in England" label="List of places in England"/>
</links>
</doc>
