<doc id="87229" wikidata="Q166714" url="?curid=87229" title="H. H. Asquith">
<text>Herbert Henry Asquith, 1st Earl of Oxford and Asquith (12 September 1852 – 15 February 1928) was a British statesman and Liberal politician who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1908 to 1916. He was the last prime minister from the Liberal Party to command a majority government, and the most recent Liberal to have served as Leader of the Opposition. He played a major role in the design and passage of major liberal legislation and a reduction of the power of the House of Lords. In August 1914, Asquith took Great Britain and the British Empire into the First World War. During 1915, his government was vigorously attacked for a shortage of munitions and the failure of the Gallipoli Campaign. He formed a coalition government with other parties but failed to satisfy critics, was forced to resign in December 1916 and never regained power.

After attending Balliol College, Oxford, he became a successful barrister. In 1886, he was the Liberal candidate for East Fife, a seat he held for over thirty years. In 1892, he was appointed Home Secretary in Gladstone&#x27;s fourth ministry, remaining in the post until the Liberals lost the 1895 election. In the decade of opposition that followed, Asquith became a major figure in the party, and when the Liberals regained power under Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman in 1905, Asquith was named Chancellor of the Exchequer. In 1908, Asquith succeeded him as prime minister. The Liberals were determined to advance their reform agenda. An impediment to this was the House of Lords, which rejected the People&#x27;s Budget of 1909. Meanwhile, the South Africa Act 1909 passed. Asquith called an election for January 1910, and the Liberals won, though they were reduced to a minority government. After another general election in December 1910, he gained passage of the Parliament Act 1911, allowing a bill three times passed by the Commons in consecutive sessions to be enacted regardless of the Lords. Asquith was less successful in dealing with Irish Home Rule. Repeated crises led to gun running and violence, verging on civil war.

When Britain declared war on Germany in response to the German invasion of Belgium, high-profile domestic conflicts were suspended regarding Ireland and women&#x27;s suffrage. Asquith was more of a committee chair than a dynamic leader. He oversaw national mobilisation, the dispatch of the British Expeditionary Force to the Western Front, the creation of a mass army and the development of an industrial strategy designed to support the country&#x27;s war aims. The war became bogged down and there was a call for better leadership. He was forced to form a coalition with the Conservatives and Labour early in 1915. He was weakened by his own indecision over strategy, conscription and financing. David Lloyd George replaced him as prime minister in December 1916. They became bitter enemies and fought for control of the fast-declining Liberal Party. Asquith&#x27;s role in creating the modern British welfare state (1906–1911) has been celebrated, but his weaknesses as a war leader and as a party leader after 1914 have been highlighted by historians. He remained the only prime minister between 1827 and 1979 to serve more than eight consecutive years in a single term.

==Early life: 1852–1874==

===Family background===

Asquith was born in Morley, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the younger son of Joseph Dixon Asquith (1825–1860) and his wife Emily, &quot;née&quot; Willans (1828–1888). The couple also had three daughters, of whom only one survived infancy. The Asquiths were an old Yorkshire family, with a long nonconformist tradition. It was a matter of family pride, shared by Asquith, that an ancestor, Joseph Asquith, was imprisoned for his part in the pro-Roundhead Farnley Wood Plot of 1664.

Both Asquith&#x27;s parents came from families associated with the Yorkshire wool trade. Dixon Asquith inherited the Gillroyd Mill Company, founded by his father. Emily&#x27;s father, William Willans, ran a successful wool-trading business in Huddersfield. Both families were middle-class, Congregationalist, and politically radical. Dixon was a mild man, cultivated and in his son&#x27;s words &quot;not cut out&quot; for a business career. He was described as &quot;a man of high character who held Bible classes for young men&quot;. Emily suffered persistent poor health, but was of strong character, and a formative influence on her sons.

===Childhood and schooling===
In his younger days, he was called Herbert (&quot;Bertie&quot; as a child) within the family, but his second wife called him Henry. His biographer Stephen Koss entitled the first chapter of his biography &quot;From Herbert to Henry&quot;, referring to upward social mobility and his abandonment of his Yorkshire Nonconformist roots with his second marriage. However, in public, he was invariably referred to only as H. H. Asquith. &quot;There have been few major national figures whose Christian names were less well known to the public&quot; according to biographer Roy Jenkins.

Herbert Asquith and his brother were educated at home by their parents until 1860, when Dixon Asquith died suddenly. William Willans took charge of the family, moved them to a house near his own, and arranged for the boys&#x27; schooling. After a year at Huddersfield College they were sent as boarders to Fulneck School, a Moravian Church school near Leeds. In 1863 William Willans died, and the family came under the care of Emily&#x27;s brother, John Willans. The boys went to live with him in London; when he moved back to Yorkshire in 1864 for business reasons, they remained in London and were lodged with various families.

The biographer Naomi Levine writes that in effect Asquith was &quot;treated like an orphan&quot; for the rest of his childhood. The departure of his uncle effectively severed Asquith&#x27;s ties with his native Yorkshire, and he described himself thereafter as &quot;to all intents and purposes a Londoner&quot;. Another biographer, H. C. G. Matthew, writes that Asquith&#x27;s northern nonconformist background continued to influence him: &quot;It gave him a point of sturdy anti-establishmentarian reference, important to a man whose life in other respects was a long absorption into metropolitanism.&quot;

The boys were sent to the City of London School as day boys. Under the school&#x27;s headmaster, E. A. Abbott, a distinguished classical scholar, Asquith became an outstanding pupil. He later said that he was under deeper obligations to his old headmaster than to any man living; Abbott disclaimed credit for the boy&#x27;s progress: &quot;I never had a pupil who owed less to me and more to his own natural ability.&quot; Asquith excelled in classics and English, was little interested in sports, read voraciously in the Guildhall Library, and became fascinated with oratory. He visited the public gallery of the House of Commons, studied the techniques of famous preachers, and honed his own skills in the school debating society. Abbott remarked on the cogency and clarity of his pupil&#x27;s speeches, qualities for which Asquith became celebrated throughout the rest of his life. Asquith later recalled seeing, as a schoolboy, the corpses of five murderers left hanging outside Newgate.

===Oxford===

In November 1869, Asquith won a classical scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, going up the following October. The college&#x27;s prestige, already high, continued to rise under the recently elected Master, Benjamin Jowett. He sought to raise the standards of the college to the extent that its undergraduates shared what Asquith later called a &quot;tranquil consciousness of effortless superiority&quot;. Although Asquith admired Jowett, he was more influenced by T. H. Green, White&#x27;s Professor of Moral Philosophy. The abstract side of philosophy did not greatly attract Asquith, whose outlook was always practical, but Green&#x27;s progressive liberal political views appealed to him.

Asquith&#x27;s university career was distinguished—&quot;striking without being sensational&quot; in the words of his biographer, Roy Jenkins. An easy grasp of his studies left him ample time to indulge his liking for debate. In the first month at university he spoke at the Oxford Union. His official biographers, J. A. Spender and Cyril Asquith, commented that in his first months at Oxford &quot;he voiced the orthodox Liberal view, speaking in support, &quot;inter alia&quot;, of the disestablishment of the Church of England, and of non-intervention in the Franco-Prussian War&quot;. He sometimes debated against his Balliol contemporary Alfred Milner, who although then a Liberal was already an advocate of British imperialism. He was elected Treasurer of the Union in 1872 but was defeated at his first attempt at the Presidency. During the General Election in January and February 1874 he spoke against Lord Randolph Churchill, who was not yet a prominent politician, at nearby Woodstock. He eventually became President of the Union in Trinity Term 1874, his last term as an undergraduate.

Asquith was &quot;proxime accessit&quot; (runner-up) for the Hertford Prize in 1872, again &quot;proxime accessit&quot; for the Ireland Prize in 1873, and again for the Ireland in 1874, on that occasion coming so close that the examiners awarded him a special prize of books. However, he won the Craven Scholarship and graduated with what his biographers describe as an &quot;easy&quot; double first in Mods and Greats. After graduating he was elected to a prize fellowship of Balliol.

==Early professional career: 1874–1886==
=== After Oxford ===
After his graduation in 1874, Asquith spent several months coaching Viscount Lymington, the 18-year-old son and heir of the Earl of Portsmouth. He found the experience of aristocratic country-house life agreeable. He liked less the austere side of the nonconformist Liberal tradition, with its strong temperance movement. He was proud of ridding himself of &quot;the Puritanism in which I was bred&quot;. His fondness for fine wines and spirits, which began at this period, eventually earned him the sobriquet &quot;&quot;.

Returning to Oxford, Asquith spent the first year of his seven-year fellowship in residence there. But he had no wish to pursue a career as a don; the traditional route for politically ambitious but unmoneyed young men was through the law. While still at Oxford Asquith had already entered Lincoln&#x27;s Inn to train as a barrister, and in 1875 he served a pupillage under Charles Bowen. He was called to the bar in June 1876.

=== Marriage and children ===
There followed what Jenkins calls &quot;seven extremely lean years&quot;. Asquith set up a legal practice with two other junior barristers. With no personal contacts with solicitors, he received few briefs. Those that came his way he argued capably, but he was too fastidious to learn the wilier tricks of the legal trade: &quot;he was constitutionally incapable of making a discreet fog ... nor could he prevail on himself to dispense the conventional patter&quot;. He did not allow his lack of money to stop him from marrying. His bride, Helen Kelsall Melland (1854–1891), was the daughter of Frederick Melland, a physician in Manchester. She and Asquith had met through friends of his mother&#x27;s. The two had been in love for several years, but it was not until 1877 that Asquith sought her father&#x27;s consent to their marriage. Despite Asquith&#x27;s limited income—practically nothing from the bar and a small stipend from his fellowship—Melland consented after making inquiries about the young man&#x27;s potential. Helen had a private income of several hundred pounds a year, and the couple lived in modest comfort in Hampstead. They had five children:
* Raymond Asquith (6 November 1878 – 15 September 1916), who married Katharine Horner (daughter of Sir John Horner) on 25 July 1907. They had three children.
* Herbert Asquith (11 March 1881 – 5 August 1947), who married Lady Cynthia Charteris (daughter of Hugo Richard Charteris, 11th Earl of Wemyss and 7th Earl of March) on 28 July 1910. They had three children.
* Arthur Asquith (24 April 1883 – 25 August 1939), who married Betty Constance Manners (daughter of John Manners-Sutton, 3rd Baron Manners) on 30 April 1918. They had four daughters.
* Violet Asquith (15 April 1887 – 19 February 1969), who married Sir Maurice Bonham Carter on 30 November 1915. They had four children.
* Cyril Asquith, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone (5 February 1890 – 24 August 1954), who married Anne Pollock (daughter of Sir Adrian Donald Wilde Pollock) on 12 February 1918. They had four children.

=== &quot;The Spectator&quot; and politics ===
Between 1876 and 1884, Asquith supplemented his income by writing regularly for &quot;The Spectator&quot;, which at that time had a broadly Liberal outlook. Matthew comments that the articles Asquith wrote for the magazine give a good overview of his political views as a young man. He was staunchly radical, but as unconvinced by extreme left-wing views as by Toryism. Among the topics that caused debate among Liberals were British imperialism, the union of Great Britain and Ireland, and female suffrage. Asquith was a strong, though not jingoistic, proponent of the Empire, and, after initial caution, came to support home rule for Ireland. He opposed votes for women for most of his political career. There was also an element of party interest: Asquith believed that votes for women would disproportionately benefit the Conservatives. In a 2001 study of the extension of the franchise between 1832 and 1931, Bob Whitfield concluded that Asquith&#x27;s surmise about the electoral impact was correct. In addition to his work for &quot;The Spectator&quot;, he was retained as a leader writer by &quot;The Economist&quot;, taught at evening classes, and marked examination papers.

Asquith&#x27;s career as a barrister began to flourish in 1883 when R. S. Wright invited him to join his chambers at the Inner Temple. Wright was the Junior Counsel to the Treasury, a post often known as &quot;the Attorney General&#x27;s devil&quot;, whose function included giving legal advice to ministers and government departments. One of Asquith&#x27;s first jobs in working for Wright was to prepare a memorandum for the prime minister, W. E. Gladstone, on the status of the parliamentary oath in the wake of the Bradlaugh case. Both Gladstone and the Attorney General, Sir Henry James, were impressed. This raised Asquith&#x27;s profile, though not greatly enhancing his finances. Much more remunerative were his new contacts with solicitors who regularly instructed Wright and now also began to instruct Asquith.

==Member of Parliament: 1886–1908==
===Queen&#x27;s Counsel===
In June 1886, with the Liberal party split on the question of Irish Home Rule, Gladstone called a general election. There was a last-minute vacancy at East Fife, where the sitting Liberal member, John Boyd Kinnear, had been deselected by his local Liberal Association for voting against Irish Home Rule. Richard Haldane, a close friend of Asquith&#x27;s and also a struggling young barrister, had been Liberal MP for the nearby Haddingtonshire constituency since December 1885. He put Asquith&#x27;s name forward as a replacement for Kinnear, and only ten days before polling Asquith was formally nominated in a vote of the local Liberals. The Conservatives did not contest the seat, putting their support behind Kinnear, who stood against Asquith as a Liberal Unionist. Asquith was elected with 2,863 votes to Kinnear&#x27;s 2,489.

The Liberals lost the 1886 election, and Asquith joined the House of Commons as an opposition backbencher. He waited until March 1887 to make his maiden speech, which opposed the Conservative administration&#x27;s proposal to give special priority to an Irish Crimes Bill. From the start of his parliamentary career Asquith impressed other MPs with his air of authority as well as his lucidity of expression. For the remainder of this Parliament, which lasted until 1892, Asquith spoke occasionally but effectively, mostly on Irish matters.

Asquith&#x27;s legal practice was flourishing, and took up much of his time. In the late 1880s Anthony Hope, who later gave up the bar to become a novelist, was his pupil. Asquith disliked arguing in front of a jury because of the repetitiveness and &quot;platitudes&quot; required, but excelled at arguing fine points of civil law before a judge or in front of courts of appeal. These cases, in which his clients were generally large businesses, were unspectacular but financially rewarding.

From time to time Asquith appeared in high-profile criminal cases. In 1887 and 1888, he defended the radical Liberal MP, Cunninghame Graham, who was charged with assaulting police officers when they attempted to break up a demonstration in Trafalgar Square. Graham was later convicted of the lesser charge of unlawful assembly. In what Jenkins calls &quot;a less liberal cause&quot;, Asquith appeared for the prosecution in the trial of Henry Vizetelly for publishing &quot;obscene libels&quot;—the first English versions of Zola&#x27;s novels &quot;Nana&quot;, &quot;Pot-Bouille&quot; and &quot;La Terre&quot;, which Asquith described in court as &quot;the three most immoral books ever published&quot;.

Asquith&#x27;s law career received a great and unforeseen boost in 1889 when he was named junior counsel to Sir Charles Russell at the Parnell Commission of Enquiry. The commission had been set up in the aftermath of damaging statements in &quot;The Times&quot;, based on forged letters, that Irish MP Charles Stuart Parnell had expressed approval of Dublin&#x27;s Phoenix Park killings. When the manager of &quot;The Times&quot;, J. C. Macdonald, was called to give evidence Russell, feeling tired, surprised Asquith by asking him to conduct the cross-examination. Under Asquith&#x27;s questioning, it became plain that in accepting the forgeries as genuine, without making any check, Macdonald had, in Jenkins&#x27;s phrase, behaved &quot;with a credulity which would have been childlike had it not been criminally negligent&quot;. &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; reported that under Asquith&#x27;s cross-examination, Macdonald &quot;squirmed and wriggled through a dozen half-formed phrases in an attempt at explanation, and finished none&quot;. The accusations against Parnell were shown to be false, &quot;The Times&quot; was obliged to make a full apology, and Asquith&#x27;s reputation was assured. Within a year he had gained advancement to the senior rank of the bar, Queen&#x27;s Counsel.

Asquith appeared in two important cases in the early 1890s. He played an effective low-key role in the sensational Tranby Croft libel trial (1891), helping to show that the plaintiff had not been libelled. He was on the losing side in &quot;Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co&quot; (1892), a landmark English contract law case that established that a company was obliged to meet its advertised pledges.

===Widower and cabinet minister===
In September 1891, Helen Asquith died of typhoid fever, following a few days&#x27; illness while the family were on holiday in Scotland. Asquith bought a house in Surrey, and hired nannies and other domestic staff. He sold the Hampstead property and took a flat in Mount Street, Mayfair, where he lived during the working week.

The general election of July 1892 returned Gladstone and the Liberals to office, with intermittent support from the Irish Nationalist MPs. Asquith, who was then only 39 and had never served as a junior minister, accepted the post of Home Secretary, a senior Cabinet position. The Conservatives and Liberal Unionists jointly outnumbered the Liberals in the Commons, which, together with a permanent Unionist majority in the House of Lords, restricted the government&#x27;s capacity to put reforming measures in place. Asquith failed to secure a majority for a bill to disestablish the Church in Wales, and another to protect workers injured at work, but he built up a reputation as a capable and fair minister.

In 1893, Asquith responded to a request from Magistrates in the Wakefield area for reinforcements to police a mining strike. Asquith sent 400 Metropolitan policeman. After two civilians were killed in Featherstone when soldiers opened fire on a crowd, Asquith was subject to protests at public meetings for a period. He responded to a taunt, &quot;Why did you murder the miners at Featherstone in &#x27;92?&quot; by saying, &quot;It was not &#x27;92, it was &#x27;93.&quot;

When Gladstone retired in March 1894, Queen Victoria chose the Foreign Secretary, Lord Rosebery, as the new prime minister. Asquith thought Rosebery preferable to the other possible candidate, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir William Harcourt, whom he deemed too anti-imperialist—one of the so-called &quot;Little Englanders&quot;—and too abrasive. Asquith remained at the Home Office until the government fell in 1895.

Asquith had known Margot Tennant slightly since before his wife&#x27;s death, and grew increasingly attached to her in his years as a widower. On 10 May 1894, they were married at St George&#x27;s, Hanover Square. Asquith became a son in law of Sir Charles Tennant, 1st Baronet. Margot was in many respects the opposite of Asquith&#x27;s first wife, being outgoing, impulsive, extravagant and opinionated. Despite the misgivings of many of Asquith&#x27;s friends and colleagues the marriage proved to be a success. Margot got on, if sometimes stormily, with her step-children. She and Asquith had five children of their own, only two of whom survived infancy: Anthony Asquith (9 November 1902 – 21 February 1968), and Elizabeth Asquith (26 February 1897 – 7 April 1945), who married Prince Antoine Bibesco on 30 April 1919.

====Out of office====
The general election of July 1895 was disastrous for the Liberals, and the Conservatives under Lord Salisbury won a majority of 152. With no government post, Asquith divided his time between politics and the bar. Jenkins comments that in this period Asquith earned a substantial, though not stellar, income and was never worse off and often much higher-paid than when in office. Matthew writes that his income as a QC in the following years was around £5,000 to £10,000 per annum (around £500,000–£1,000,000 at 2015 prices). According to Haldane, on returning to government in 1905 Asquith had to give up a £10,000 brief to act for the Khedive of Egypt. Margot later claimed (in the 1920s, when they were short of money) that he could have made £50,000 per annum had he remained at the bar.

The Liberal Party, with a leadership—Harcourt in the Commons and Rosebery in the Lords—who detested each other, once again suffered factional divisions. Rosebery resigned in October 1896 and Harcourt followed him in December 1898. Asquith came under strong pressure to accept the nomination to take over as Liberal leader, but the post of Leader of the Opposition, though full-time, was then unpaid, and he could not afford to give up his income as a barrister. He and others prevailed on the former Secretary of State for War, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman to accept the post.

During the Boer War of 1899–1902 Liberal opinion divided along pro-imperialist and &quot;Little England&quot; lines, with Campbell-Bannerman striving to maintain party unity. Asquith was less inclined than his leader and many in the party to censure the Conservative government for its conduct, though he regarded the war as an unnecessary distraction. Joseph Chamberlain, a former Liberal minister, now an ally of the Conservatives, campaigned for tariffs to shield British industry from cheaper foreign competition. Asquith&#x27;s advocacy of traditional Liberal free trade policies helped to make Chamberlain&#x27;s proposals the central question in British politics in the early years of the 20th century. In Matthew&#x27;s view, &quot;Asquith&#x27;s forensic skills quickly exposed deficiencies and self-contradictions in Chamberlain&#x27;s arguments.&quot; The question divided the Conservatives, while the Liberals were united under the banner of &quot;free fooders&quot; against those in the government who countenanced a tax on imported essentials.

===Chancellor of the Exchequer, 1905–1908===
Salisbury&#x27;s Conservative successor as prime minister, Arthur Balfour, resigned in December 1905, but did not seek a dissolution of Parliament and a general election. King Edward VII invited Campbell-Bannerman to form a minority government. Asquith and his close political allies Haldane and Sir Edward Grey tried to pressure him into taking a peerage to become a figurehead prime minister in the House of Lords, giving the pro-empire wing of the party greater dominance in the House of Commons. Campbell-Bannerman called their bluff and refused to move. Asquith was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer. He held the post for over two years, and introduced three budgets.

A month after taking office, Campbell-Bannerman called a general election, in which the Liberals gained a landslide majority of 132. However, Asquith&#x27;s first budget, in 1906, was constrained by the annual income and expenditure plans he had inherited from his predecessor Austen Chamberlain. The only income for which Chamberlain had over-budgeted was the duty from sales of alcohol. With a balanced budget, and a realistic assessment of future public expenditure, Asquith was able, in his second and third budgets, to lay the foundations for limited redistribution of wealth and welfare provisions for the poor. Blocked at first by Treasury officials from setting a variable rate of income tax with higher rates on those with high incomes, he set up a committee under Sir Charles Dilke which recommended not only variable income tax rates but also a supertax on incomes of more than £5,000 a year. Asquith also introduced a distinction between earned and unearned income, taxing the latter at a higher rate. He used the increased revenues to fund old-age pensions, the first time a British government had provided them. Reductions in selective taxes, such as that on sugar, were aimed at benefiting the poor.

Asquith planned the 1908 budget, but by the time he presented it to the Commons he was no longer chancellor. Campbell-Bannerman&#x27;s health had been failing for nearly a year. After a series of heart attacks, Campbell-Bannerman resigned on 3 April 1908, less than three weeks before his death. Asquith was universally accepted as the natural successor. King Edward, who was on holiday in Biarritz, sent for Asquith, who took the boat train to France and kissed hands as prime minister in the Hôtel du Palais, Biarritz, on 8 April.

== Peacetime prime minister: 1908–1914 ==

=== Appointments and cabinet ===
On Asquith&#x27;s return from Biarritz, his leadership of the Liberals was affirmed by a party meeting (the first time this had been done for a prime minister). He initiated a cabinet reshuffle. Lloyd George was promoted to be Asquith&#x27;s replacement as chancellor. Winston Churchill succeeded Lloyd George as President of the Board of Trade, entering the Cabinet despite his youth (aged 33) and the fact that he had crossed the floor to become a Liberal only four years previously.

Asquith demoted or dismissed a number of Campbell-Bannerman&#x27;s cabinet ministers. Lord Tweedmouth, the First Lord of the Admiralty, was relegated to the nominal post of Lord President of the Council. Lord Elgin was sacked from the Colonial Office and the Earl of Portsmouth (whom Asquith had tutored) was too, as undersecretary at the War Office. The abruptness of their dismissals caused hard feelings; Elgin wrote to Tweedmouth, &quot;I venture to think that even a prime minister may have some regard for the usages common among gentlemen ... I feel that even a housemaid gets a better warning.&quot;

Historian Cameron Hazlehurst wrote that &quot;the new men, with the old, made a powerful team&quot;. The cabinet choices balanced the competing factions in the party; the appointments of Lloyd George and Churchill satisfied the radicals, while the whiggish element favoured Reginald McKenna&#x27;s appointment as First Lord.

===Prime minister at leisure===
Possessed of &quot;a faculty for working quickly&quot;, Asquith had considerable time for leisure. Reading the classics, poetry and a vast range of English literature consumed much of his time. So did correspondence; intensely disliking the telephone, Asquith was a prolific letter writer. Travelling, often to country houses owned by members of Margot&#x27;s family, was almost constant, Asquith being a devoted &quot;weekender&quot;. He spent part of each summer in Scotland, with golf, constituency matters, and time at Balmoral as duty minister. He and Margot divided their time between Downing Street and The Wharf, a country house at Sutton Courtenay in Berkshire which they bought in 1912; their London mansion, 20 Cavendish Square, was let during his premiership. He was addicted to Contract bridge.

Above all else, Asquith thrived on company and conversation. A clubbable man, he enjoyed &quot;the companionship of clever and attractive women&quot; even more. Throughout his life, Asquith had a circle of close female friends, which Margot termed his &quot;harem&quot;. In 1912, one of these, Venetia Stanley became much closer. Meeting first in 1909–1910, by 1912 she was Asquith&#x27;s constant correspondent and companion. Between that point and 1915, he wrote her some 560 letters, at a rate of up to four a day. Although it remains uncertain whether or not they were lovers, she became of central importance to him. Asquith&#x27;s thorough enjoyment of &quot;comfort and luxury&quot; during peacetime, and his unwillingness to adjust his behaviour during conflict, ultimately contributed to the impression of a man out of touch. Lady Tree&#x27;s teasing question, asked at the height of the conflict, &quot;Tell me, Mr Asquith, do you take an interest in the war?&quot;, conveyed a commonly held view.

Asquith enjoyed alcohol and his drinking was the subject of considerable gossip. His relaxed attitude to drink disappointed the temperance element in the Liberal coalition and some authors have suggested it affected his decision-making, for example in his opposition to Lloyd George&#x27;s wartime attacks on the liquor trade. The Conservative leader Bonar Law quipped &quot;Asquith drunk can make a better speech than any of us sober&quot;.
 His reputation suffered, especially as wartime crises demanded the full attention of the prime minister. David Owen writes that Asquith was ordered by his doctor to rein in his consumption after a near-collapse in April 1911, but it is unclear whether he actually did so. Owen, a medical doctor by training, states that &quot;by modern diagnostic standards, Asquith became an alcoholic while Prime Minister.&quot; Witnesses often remarked on his weight gain and red, bloated face.

===Domestic policy===
==== Reforming the House of Lords ====
Asquith hoped to act as a mediator between members of his cabinet as they pushed Liberal legislation through Parliament. Events, including conflict with the House of Lords, forced him to the front from the start of his premiership. Despite the Liberals&#x27; massive majority in the House of Commons, the Conservatives had overwhelming support in the unelected upper chamber. Campbell-Bannerman had favoured reforming the Lords by providing that a bill thrice passed by the Commons at least six months apart could become law without the Lords&#x27; consent, while diminishing the power of the Commons by reducing the maximum term of a parliament from seven to five years. Asquith, as chancellor, had served on a cabinet committee that had written a plan to resolve legislative stalemates by a joint sitting of the Commons as a body with 100 of the peers. The Commons passed a number of pieces of legislation in 1908 which were defeated or heavily amended in the Lords, including a Licensing Bill, a Scottish Small Landholders&#x27; Bill, and a Scottish Land Values Bill.

None of these bills was important enough to dissolve parliament and seek a new mandate at a general election. Asquith and Lloyd George believed the peers would back down if presented with Liberal objectives contained within a finance bill—the Lords had not obstructed a money bill since the 17th century and, after initially blocking Gladstone&#x27;s attempt (as chancellor) to repeal Paper Duties, had yielded in 1861 when it was submitted again in a finance bill. Accordingly, the Liberal leadership expected that after much objection from the Conservative peers, the Lords would yield to policy changes wrapped within a budget bill.

====1909: People&#x27;s Budget====
In a major speech in December 1908, Asquith announced that the upcoming budget would reflect the Liberals&#x27; policy agenda, and the People&#x27;s Budget that was submitted to Parliament by Lloyd George the following year greatly expanded social welfare programmes. To pay for them, it significantly increased both direct and indirect taxes. These included a 20 per cent tax on the unearned increase in value in land, payable at death of the owner or sale of the land. There would also be a tax of d in the pound on undeveloped land. A graduated income tax was imposed, and there were increases in imposts on tobacco, beer and spirits. A tax on petrol was introduced despite Treasury concerns that it could not work in practice. Although Asquith held fourteen cabinet meetings to assure unity amongst his ministers, there was opposition from some Liberals; Rosebery described the budget as &quot;inquisitorial, tyrannical, and Socialistic&quot;.

The budget divided the country and provoked bitter debate through the summer of 1909. The Northcliffe Press (&quot;The Times&quot; and the &quot;Daily Mail&quot;) urged rejection of the budget to give tariff reform (indirect taxes on imported goods which, it was felt, would encourage British industry and trade within the Empire) a chance; there were many public meetings, some of them organised by dukes, in protest at the budget. Many Liberal politicians attacked the peers, including Lloyd George in his Newcastle upon Tyne speech, in which he said &quot;a fully-equipped duke costs as much to keep up as two Dreadnoughts; and dukes are just as great a terror and they last longer&quot;. King Edward privately urged Conservative leaders Balfour and Lord Lansdowne to pass the Budget (this was not unusual, as Queen Victoria had helped to broker agreement between the two Houses over the Irish Church Act 1869 and the Third Reform Act in 1884).

From July it became increasingly clear that the Conservative peers would reject the budget, partly in the hope of forcing an election. If they rejected it, Asquith determined, he would have to ask the King to dissolve Parliament, four years into a seven-year term, as it would mean the legislature had refused supply. The budget passed the Commons on 4 November 1909, but was voted down in the Lords on the 30th, the Lords passing a resolution by Lord Lansdowne stating that they were entitled to oppose the finance bill as it lacked an electoral mandate. Asquith had Parliament prorogued three days later for an election beginning on 15 January 1910, with the Commons first passing a resolution deeming the Lords&#x27; vote to be an attack on the constitution.

====1910: election and constitutional deadlock====
The January 1910 general election was dominated by talk of removing the Lords&#x27; veto. A possible solution was to threaten to have King Edward pack the House of Lords with freshly minted Liberal peers, who would override the Lords&#x27;s veto; Asquith&#x27;s talk of safeguards was taken by many to mean that he had secured the King&#x27;s agreement to this. They were mistaken; the King had informed Asquith that he would not consider a mass creation of peers until after a &quot;second&quot; general election.

Lloyd George and Churchill were the leading forces in the Liberals&#x27; appeal to the voters; Asquith, clearly tired, took to the hustings for a total of two weeks during the campaign, and when the polls began, journeyed to Cannes with such speed that he neglected an engagement with the King, to the monarch&#x27;s annoyance. The result was a hung parliament. The Liberals lost heavily from their great majority of 1906, but still finished with two more seats than the Conservatives. With Irish Nationalist and Labour support, the government would have ample support on most issues, and Asquith stated that his majority compared favourably with those enjoyed by Palmerston and Lord John Russell.

Immediate further pressure to remove the Lords&#x27; veto now came from the Irish MPs, who wanted to remove the Lords&#x27; ability to block the introduction of Irish Home Rule. They threatened to vote against the Budget unless they had their way. With another general election likely before long, Asquith had to make clear the Liberal policy on constitutional change to the country without alienating the Irish and Labour. This initially proved difficult, and the King&#x27;s speech opening Parliament was vague on what was to be done to neutralise the Lords&#x27; veto. Asquith dispirited his supporters by stating in Parliament that he had neither asked for nor received a commitment from the King to create peers. The cabinet considered resigning and leaving it up to Balfour to try to form a Conservative government.

The budget passed the Commons again, and this time was approved by the Lords in April without a division. The cabinet finally decided to back a plan based on Campbell-Bannerman&#x27;s, that a bill passed by the Commons in three consecutive annual sessions would become law notwithstanding the Lords&#x27; objections. Unless the King guaranteed that he would create enough Liberal peers to pass the bill, ministers would resign and allow Balfour to form a government, leaving the matter to be debated at the ensuing general election. On 14 April 1910, the Commons passed resolutions that would become the basis of the eventual Parliament Act 1911: to remove the power of the Lords to veto money bills, to reduce blocking of other bills to a two-year power of delay, and also to reduce the term of a parliament from seven years to five. In that debate Asquith also hinted—in part to ensure the support of the Irish MPs—that he would ask the King to break the deadlock &quot;in that Parliament&quot; (i.e. that he would ask for the mass creation of peers, contrary to the King&#x27;s earlier stipulation that there be a second election).

These plans were scuttled by the death of Edward VII on 6 May 1910. Asquith and his ministers were initially reluctant to press the new king, George V, in mourning for his father, for commitments on constitutional change, and the monarch&#x27;s views were not yet known. With a strong feeling in the country that the parties should compromise, Asquith and other Liberals met with Conservative leaders in a number of conferences through much of the remainder of 1910. These talks failed in November over Conservative insistence that there be no limits on the Lords&#x27;s ability to veto Irish Home Rule. When the Parliament Bill was submitted to the Lords, they made amendments that were not acceptable to the government.

====1910–1911: second election and Parliament Act====
On 11 November, Asquith asked King George to dissolve Parliament for another general election in December, and on the 14th met again with the King and demanded assurances the monarch would create an adequate number of Liberal peers to carry the Parliament Bill. The King was slow to agree, and Asquith and his cabinet informed him they would resign if he did not make the commitment. Balfour had told King Edward that he would form a Conservative government if the Liberals left office but the new King did not know this. The King reluctantly gave in to Asquith&#x27;s demand, writing in his diary that, &quot;I disliked having to do this very much, but agreed that this was the only alternative to the Cabinet resigning, which at this moment would be disastrous&quot;.

Asquith dominated the short election campaign, focusing on the Lords&#x27; veto in calm speeches, compared by his biographer Stephen Koss to the &quot;wild irresponsibility&quot; of other major campaigners. In a speech at Hull, he stated that the Liberals&#x27; purpose was to remove the obstruction, not establish an ideal upper house, &quot;I have always got to deal—the country has got to deal—with things here and now. We need an instrument [of constitutional change] that can be set to work at once, which will get rid of deadlocks, and give us the fair and even chance in legislation to which we are entitled, and which is all that we demand.&quot;

The election resulted in little change to the party strengths (the Liberal and Conservative parties were exactly equal in size; by 1914 the Conservative Party would actually be larger owing to by-election victories). Nevertheless, Asquith remained in Number Ten, with a large majority in the Commons on the issue of the House of Lords. The Parliament Bill again passed the House of Commons in April 1911, and was heavily amended in the Lords. Asquith advised King George that the monarch would be called upon to create the peers, and the King agreed, asking that his pledge be made public, and that the Lords be allowed to reconsider their opposition. Once it was, there was a raging internal debate within the Conservatives on whether to give in, or to continue to vote no even when outnumbered by hundreds of newly created peers. After lengthy debate, on 10 August 1911 the Lords voted narrowly not to insist on their amendments, with many Conservative peers abstaining and a few voting in favour of the government; the bill was passed into law.

According to Jenkins, although Asquith had at times moved slowly during the crisis, &quot;on the whole, Asquith&#x27;s slow moulding of events had amounted to a masterly display of political nerve and patient determination. Compared with [the Conservatives], his leadership was outstanding.&quot; Churchill wrote to Asquith after the second 1910 election, &quot;your leadership was the main and conspicuous feature of the whole fight&quot;. Matthew, in his article on Asquith, found that, &quot;the episode was the zenith of Asquith&#x27;s prime ministerial career. In the British Liberal tradition, he patched rather than reformulated the constitution.&quot;

====Social, religious and labour matters====
Despite the distraction of the problem of the House of Lords, Asquith and his government moved ahead with a number of pieces of reforming legislation. According to Matthew, &quot;no peacetime premier has been a more effective enabler. Labour exchanges, the introduction of unemployment and health insurance ... reflected the reforms the government was able to achieve despite the problem of the Lords. Asquith was not himself a &#x27;new Liberal&#x27;, but he saw the need for a change in assumptions about the individual&#x27;s relationship to the state, and he was fully aware of the political risk to the Liberals of a Labour Party on its left flank.&quot; Keen to keep the support of the Labour Party, the Asquith government passed bills urged by that party, including the Trade Union Act 1913 (reversing the Osborne judgment) and in 1911 granting MPs a salary, making it more feasible for working-class people to serve in the House of Commons.

Asquith had as chancellor placed money aside for the provision of non-contributory old-age pensions; the bill authorising them passed in 1908, during his premiership, despite some objection in the Lords. Jenkins noted that the scheme (which provided five shillings a week to single pensioners aged seventy and over, and slightly less than twice that to married couples) &quot;to modern ears sounds cautious and meagre. But it was violently criticised at the time for showing a reckless generosity.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s new government became embroiled in a controversy over the Eucharistic Congress of 1908, held in London. Following the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, the Catholic Church had seen a resurgence in Britain, and a large procession displaying the Blessed Sacrament was planned to allow the laity to participate. Although such an event was forbidden by the 1829 act, planners counted on the British reputation for religious tolerance, and Francis Cardinal Bourne, the Archbishop of Westminster, had obtained permission from the Metropolitan Police. When the plans became widely known, King Edward objected, as did many other Protestants. Asquith received inconsistent advice from his Home Secretary, Herbert Gladstone, and successfully pressed the organisers to cancel the religious aspects of the procession, though it cost him the resignation of his only Catholic cabinet minister, Lord Ripon.

Disestablishment of the Welsh Church was a Liberal priority, but despite support by most Welsh MPs, there was opposition in the Lords. Asquith was an authority on Welsh disestablishment from his time under Gladstone, but had little to do with the passage of the bill. It was twice rejected by the Lords, in 1912 and 1913, but having been forced through under the Parliament Act received royal assent in September 1914, with the provisions suspended until war&#x27;s end.

==== Votes for women ====
Asquith had opposed votes for women as early as 1882, and he remained well known as an adversary throughout his time as prime minister. He took a detached view of the women&#x27;s suffrage question, believing it should be judged on whether extending the franchise would improve the system of government, rather than as a question of rights. He did not understand—Jenkins ascribed it to a failure of imagination—why passions were raised on both sides over the issue. He told the House of Commons in 1913, while complaining of the &quot;exaggerated language&quot; on both sides, &quot;I am sometimes tempted to think, as one listens to the arguments of supporters of women&#x27;s suffrage, that there is nothing to be said for it, and I am sometimes tempted to think, as I listen to the arguments of the opponents of women&#x27;s suffrage, that there is nothing to be said against it.&quot;

In 1906 suffragettes Annie Kenney, Adelaide Knight, and Jane Sbarborough were arrested when they tried to obtain an audience with Asquith. Offered either six weeks in prison or giving up campaigning for one year, the women all chose prison. Asquith was a target for militant suffragettes as they abandoned hope of achieving the vote through peaceful means. He was several times the subject of their tactics: approached (to his annoyance) arriving at 10 Downing Street (by Olive Fargus and Catherine Corbett whom he called &#x27;silly women&#x27;, confronted at evening parties, accosted on the golf course, and ambushed while driving to Stirling to dedicate a memorial to Campbell-Bannerman. On the last occasion, his top hat proved adequate protection against the dog whips wielded by the women. These incidents left him unmoved, as he did not believe them a true manifestation of public opinion.

With a growing majority of the Cabinet, including Lloyd George and Churchill, in favour of women&#x27;s suffrage, Asquith was pressed to allow consideration of a private member&#x27;s bill to give women the vote. The majority of Liberal MPs were also in favour. Jenkins deemed him one of the two main prewar obstacles to women gaining the vote, the other being the suffragists&#x27;s own militancy. In 1912, Asquith reluctantly agreed to permit a free vote on an amendment to a pending reform bill, allowing women the vote on the same terms as men. This would have satisfied Liberal suffrage supporters, and many suffragists, but the Speaker in January 1913 ruled that the amendment changed the nature of the bill, which would have to be withdrawn. Asquith was loud in his complaints against the Speaker, but was privately relieved.

Asquith belatedly came around to support women&#x27;s suffrage in 1917, by which time he was out of office. Women over the age of thirty were eventually given the vote by Lloyd George&#x27;s government under the Representation of the People Act 1918. Asquith&#x27;s reforms to the House of Lords eased the way for the passage of the bill.

===Irish Home Rule===
As a minority party after 1910 elections, the Liberals depended on the Irish vote, controlled by John Redmond. To gain Irish support for the budget and the parliament bill, Asquith promised Redmond that Irish Home Rule would be the highest priority. It proved much more complex and time-consuming than expected. Support for self-government for Ireland had been a tenet of the Liberal Party since 1886, but Asquith had not been as enthusiastic, stating in 1903 (while in opposition) that the party should never take office if that government would be dependent for survival on the support of the Irish Nationalist Party. After 1910, though, Irish Nationalist votes were essential to stay in power. Retaining Ireland in the Union was the declared intent of all parties, and the Nationalists, as part of the majority that kept Asquith in office, were entitled to seek enactment of their plans for Home Rule, and to expect Liberal and Labour support. The Conservatives, with die-hard support from the Protestant Orangemen of Ulster, were strongly opposed to Home Rule. The desire to retain a veto for the Lords on such bills had been an unbridgeable gap between the parties in the constitutional talks prior to the second 1910 election.

The cabinet committee (not including Asquith) that in 1911 planned the Third Home Rule Bill opposed any special status for Protestant Ulster within majority-Catholic Ireland. Asquith later (in 1913) wrote to Churchill, stating that the Prime Minister had always believed and stated that the price of Home Rule should be a special status for Ulster. In spite of this, the bill as introduced in April 1912 contained no such provision, and was meant to apply to all Ireland. Neither partition nor a special status for Ulster was likely to satisfy either side. The self-government offered by the bill was very limited, but Irish Nationalists, expecting Home Rule to come by gradual parliamentary steps, favoured it. The Conservatives and Irish Unionists opposed it. Unionists began preparing to get their way by force if necessary, prompting nationalist emulation. Though very much a minority, Irish Unionists were generally better financed and more organised.

Since the Parliament Act the Unionists could no longer block Home Rule in the House of Lords, but only delay Royal Assent by two years. Asquith decided to postpone any concessions to the Unionists until the bill&#x27;s third passage through the Commons, when he believed the Unionists would be desperate for a compromise. Jenkins concluded that had Asquith tried for an earlier agreement, he would have had no luck, as many of his opponents wanted a fight and the opportunity to smash his government. Sir Edward Carson, MP for Dublin University and leader of the Irish Unionists in Parliament, threatened a revolt if Home Rule was enacted. The new Conservative leader, Bonar Law, campaigned in Parliament and in northern Ireland, warning Ulstermen against &quot;Rome Rule&quot;, that is, domination by the island&#x27;s Catholic majority. Many who opposed Home Rule felt that the Liberals had violated the Constitution—by pushing through major constitutional change without a clear electoral mandate, with the House of Lords, formerly the &quot;watchdog of the constitution&quot;, not reformed as had been promised in the preamble of the 1911 Act—and thus justified actions that in other circumstances might be treason.

The passions generated by the Irish question contrasted with Asquith&#x27;s cool detachment, and he wrote about the prospective partition of the county of Tyrone, which had a mixed population, deeming it &quot;an impasse, with unspeakable consequences, upon a matter which to English eyes seems inconceivably small, &amp; to Irish eyes immeasurably big&quot;. In 1912 Asquith said: &quot;Ireland is a nation, not two nations but one nation. There are few cases in history, ...of nationality at once so distinct, so persistent and so assimilative as the Irish.&quot; As the Commons debated the Home Rule bill in late 1912 and early 1913, unionists in the north of Ireland mobilised, with talk of Carson declaring a Provisional Government and Ulster Volunteer Forces (UVF) built around the Orange Lodges, but in the cabinet, only Churchill viewed this with alarm. These forces, insisting on their loyalty to the British Crown but increasingly well-armed with smuggled German weapons, prepared to do battle with the British Army, but Unionist leaders were confident that the army would not aid in forcing Home Rule on Ulster. As the Home Rule bill awaited its third passage through the Commons, the so-called Curragh incident occurred in April 1914. With deployment of troops into Ulster imminent and threatening language by Churchill and the Secretary of State for War, John Seely, around sixty army officers, led by Brigadier-General Hubert Gough, announced that they would rather be dismissed from the service than obey. With unrest spreading to army officers in England, the Cabinet acted to placate the officers with a statement written by Asquith reiterating the duty of officers to obey lawful orders but claiming that the incident had been a misunderstanding. Seely then added an unauthorised assurance, countersigned by Sir John French (the professional head of the army), that the government had no intention of using force against Ulster. Asquith repudiated the addition, and required Seely and French to resign, taking on the War Office himself, retaining the additional responsibility until hostilities against Germany began.

Within a month of the start of Asquith&#x27;s tenure at the War Office, the UVF landed a large cargo of guns and ammunition at Larne, but the Cabinet did not deem it prudent to arrest their leaders. On 12 May, Asquith announced that he would secure Home Rule&#x27;s third passage through the Commons (accomplished on 25 May), but that there would be an amending bill with it, making special provision for Ulster. But the Lords made changes to the amending bill unacceptable to Asquith, and with no way to invoke the Parliament Act on the amending bill, Asquith agreed to meet other leaders at an all-party conference on 21 July at Buckingham Palace, chaired by the King. When no solution could be found, Asquith and his cabinet planned further concessions to the Unionists, but this did not occur as the crisis on the Continent erupted into war. In September 1914, after the outbreak of the conflict, Asquith announced that the Home Rule bill would go on the statute book (as the Government of Ireland Act 1914) but would not go into force until after the war (see Suspensory Act 1914); in the interim a bill granting special status to Ulster would be considered. This solution satisfied neither side.

=== Foreign and defence policy ===

Asquith led a deeply divided Liberal Party as prime minister, not least on questions of foreign relations and defence spending. Under Balfour, Britain and France had agreed upon the Entente Cordiale. In 1906, at the time the Liberals took office, there was an ongoing crisis between France and Germany over Morocco, and the French asked for British help in the event of conflict. Grey, the Foreign Secretary, refused any formal arrangement, but gave it as his personal opinion that in the event of war Britain would aid France. France then asked for military conversations aimed at co-ordination in such an event. Grey agreed, and these went on in the following years, without cabinet knowledge—Asquith most likely did not know of them until 1911. When he learnt of them, Asquith was concerned that the French took for granted British aid in the event of war, but Grey persuaded him the talks must continue.

More public was the naval arms race between Britain and Germany. The Moroccan crisis had been settled at the Algeciras Conference, and Campbell-Bannerman&#x27;s cabinet approved reduced naval estimates. Tenser relationships with Germany, and that nation moving ahead with its own dreadnoughts, led Reginald McKenna, when Asquith appointed him First Lord of the Admiralty in 1908, to propose the laying down of eight more British ones in the following three years. This prompted conflict in the Cabinet between those who supported this programme, such as McKenna, and the &quot;economists&quot; who promoted economy in naval estimates, led by Lloyd George and Churchill. There was much public sentiment for building as many ships as possible to maintain British naval superiority. Asquith mediated among his colleagues and secured a compromise whereby four ships would be laid down at once, and four more if there proved to be a need. The armaments matter was put to the side during the domestic crises over the 1909 budget and then the Parliament Act, though the building of warships continued at an accelerated rate.

The Agadir Crisis of 1911 was again between France and Germany over Moroccan interests, but Asquith&#x27;s government signalled its friendliness towards France in Lloyd George&#x27;s Mansion House speech on 21 July. Late that year, the Lord President of the Council, Viscount Morley, brought the question of the communications with the French to the attention of the Cabinet. The Cabinet agreed (at Asquith&#x27;s instigation) that no talks could be held that committed Britain to war, and required cabinet approval for co-ordinated military actions. Nevertheless, by 1912, the French had requested additional naval co-ordination and late in the year, the various understandings were committed to writing in an exchange of letters between Grey and French Ambassador Paul Cambon. The relationship with France disquieted some Liberal backbenchers and Asquith felt obliged to assure them that nothing had been secretly agreed that would commit Britain to war. This quieted Asquith&#x27;s foreign policy critics until another naval estimates dispute erupted early in 1914.

===July Crisis and outbreak of World War I===
The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914 initiated a month of unsuccessful diplomatic attempts to avoid war. These attempts ended with Grey&#x27;s proposal for a four-power conference of Britain, Germany, France and Italy, following the Austrian ultimatum to Serbia on the evening of 23 July. Grey&#x27;s initiative was rejected by Germany as &quot;not practicable&quot;. During this period, George Cassar considers that &quot;the country was overwhelmingly opposed to intervention.&quot; Much of Asquith&#x27;s cabinet was similarly inclined, Lloyd George told a journalist on 27 July that &quot;there could be no question of our taking part in any war in the first instance. He knew of no Minister who would be in favour of it.&quot; and wrote in his &quot;War Memoirs&quot; that before the German ultimatum to Belgium on 3 August &quot;The Cabinet was hopelessly divided—fully one third, if not one half, being opposed to our entry into the War. After the German ultimatum to Belgium the Cabinet was almost unanimous.&quot; Asquith himself, while growing more aware of the impending catastrophe, was still uncertain of the necessity for Britain&#x27;s involvement. On 24 July, he wrote to Venetia, &quot;We are within measurable, or imaginable, distance of a real Armageddon. Happily there seems to be no reason why we should be anything more than spectators.&quot;

During the continuing escalation Asquith &quot;used all his experience and authority to keep his options open&quot; and adamantly refused to commit his government by saying, &quot;The worst thing we could do would be to announce to the world at the present moment that in &quot;no circumstances&quot; would we intervene.&quot; But he recognised Grey&#x27;s clear commitment to Anglo-French unity and, following Russian mobilisation on 30 July, and the Kaiser&#x27;s ultimatum to the Tsar on 1 August, he recognised the inevitability of war. From this point, he committed himself to participation, despite continuing Cabinet opposition. As he said, &quot;There is a strong party reinforced by Ll George[, ] Morley and Harcourt who are against any kind of intervention. Grey will never consent and I shall not separate myself from him.&quot; Also, on 2 August, he received confirmation of Conservative support from Bonar Law. In one of two extraordinary Cabinets held on that Sunday, Grey informed members of the 1912 Anglo-French naval talks and Asquith secured agreement to mobilise the fleet.

On Monday 3 August, the Belgian Government rejected the German demand for free passage through its country and in the afternoon, &quot;with gravity and unexpected eloquence&quot;, Grey spoke in the Commons and called for British action &quot;against the unmeasured aggrandisement of any power&quot;. Basil Liddell Hart considered that this speech saw the &quot;hardening (of) British opinion to the point of intervention&quot;. The following day Asquith saw the King and an ultimatum to Germany demanding withdrawal from Belgian soil was issued with a deadline of midnight Berlin time, 11.00 p.m. (GMT). Margot Asquith described the moment of expiry, somewhat inaccurately, in these terms: &quot;(I joined) Henry in the Cabinet room. Lord Crewe and Sir Edward Grey were already there and we sat smoking cigarettes in silence ... The clock on the mantelpiece hammered out the hour and when the last beat of midnight struck it was as silent as dawn. We were at War.&quot;

==First year of the war: August 1914 – May 1915==
===Asquith&#x27;s wartime government===
The declaration of war on 4 August 1914 saw Asquith as the head of an almost united Liberal Party. Having persuaded Sir John Simon and Lord Beauchamp to remain, Asquith suffered only two resignations from his cabinet, those of John Morley and John Burns. With other parties promising to co-operate, Asquith&#x27;s government declared war on behalf of a united nation, Asquith bringing &quot;the country into war without civil disturbance or political schism&quot;.

The first months of the War saw a revival in Asquith&#x27;s popularity. Bitterness from earlier struggles temporarily receded and the nation looked to Asquith, &quot;steady, massive, self-reliant and unswerving&quot;, to lead them to victory. But Asquith&#x27;s peacetime strengths ill-equipped him for what was to become perhaps the first total war and, before its end, he would be out of office for ever and his party would never again form a majority government.

Beyond the replacement of Morley and Burns, Asquith made one other significant change to his cabinet. He relinquished the War Office and appointed the non-partisan but Conservative-inclined Lord Kitchener of Khartoum. Kitchener was a figure of national renown and his participation strengthened the reputation of the government. Whether it increased its effectiveness is less certain. Overall, it was a government of considerable talent with Lloyd George remaining as chancellor, Grey as foreign secretary, and Churchill at the Admiralty.

The invasion of Belgium by German forces, the touch paper for British intervention, saw the Kaiser&#x27;s armies attempt a lightning strike through Belgium against France, while holding Russian forces on the Eastern Front. To support the French, Asquith&#x27;s cabinet authorised the despatch of the British Expeditionary Force. The ensuing Battle of the Frontiers in the late summer and early autumn of 1914 saw the final halt of the German advance at the First Battle of the Marne, which established the pattern of attritional trench warfare on the Western Front that continued until 1918. This stalemate brought deepening resentment against the government, and against Asquith personally, as the population at large and the press lords in particular, blamed him for a lack of energy in the prosecution of the war. It also created divisions within the Cabinet between the &quot;Westerners&quot;, including Asquith, who supported the generals in believing that the key to victory lay in ever greater investment of men and munitions in France and Belgium, and the &quot;Easterners&quot;, led by Churchill and Lloyd George, who believed that the Western Front was in a state of irreversible stasis and sought victory through action in the East. Lastly, it highlighted divisions between those politicians, and newspaper owners, who thought that military strategy and actions should be determined by the generals, and those who thought politicians should make those decisions. Asquith said in his memoirs: &quot;Once the governing objectives have been decided by Ministers at home—the execution should always be left to the untrammeled discretion of the commanders on the spot.&quot; Lloyd George&#x27;s counter view was expressed in a letter of early 1916 in which he asked &quot;whether I have a right to express an independent view on the War or must (be) a pure advocate of opinions expressed by my military advisers?&quot; These divergent opinions lay behind the two great crises that would, within 14 months, see the collapse of the last ever fully Liberal administration and the advent of the first coalition on 25 May 1915, the Dardanelles Campaign and the Shell Crisis.

===Dardanelles Campaign===
The Dardanelles Campaign was an attempt by Churchill and those favouring an Eastern strategy to end the stalemate on the Western Front. It envisaged an Anglo-French landing on Turkey&#x27;s Gallipoli Peninsula and a rapid advance to Constantinople which would see the exit of Turkey from the conflict. The plan was rejected by Admiral Fisher, the First Sea Lord, and Kitchener. Unable to provide decisive leadership, Asquith sought to arbitrate between these two and Churchill, leading to procrastination and delay. The naval attempt was badly defeated. Allied troops established bridgeheads on the Gallipoli Peninsula, but a delay in providing sufficient reinforcements allowed the Turks to regroup, leading to a stalemate Jenkins described &quot;as immobile as that which prevailed on the Western Front&quot;. The Allies suffered from infighting at the top, poor equipment, incompetent leadership, and lack of planning, while facing the best units of the Ottoman army. The Allies sent in 492,000 men; they suffered 132,000 casualties in the humiliating defeat—with very high rates for Australia and New Zealand that permanently transformed those dominions. In Britain, it was political ruin for Churchill and badly hurt Asquith.

===Shell Crisis of May 1915===
The opening of 1915 saw growing division between Lloyd George and Kitchener over the supply of munitions for the army. Lloyd George considered that a munitions department, under his control, was essential to co-ordinate &quot;the nation&#x27;s entire engineering capacity&quot;. Kitchener favoured the continuance of the current arrangement whereby munitions were sourced through contracts between the War Office and the country&#x27;s armaments manufacturers. As so often, Asquith sought compromise through committee, establishing a group to &quot;consider the much vexed question of putting the contracts for munitions on a proper footing&quot;. This did little to dampen press criticism and, on 20 April, Asquith sought to challenge his detractors in a major speech at Newcastle by saying, &quot;I saw a statement the other day that the operations of our army were being crippled by our failure to provide the necessary ammunition. There is not a word of truth in that statement.&quot;

The press response was savage: 14 May 1915 saw the publication in &quot;The Times&quot; of a letter from their correspondent Charles à Court Repington which ascribed the British failure at the Battle of Aubers Ridge to a shortage of high explosive shells. Thus opened a fully-fledged crisis, the Shell Crisis. The prime minister&#x27;s wife correctly identified her husband&#x27;s chief opponent, the Press baron, and owner of &quot;The Times&quot;, Lord Northcliffe: &quot;I&#x27;m quite sure Northcliffe is at the bottom of all this,&quot; but failed to recognise the clandestine involvement of Sir John French, who leaked the details of the shells shortage to Repington. Northcliffe claimed that &quot;the whole question of the supply of the munitions of war is one on which the Cabinet cannot be arraigned too sharply.&quot; Attacks on the government and on Asquith&#x27;s personal lethargy came from the left as well as the right, C. P. Scott, the editor of &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; writing, &quot;The Government has failed most frightfully and discreditably in the matter of munitions.&quot;

===Other events===

Failures in both the East and the West began a tide of events that was to overwhelm Asquith&#x27;s Liberal Government. Strategic setbacks combined with a shattering personal blow when, on 12 May 1915, Venetia Stanley announced her engagement to Edwin Montagu. Asquith&#x27;s reply was immediate and brief, &quot;As you know well, this breaks my heart. I couldn&#x27;t bear to come and see you. I can only pray God to bless you—and help me.&quot; Venetia&#x27;s importance to him is illustrated by a remark in a letter written in mid-1914: &quot;Keep close to me beloved in this most critical time of my life. I know you will not fail.&quot; Her engagement, &quot;a very treacherous return after all the joy you&#x27;ve given me&quot;, left him devastated. Significant though the loss was personally, its impact on Asquith politically can be overstated. The historian Stephen Koss notes that Asquith &quot;was always able to divide his public and private lives into separate compartments (and) soon found new confidantes to whom he was writing with no less frequency, ardour and indiscretion.&quot;

This personal loss was immediately followed, on 15 May, by the resignation of Admiral Fisher after continuing disagreements with Churchill and in frustration at the disappointing developments in Gallipoli. Aged 74, Fisher&#x27;s behaviour had grown increasingly erratic and, in frequent letters to Lloyd George, he gave vent to his frustrations with the First Lord of the Admiralty: &quot;Fisher writes to me every day or two to let me know how things are going. He has a great deal of trouble with his chief, who is always wanting to do something big and striking.&quot; Adverse events, press hostility, Conservative opposition and personal sorrows assailed Asquith, and his position was further weakened by his Liberal colleagues. Cassar considers that Lloyd George displayed a distinct lack of loyalty, and Koss writes of the contemporary rumours that Churchill had &quot;been up to his old game of intriguing all round&quot; and reports a claim that Churchill &quot;unquestionably inspired&quot; the Repington Letter, in collusion with Sir John French. Lacking cohesion internally, and attacked from without, Asquith determined that his government could not continue and he wrote to the King, &quot;I have come decidedly to the conclusion that the [Government] must be reconstituted on a broad and non-party basis.&quot;

==First Coalition: May 1915 – December 1916==
The formation of the First Coalition saw Asquith display the political acuteness that seemed to have deserted him. But it came at a cost. This involved the sacrifice of two old political comrades: Churchill, who was blamed for the Dardanelles fiasco, and Haldane, who was wrongly accused in the press of pro-German sympathies. The Conservatives under Bonar Law made these removals a condition of entering government and, in sacking Haldane, who &quot;made no difficulty&quot;, Asquith, committed &quot;the most uncharacteristic fault of (his) whole career&quot;. In a letter to Grey, Asquith wrote of Haldane, &quot;He is the oldest personal and political friend that I have in the world and, with him, you and I have stood together for the best part of 30 years.&quot; But he was unable to express these sentiments directly to Haldane, who was greatly hurt. Asquith handled the allocation of offices more successfully, appointing Law to the relatively minor post of Colonial Secretary, taking responsibility for munitions from Kitchener and giving it, as a new ministry, to Lloyd George and placing Balfour at the Admiralty, in place of Churchill, who was demoted to the sinecure Cabinet post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. Overall the Liberals held 12 Cabinet seats, including most of the important ones, while the Conservatives held 8. Despite this outcome, many Liberals were dismayed, the sacked Charles Hobhouse writing, &quot;The disintegration of the Liberal Party is complete. Ll.G. and his Tory friends will soon get rid of Asquith.&quot; From a party, and a personal, perspective, the creation of the First Coalition was seen as a &quot;notable victory for (Asquith), if not for the allied cause&quot;. But Asquith&#x27;s dismissive handling of Law also contributed to his own and his party&#x27;s later destruction.

===War re-organisation===

Having reconstructed his government, Asquith attempted a re-configuration of his war-making apparatus. The most important element of this was the establishment of the Ministry of Munitions, followed by the re-ordering of the War Council into a Dardanelles Committee, with Maurice Hankey as secretary and with a remit to consider all questions of war strategy.

The Munitions of War Act 1915 brought private companies supplying the armed forces under the tight control of the Minister of Munitions, Lloyd George. The policy, according to J. A. R. Marriott, was that:

no private interest was to be permitted to obstruct the service, or imperil the safety, of the State. Trade Union regulations must be suspended; employers&#x27; profits must be limited, skilled men must fight, if not in the trenches, in the factories; man-power must be economised by the dilution of labour and the employment of women; Private factories must pass under the control of the State, and new national factories be set up. Results justified the new policy: the output was prodigious; the goods were at last delivered.

Nevertheless, criticism of Asquith&#x27;s leadership style continued. The Earl of Crawford, who had joined the Government as Minister of Agriculture, described his first Cabinet meeting in these terms: &quot;It was a huge gathering, so big that it is hopeless for more than one or two to express opinions on each detail [...] Asquith somnolent—hands shaky and cheeks pendulous. He exercised little control over debate, seemed rather bored, but good humoured throughout.&quot; Lloyd George was less tolerant, George Riddell recording in his diary, &quot;(He) says the P.M. should lead not follow and (Asquith) never moves until he is forced, and then it is usually too late.&quot; And crises, as well as criticism, continued to assail the Prime Minister, &quot;envenomed by intra-party as well as inter-party rancour&quot;.

===Conscription===

The insatiable demand for manpower for the Western Front had been foreseen early on. A volunteer system had been introduced at the outbreak of war, and Asquith was reluctant to change it for political reasons, as many Liberals, and almost all of their Irish Nationalist and Labour allies, were strongly opposed to conscription. Volunteer numbers dropped, not meeting the demands for more troops for Gallipoli, and much more strongly, for the Western Front. This made the voluntary system increasingly untenable; Asquith&#x27;s daughter Violet wrote in March 1915, &quot;Gradually every man with the average number of limbs and faculties is being sucked out to the war.&quot; In July 1915, the National Registration Act was passed, requiring compulsory registration for all men between the ages of 18 and 65. This was seen by many as the prelude to conscription but the appointment of Lord Derby as Director-General of Recruiting instead saw an attempt to rejuvenate the voluntary system, the Derby Scheme. Asquith&#x27;s slow steps towards conscription continued to infuriate his opponents. Sir Henry Wilson, for example, wrote this to Leo Amery: &quot;What is going to be the result of these debates? Will &#x27;wait and see&#x27; win, or can that part of the Cabinet that is in earnest and is honest force that damned old Squiff into action?&quot; The Prime Minister&#x27;s balancing act, within Parliament and within his own party, was not assisted by a strident campaign against conscription conducted by his wife. Describing herself as &quot;passionately against it&quot;, Margot Asquith engaged in one of her frequent influencing drives, by letters and through conversations, which had little impact other than doing &quot;great harm&quot; to Asquith&#x27;s reputation and position.

By the end of 1915, it was clear that conscription was essential and Asquith laid the Military Service Act in the House of Commons on 5 January 1916. The Act introduced conscription of bachelors, and was extended to married men later in the year. Asquith&#x27;s main opposition came from within his own party, particularly from Sir John Simon, who resigned. Asquith described Simon&#x27;s stance in a letter to Sylvia Henley in these terms: &quot;I felt really like a man who had been struck publicly in the face by his son.&quot; Some years later, Simon acknowledged his error by saying, &quot;I have long since realised that my opposition was a mistake.&quot; Asquith&#x27;s achievement in bringing the bill through without breaking up the government was considerable, to quote the estimation of his wife: &quot;Henry&#x27;s patience and skill in keeping Labour in this amazing change in England have stunned everyone,&quot; but the long struggle &quot;hurt his own reputation and the unity of his party&quot;.

===Ireland===
On Easter Monday 1916, a group of Irish Volunteers and members of the Irish Citizen Army seized a number of key buildings and locations in Dublin and elsewhere. There was heavy fighting over the next week before the Volunteers were forced to surrender. Distracted by conscription, Asquith and the Government were slow to appreciate the developing danger, which was exacerbated when, after hasty courts martial, a number of the Irish leaders were executed. On 11 May Asquith crossed to Dublin and, after a week of investigation, decided that the island&#x27;s governance system was irredeemably broken, He turned to Lloyd George for a solution. With his customary energy, Lloyd George brokered a settlement which would have seen Home Rule introduced at the end of the War, with the exclusion of Ulster. However, neither he, nor Asquith, appreciated the extent of Conservative opposition, the plan was strongly attacked in the House of Lords, and was abandoned thereafter. The episode damaged not only Lloyd George&#x27;s reputation, but also that of Asquith. Walter Long spoke of the latter as &quot;terribly lacking in decision&quot;. It also further widened the divide between Asquith and Lloyd George, and encouraged the latter in his plans for government reconstruction. Lloyd George remarked that &quot;Mr. A gets very few cheers nowadays.&quot;

===Progress of the war===
Continued Allied failure and heavy losses at the Battle of Loos between September and October 1915 ended any remaining confidence in the British commander, Sir John French and in the judgement of Lord Kitchener. Asquith resorted to a favoured stratagem and, persuading Kitchener to undertake a tour of the Gallipoli battlefield in the hope that he could be persuaded to remain in the Mediterranean as Commander-in-Chief, took temporary charge of the War Office himself. He then replaced French with Sir Douglas Haig. In his diary for 10 December 1915, the latter recorded, &quot;About 7 pm I received a letter from the Prime Minister marked &#x27;Secret&#x27; and enclosed in &quot;three&quot; envelopes. It ran &#x27;Sir J. French has placed in my hands his resignation ... Subject to the King&#x27;s approval, I have the pleasure of proposing to you that you should be his successor. Asquith also appointed Sir William Robertson as Chief of the Imperial General Staff with increased powers, reporting directly to the Cabinet and with the sole right to give them military advice, relegating the Secretary of State for War to the tasks of recruiting and supplying the army. Lastly, he instituted a smaller Dardanelles Committee, re-christened the War Committee, with himself, Balfour, Law, Lloyd George and Reginald McKenna as members although, as this soon increased, the Committee continued the failings of its predecessor, being &quot;too large and lack(ing) executive authority&quot;. None of this saved the Dardanelles Campaign and the decision to evacuate was taken in December, resulting in the resignation from the Duchy of Lancaster of Churchill, who wrote, &quot;I could not accept a position of general responsibility for war policy without any effective share in its guidance and control.&quot; Further reverses took place in the Balkans: the Central Powers overran Serbia, forcing the Allied troops which had attempted to intervene back towards Salonika.

Early 1916 saw the start of the German offensive at Verdun, the &quot;greatest battle of attrition in history&quot;. In late May, the only significant Anglo-German naval engagement of the War took place at The Battle of Jutland. Although a strategic success, the greater loss of ships on the Allied side brought early dismay. Lord Newton, Paymaster General and Parliamentary spokesman for the War office in Kitchener&#x27;s absence, recorded in his diary, &quot;Stupefying news of naval battle off Jutland. Whilst listening to the list of ships lost, I thought it the worst disaster that we had ever suffered.&quot; This despondency was compounded, for the nation, if not for his colleagues, when Lord Kitchener was killed in the sinking of HMS &quot;Hampshire&quot; on 5 June.

Asquith first considered taking the vacant War Office himself but then offered it to Law, who declined it in favour of Lloyd George. This was an important sign of growing unity of action between the two men and it filled Margot Asquith with foreboding: &quot;I look upon this as the greatest political blunder of Henry&#x27;s lifetime ... We are out: it can only be a question of time now when we shall have to leave Downing Street.&quot;
Asquith followed this by agreeing to hold Commissions of Inquiry into the conduct of the Dardanelles and of the Mesopotamian campaign, where Allied forces had been forced to surrender at Kut. Sir Maurice Hankey, Secretary to the War Committee, considered that, &quot;the Coalition never recovered. For (its) last five months, the function of the Supreme Command was carried out under the shadow of these inquests.&quot; But these mistakes were overshadowed by the limited progress and immense casualties of the Battle of the Somme, which began on 1 July 1916, and then by another devastating personal loss, the death of Asquith&#x27;s son Raymond, on 15 September at the Battle of Flers–Courcelette. Asquith&#x27;s relationship with his eldest son had not been easy. Raymond wrote to his wife in early 1916, &quot;If Margot talks any more bosh to you about the inhumanity of her stepchildren you can stop her mouth by telling her that during my 10 months exile here the P.M. has never written me a line of any description.&quot; But Raymond&#x27;s death was shattering. Violet wrote as follows: &quot;...to see Father suffering so wrings one&quot;, and Asquith passed much of the following months &quot;withdrawn and difficult to approach&quot;. The War brought no respite; Churchill remarked, &quot;The failure to break the German line in the Somme, the recovery of the Germanic powers in the East [i.e. the defeat of the Brusilov Offensive], the ruin of Roumania and the beginnings of renewed submarine warfare strengthened and stimulated all those forces which insisted upon still greater vigour in the conduct of affairs.&quot;

==Fall: November–December 1916==

The events that led to the collapse of the First Coalition were exhaustively chronicled by almost all of the major participants (although Asquith himself was a notable exception), and have been studied by historians in the 100 years since. Although many of the accounts and studies differ in detail, and present a somewhat confusing picture overall, the outline is clear. As R. J. Q. Adams wrote, &quot;The Prime Minister depended upon [a] majority [in] Parliament. The faith of that majority in Asquith&#x27;s leadership had been shaken and the appearance of a logical alternative destroyed him.&quot;

===Nigeria debate and Lord Lansdowne&#x27;s memorandum===

The touch paper for the final crisis was the unlikely subject of the sale of captured German assets in Nigeria. As Colonial Secretary, the Conservative leader Bonar Law led the debate and was subject to a furious attack by Sir Edward Carson. The issue itself was trivial, but the fact that Law had been attacked by a leading member of his own party, and was not supported by Lloyd George (who absented himself from the House only to dine with Carson later in the evening), was not.

Margot Asquith immediately sensed the coming danger: &quot;From that night it was quite clear that Northcliffe, Rothermere, Bonar, Carson, Ll.G (and a man called Max Aitken) were going to run the Government. I knew it was the end.&quot; Grey was similarly prescient and wrote, &quot;Lloyd George means to break up the Government.&quot; Law saw the debate as a threat to his own political position, as well as another instance of lack of grip by the government.

The situation was further inflamed by the publication of a memorandum on future prospects in the war by Lord Lansdowne. Circulated on 13 November, it considered, and did not dismiss, the possibility of a negotiated settlement with the Central Powers. Asquith&#x27;s critics immediately assumed that the memorandum represented his own views and that Lansdowne was being used as a stalking horse, Lord Crewe going so far as to suggest that the Lansdowne Memorandum was the &quot;veritable &quot;causa causans&quot; of the final break-up&quot;.

===Triumvirate gathers===

On 20 November 1916 Lloyd George, Carson and Law met at the Hyde Park Hotel. The meeting was organised by Max Aitken, who was to play central roles both in the forthcoming crisis and in its subsequent historiography. Max Aitken was a Canadian adventurer, millionaire, and close friend of Law. His book on the fall of the First Coalition, &quot;Politicians and the War 1914–1916&quot;, although always partial and sometimes inaccurate, gives a detailed insider&#x27;s view of the events leading up to Asquith&#x27;s political demise. The trio agreed on the necessity of overhauling the government and further agreed on the mechanism for doing so; the establishment of a small War Council, chaired by Lloyd George, with no more than five members and with full executive authority for the conduct of the war.

Asquith was to be retained as prime minister, and given honorific oversight of the War Council, but day to day operations would be directed by Lloyd George. This scheme, although often reworked, remained the basis of all proposals to reform the government until Asquith&#x27;s fall on 6 December. Until almost the end, both Law and Lloyd George wished to retain Asquith as premier, but Aitken, Carson and Lord Northcliffe emphatically did not.

===Power without responsibility===

Lord Northcliffe&#x27;s role was critical, as was the use Lloyd George made of him, and of the press in general. Northcliffe&#x27;s involvement also highlights the limitations of both Aitken&#x27;s and Lloyd George&#x27;s accounts of Asquith&#x27;s fall. Both minimised Northcliffe&#x27;s part in the events. In his &quot;War Memoirs&quot;, Lloyd George stated emphatically &quot;Lord Northcliffe was never, at any stage, brought into our consultations.&quot; Aitken supported this by saying, &quot;Lord Northcliffe was not in active co-operation with Lloyd George.&quot;

But these claims are contradicted by others. In their biography of Northcliffe, Reginald Pound and Geoffrey Harmsworth record Northcliffe&#x27;s brother Rothermere writing contemporaneously, &quot;Alfred has been actively at work with Ll.G. with a view to bringing about a change.&quot; Riddell wrote in his diary for 27 May 1916: &quot;LG never mentions directly that he sees Northcliffe but I am sure they are in daily contact.&quot; Margot Asquith was also certain of Northcliffe&#x27;s role, and of Lloyd George&#x27;s involvement, although she obscured both of their names when writing in her diary: &quot;I only hope the man responsible for giving information to Lord N- will be heavily punished: God may forgive him; I never can.&quot;

The claims are also contradicted by events. Northcliffe met with Lloyd George on each of the three days just prior to Lloyd George&#x27;s resignation, on 1, 2, and 3 December, including two meetings on 1 December, both before and after Lloyd George put his revised proposals for the War Council to Asquith. It seems improbable that ongoing events were not discussed and that the two men confined their conversations to negotiating article circulation rights for Lloyd George once he had resigned, as Pound and Harmsworth weakly suggest.

The attempts made by others to use Northcliffe and the wider press also merit consideration. In this regard, some senior military officers were extremely active. Robertson, for example, wrote to Northcliffe in October 1916, &quot;The Boche gives me no trouble compared with what I meet in London. So any help you can give me will be of Imperial value.&quot; Lastly, the actions of Northcliffe&#x27;s newspapers must be considered—in particular &quot;The Times&quot; editorial on 4 December which led Asquith to reject Lloyd George&#x27;s final War Council proposals. Thompson, Northcliffe&#x27;s most recent biographer, concludes, &quot;From the evidence, it appears that Northcliffe and his newspapers should be given more credit than they have generally received for the demise of the Asquith government in December 1916.&quot;

===To-ing and fro-ing===

Law met again with Carson and Lloyd George on 25 November and, with Aitken&#x27;s help, drafted a memorandum for Asquith&#x27;s signature. This would see a &quot;Civilian General Staff&quot;, with Lloyd George as chairman and Asquith as president, attending irregularly but with the right of referral to Cabinet as desired. This Law presented to Asquith, who committed to reply on Monday the following week.

His reply was an outright rejection; the proposal was impossible &quot;without fatally impairing the confidence of colleagues, and undermining my own authority.&quot; Law took Asquith&#x27;s response to Carson and Lloyd George at Law&#x27;s office in the Colonial Office. All were uncertain of the next steps. Law decided it would be appropriate to meet with his senior Conservative colleagues, something he had not previously done. He saw Austen Chamberlain, Lord Curzon and Lord Robert Cecil on Thursday 30 November. All were united in opposition to Lloyd George&#x27;s War Council plans, with Chamberlain writing, &quot;(we) were unanimously of opinion (sic) that (the plans) were open to grave objection and made certain alternative proposals.&quot;

Lloyd George had also been reflecting on the substance of the scheme and, on Friday 1 December, he met with Asquith to put forward an alternative. This would see a War Council of three, the two Service ministers and a third without portfolio. One of the three, presumably Lloyd George although this was not explicit, would be chairman. Asquith, as prime minister, would retain &quot;supreme control.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s reply the same day did not constitute an outright rejection, but he did demand that he retain the chairmanship of the council. As such, it was unacceptable to Lloyd George and he wrote to Law the next day (Saturday 2 December), &quot;I enclose copy of P.M.&#x27;s letter. The life of the country depends on resolute action by you now.&quot;

===Last four days: Sunday 3 December to Wednesday 6 December===
In a four-day crisis Asquith was unaware how fast he was losing support. Lloyd George now had growing Unionist support, the backing of Labour and (thanks to the efforts of Christopher Addison) a majority of Liberal MPs. Asquith fell and Lloyd George answered the loud demands for a much more decisive government. He energetically set up a new small war cabinet, a cabinet secretariat under Hankey, and a secretariat of private advisors in the &#x27;Garden Suburb&#x27; to move towards prime ministerial control.

====Sunday 3 December====

Sunday 3 December saw the Conservative leadership meet at Law&#x27;s house, Pembroke Lodge. They gathered against a backdrop of ever-growing press involvement, in part fomented by Max Aitken. That morning&#x27;s &quot;Reynold&#x27;s News&quot;, owned and edited by Lloyd George&#x27;s close associate Henry Dalziel, had published an article setting out Lloyd George&#x27;s demands to Asquith and claiming that he intended to resign and take his case to the country if they were not met. At Law&#x27;s house, the Conservatives present drew up a resolution which they demanded Law present to Asquith.

This document, subsequently the source of much debate, stated that &quot;the Government cannot continue as it is; the Prime Minister (should) tender the resignation of the Government&quot; and, if Asquith was unwilling to do that, the Conservative members of the Government would &quot;tender (their) resignations.&quot; The meaning of this resolution is unclear, and even those who contributed to it took away differing interpretations.

Chamberlain felt that it left open the options of either Asquith or Lloyd George as premier, dependent on who could gain greater support. Curzon, in a letter of that day to Lansdowne, stated that no one at the Pembroke Lodge meeting felt that the war could be won under Asquith&#x27;s continued leadership, and that the issue for the Liberal politicians to resolve was whether Asquith remained in a Lloyd George administration in a subordinate role, or left the government altogether. Max Aitken&#x27;s claim that the resolution&#x27;s purpose was to ensure that &quot;Lloyd George should go&quot; is not supported by most of the contemporary accounts, or by the assessments of most subsequent historians.

As one example, Gilmour, Curzon&#x27;s biographer, writes that the Unionist ministers &quot;did not, as Beaverbrook alleged, decide to resign themselves in order to strengthen the Prime Minister&#x27;s hand against Lloyd George..(their intentions) were completely different.&quot; Similarly, Adams, Law&#x27;s latest biographer, describes Aitken&#x27;s interpretation of the resolution as &quot;convincingly overturned&quot;. John Ramsden is equally clear: &quot;the Unionist ministers acted to strengthen Lloyd George&#x27;s hand, from a conviction that only greater power for Lloyd George could put enough drive into the war effort.&quot;

Law then took the resolution to Asquith, who had, unusually, broken his weekend at Walmer Castle to return to Downing Street. At their meeting Law sought to convey the content of his colleagues&#x27; earlier discussion but failed to produce the resolution itself. That it was never actually shown to Asquith is incontrovertible, and Asquith confirmed this in his writings. Law&#x27;s motives in not handing it over are more controversial. Law himself maintained he simply forgot. Jenkins charges him with bad faith, or neglect of duty. Adams suggests that Law&#x27;s motives were more complex (the resolution also contained a clause condemning the involvement of the press, prompted by the &quot;Reynold&#x27;s News&quot; story of that morning) and that, in continuing to seek an accommodation between Asquith and Lloyd George, Law felt it prudent not to share the actual text.

The outcome of the interview between Law and Asquith was clear, even if Law had not been. Asquith immediately decided that an accommodation with Lloyd George, and a substantial reconstruction to placate the Unionist ministers, were required. He summoned Lloyd George and together they agreed a compromise that was, in fact, little different from Lloyd George&#x27;s 1 December proposals. The only substantial amendment was that Asquith would have daily oversight of the War Council&#x27;s work and a right of veto. John Grigg saw this compromise as &quot;very favourable to Asquith&quot;. Cassar is less certain: &quot;The new formula left him in a much weaker position[, his] authority merely on paper for he was unlikely to exercise his veto lest it bring on the collective resignation of the War Council.&quot; Nevertheless, Asquith, Lloyd George, and Law who had rejoined them at 5.00 pm, all felt a basis for a compromise had been reached, and they agreed that Asquith would issue a bulletin that evening announcing the reconstruction of the Government. Crewe, who joined Asquith at Montagu&#x27;s house at 10.00 p.m., recorded: &quot;accommodation with Mr. Lloyd George would ultimately be achieved, without sacrifice of (Asquith&#x27;s) position as chief of the War Committee; a large measure of reconstruction would satisfy the Unionist Ministers.&quot;

Despite Lloyd George&#x27;s denials of collaboration, the diary for 3 December by Northcliffe&#x27;s factotum Tom Clarke, records that: &quot;The Chief returned to town and at 7.00 o&#x27;clock he was at the War Office with Lloyd George.&quot; Meanwhile, Duff Cooper was invited to dinner at Montagu&#x27;s Queen Anne&#x27;s Gate house, he afterwards played bridge with Asquith, Venetia Montagu and Churchill&#x27;s sister-in-law &quot;Goonie&quot;, recording in his diary : &quot;..the P.M. more drunk than I have ever seen him, (..) so drunk that one felt uncomfortable ... an extraordinary scene.&quot;

====Monday 4 December====

The bulletin was published on the morning of Monday 4 December. It was accompanied by an avalanche of press criticism, all of it intensely hostile to Asquith. The worst was a leader in Northcliffe&#x27;s &quot;Times&quot;. This had full details of the compromise reached the day before, including the names of those suggested as members of the War Council. More damagingly still, it ridiculed Asquith, claiming he had conspired in his own humiliation and would henceforth be &quot;Prime Minister in name only.&quot; Lloyd George&#x27;s involvement is uncertain; he denied any, but Asquith was certain he was the source. The author was certainly the editor, Geoffrey Dawson, with some assistance from Carson. But it seems likely that Carson&#x27;s source was Lloyd George.

The leak prompted an immediate reaction from Asquith: &quot;Unless the impression is at once corrected that I am being relegated to the position of an irresponsible spectator of the War, I cannot possibly go on.&quot; Lloyd George&#x27;s reply was prompt and conciliatory: &quot;I cannot restrain nor I fear influence Northcliffe. I fully accept in letter and in spirit your summary of the suggested arrangement—subject of course to personnel.&quot; But Asquith&#x27;s mind was already turning to rejection of the Sunday compromise and outright confrontation with Lloyd George.

It is unclear exactly whom Asquith spoke with on 4 December. Beaverbrook and Crewe state he met Chamberlain, Curzon and Cecil. Cassar follows these opinions, to a degree. But Chamberlain himself was adamant that he and his colleagues met Asquith only once during the crisis and that was on the following day, Tuesday 5 December. Chamberlain wrote at the time, &quot;On Tuesday afternoon the Prime Minister sent for Curzon, Bob Cecil and myself. This is the first and only time the three of us met Asquith during those fateful days.&quot; His recollection is supported by details of their meetings with Law and other colleagues, in the afternoon, and then in the evening of the 4th, and by most modern historians, e.g. Gilmour and Adams. Crawford records how little he and his senior Unionist colleagues were involved in the key discussions, and by implication, how much better informed were the press lords, writing in his diary: &quot;We were all in such doubt as to what had actually occurred, and we sent out for an evening paper to see if there was any news!&quot; Asquith certainly did meet his senior Liberal colleagues on the evening of 4 December; they were unanimously opposed to compromise with Lloyd George and supported Asquith&#x27;s growing determination to fight. His way forward had been cleared by his tendering the resignation of his government to the King earlier in the day. Asquith also saw Law, who confirmed that he would resign if Asquith failed to implement the War Council agreement as discussed only the day before. In the evening, and having declined two requests for meetings, Asquith threw down the gauntlet to Lloyd George by rejecting the War Council proposal.

====Tuesday 5 December====

Lloyd George accepted the challenge by return of post, writing: &quot;As all delay is fatal in war, I place my office without further parley at your disposal.&quot; Asquith had anticipated this response, but was surprised by a letter from Arthur Balfour, who until that point had been removed from the crisis by illness. On its face, this letter merely offered confirmation that Balfour believed that Lloyd George&#x27;s scheme for a smaller War Council deserved a chance and that he had no wish to remain at the Admiralty if Lloyd George wished him out. Jenkins argues that Asquith should have recognised it as a shift of allegiance. Asquith discussed the crisis with Lord Crewe and they agreed an early meeting with the Unionist ministers was essential. Without their support, &quot;it would be impossible for Asquith to continue.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s meeting with Chamberlain, Curzon and Cecil at 3.00 p.m. only highlighted the weakness of his position. They unanimously declined to serve in a Government that did not include Law and Lloyd George, as a Government so constituted offered no &quot;prospect of stability&quot;. Their reply to Asquith&#x27;s follow-up question as to whether they would serve under Lloyd George caused him even more concern. The &quot;Three Cs&quot; stated they would serve under Lloyd George if he could create the stable Government they considered essential for the effective prosecution of the war.

The end was near, and a further letter from Balfour declining to reconsider his earlier decision brought it about. The Home Secretary, Herbert Samuel, recorded in a contemporaneous note: &quot;We were all strongly of opinion, from which [Asquith] did not dissent, that there was no alternative [to resignation]. We could not carry on without LlG and the Unionists and ought not to give the appearance of wishing to do so.&quot;

At 7.00 pm, having been prime minister for eight years and 241 days, Asquith went to Buckingham Palace and tendered his resignation. Describing the event to a friend sometime later, Asquith wrote, &quot;When I fully realised what a position had been created, I saw that I could not go on without dishonour or impotence, or both.&quot; That evening, he dined at Downing Street with family and friends, his daughter-in-law Cynthia describing the scene: &quot;I sat next to the P.M.—he was too darling—rubicund, serene, puffing a guinea cigar and talking of going to Honolulu.&quot; Cynthia believed that he would be back &quot;in the saddle&quot; within a fortnight with his position strengthened.

Later that evening Law, who had been to the Palace to receive the King&#x27;s commission, arrived to enquire whether Asquith would serve under him. Lord Crewe described Asquith&#x27;s reply as &quot;altogether discouraging, if not definitely in the negative.&quot;

====Wednesday 6 December====

Wednesday saw an afternoon conference at Buckingham Palace, hosted by the King and chaired by Balfour. There is some doubt as to the originator of the idea, although Adams considers that it was Law. This is supported by a handwritten note of Aitken&#x27;s, reproduced in A.J.P. Taylor&#x27;s life of that politician, which reads: &quot;6th Wed. Meeting at BL house with G. (Lloyd George) and C. (Carson)—Decide on Palace Conference.&quot; Conversely, Crewe suggests that the suggestion came jointly from Lord Derby and Edwin Montagu.

However the meeting came about, it did not bring the compromise the King sought. Within two hours of its break-up, Asquith, after consulting his Liberal colleagues, except for Lloyd George, declined to serve under Law, who accordingly declined the King&#x27;s commission. At 7.00 pm. Lloyd George was invited to form a Government. In just over twenty four hours he had done so, forming a small War Cabinet instead of the mooted War Council, and at 7.30 p.m. on Thursday 7 December he kissed hands as prime minister.

Lloyd George&#x27;s achievement in creating a government was considerable, given that almost all of the senior Liberals sided with Asquith. Balfour&#x27;s acceptance of the Foreign Office made it possible. Others placed a greater responsibility on Asquith as the author of his own downfall, for example Churchill: &quot;A fierce, resolute Asquith, fighting with all his powers would have conquered easily. But the whole trouble arose from the fact that there was no fierce resolute Asquith to win this war or any other.&quot;

==Wartime Opposition Leader: 1916–1918==
The Asquiths finally vacated 10 Downing Street on 9 December. Asquith, not normally given to displays of emotion, confided to his wife that he felt he had been stabbed. He likened himself (10 December) to the Biblical character Job, although he also commented that Aristide Briand&#x27;s government was also under strain in France. Lord Newton wrote in his diary of meeting Asquith at dinner a few days after the fall, &quot;It became painfully evident that he was suffering from an incipient nervous breakdown and before leaving the poor man completely collapsed.&quot; Asquith was particularly appalled at Balfour&#x27;s behaviour, especially as he had argued against Lloyd George to retain Balfour at the Admiralty. Writing years later, Margot&#x27;s spleen was still evident: &quot;between you and me, this is what hurt my husband more than anything else. That Lloyd George (a Welshman!) should betray him, he dimly did understand, but that Arthur should join his enemy and help to ruin him, he never understood.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s fall was met with rejoicing in much of the British and Allied press and sterling rallied against the German mark on the New York markets. Press attacks on Asquith continued and indeed increased after the publication of the Dardanelles Report.

Like Sir Robert Peel after 1846, Asquith after 1916 still controlled the party machinery and resented those who had ousted him, but showed no real interest in reuniting his party. Asquith did not put any pressure on Liberals to eschew joining the coalition government; in fact, though, few Liberals did join it. Most Liberal parliamentarians remained intensely loyal to him, and felt that he alone should not be left to face the criticism. On 8 December a gathering of Liberal MPs gave Asquith a vote of confidence as Leader of the Liberal Party, followed unanimously a few days later by the executive of the National Liberal Federation. There was much hostility to Lloyd George at these gatherings.

Within Parliament, Asquith pursued a course of quiet support, retaining a &quot;heavy, continuing responsibility for the decision of August 4, 1914.&quot; A. G. Gardiner in &quot;The Daily News&quot; (9 December) stated explicitly that Lloyd George&#x27;s government should not have to live under the constant barrage of criticism that Asquith&#x27;s coalition had endured. In a &quot;gracious&quot; reply to Lloyd George&#x27;s first speech in the House of Commons as prime minister on 19 December 1916, Asquith made clear that he did not see his role &quot;in any sense to be the leader of what is called an opposition&quot;. From around the spring of 1917 Asquith&#x27;s reluctance to criticise the government at all began to exasperate some of his press supporters.

Outside of the Commons, Margot and he returned to 20 Cavendish Square and he divided his life between there, The Wharf and visiting. Money, in the absence of his premier&#x27;s salary, became more of a concern. In March 1917 he was informally offered the Lord Chancellorship, with the highest salary in government, but he declined. Personal sadness continued in December 1917 when Asquith&#x27;s third son Arthur, known in the family as &quot;Oc&quot;, was badly wounded fighting in France; his leg was amputated in January 1918. Asquith&#x27;s daughter-in-law recorded in her diary, &quot;The Old Boy (Asquith) sent me fifteen pounds and also, in a letter, told me the sad news of poor, dear Oc having been badly wounded again.&quot;

===Maurice Debate===
On 7 May 1918 a letter from a serving officer, Major-General Sir Frederick Maurice, appeared in four London newspapers, accusing Lloyd George and Law of having misled the House of Commons in debates the previous month as to the manpower strength of the army in France. Asquith, who received a letter from Maurice on 6 May, and had also been in contact with the sacked Robertson, with whom Maurice discussed the letter, called for a Select Committee of the House to investigate the charges.

In response to a private notice question, Law had offered a judicial inquiry, with Asquith free to choose the judges, but Asquith declined this offer on the evening of 7 May, thinking it contrary to the dignity of Parliament. Prior to the debate, Asquith received a surprising communication (8 May) from H. A. Gwynne, the editor of &quot;The Morning Post&quot;, and previously a fervent opponent. &quot;The effect of the Maurice letter, and your motion, must be the dissolution of the present government (and) your accession to power.&quot; At this point &quot;Asquith hated Lloyd George with a passion&quot; but he did not want the premiership for himself.

Asquith&#x27;s opening speech on the Select Committee motion was lengthy and lacked punch. Bridgeman recorded, &quot;He did not make much of a case, and did not even condemn Maurice&#x27;s breach of the King&#x27;s Regulations, for which he got a very heavy blow from L.G.&quot;. Lloyd George&#x27;s one-and-a-quarter-hour-long reply was &quot;a stunning solo display by the greatest rhetorician of his age&quot; in which he threatened the House with the inevitable political consequence of a vote for Asquith&#x27;s motion. &quot;... if this motion is carried, he [Asquith] will again be responsible for the conduct of the War. Make no mistake!&quot;

John Ramsden summed up the opinion in the House of Commons: &quot;Lloyd George&#x27;s lies were (preferred to) Asquith&#x27;s half-measures.&quot; The motion was defeated by 293 votes to 106, more an &quot;utter rejection of Asquith, than (a) wholehearted endorsement of Lloyd George&quot;, and the latter&#x27;s position in Parliament was not seriously threatened for the remainder of the War.

===End of the war===
Asquith was left politically discredited by the Maurice Debate and by the clear turn of the war in the Allies&#x27; favour from the summer of 1918. He devoted far more effort to his Romanes Lecture &quot;Some Aspects of the Victorian Age&quot; at Oxford in June 1918 than to any political speech. However, Lady Ottoline Morrell thought it &quot;a dull address&quot;. A letter of July 1918 describes a typical couple of days. &quot;Nothing much is happening here. I dined with the usual crowd at Mrs. Astor&#x27;s last night. The Duke of Connaught lunches here on Friday: don&#x27;t you wish you were coming!&quot;

The beginning of the end of the war began where it had begun, with the last German offensive on the Western Front, the Second Battle of the Marne. &quot;The tide of German success was stemmed and the ebb began under pressure of the great Allied counter-stroke.&quot; In response to the Allied offensives, &quot;the governments of the Central Powers were everywhere in collapse&quot;.

==Decline and eclipse: 1918–1926==

===Coupon election===
Even before the Armistice, Lloyd George had been considering the political landscape and, on 2 November 1918, wrote to Law proposing an immediate election with a formal endorsement—for which Asquith coined the name &quot;Coupon&quot;, with overtones of wartime food rationing—for Coalition candidates. News of his plans soon reached Asquith, causing considerable concern. On 6 November he wrote to Hilda Henderson, &quot;I suppose that tomorrow we shall be told the final decision about this accursed election.&quot; A Liberal delegation met Lloyd George in the week of 6 November to propose Liberal reunification but was swiftly rebuffed.

Asquith joined in the celebrations of the Armistice, speaking in the Commons, attending the service of thanksgiving at St Margaret&#x27;s, Westminster and afterwards lunching with King George. Asquith had a friendly meeting with Lloyd George a few days after the Armistice (the exact date is unclear), which Lloyd George began by saying &quot;I understand you don&#x27;t wish to join the government.&quot; Asquith was instead keen to go to the Peace Conference, where he considered his expertise at finance and international law would have been an asset. As he refused to accept public subordination, Lloyd George, despite lobbying from the King and Churchill, refused to invite him.

Asquith led the Liberal Party into the election, but with a singular lack of enthusiasm, writing on 25 November: &quot;I doubt whether there is much interest. The whole thing is a wicked fraud.&quot; The Liberal leaders expected to lose the 1918 election badly, as they had lost the &quot;Khaki Election&quot; in 1900, but did not foresee the sheer scale of the defeat. Asquith hoped for 100 Liberal MPs to be returned. He began by attacking the Conservatives, but was eventually driven to attack the &quot;blank cheque&quot; which the government was demanding.

Asquith was one of five people given a free pass by the Coalition but the East Fife Unionist Association defied national instructions and put up a candidate, Alexander Sprot, against him. Sprot was refused a Coalition &quot;coupon&quot;. Asquith assumed his own seat would be safe and spent only two and half days there, speaking only to closed meetings; in one speech there on 11 December he conceded that he did not want to &quot;displace&quot; the current government. He scoffed at press rumours that he was being barracked by a gang of discharged soldiers. Postwar reconstruction, the desire for harsh peace terms, and Asquith&#x27;s desire to attend the peace talks, were campaign issues, with posters asking: &quot;Asquith nearly lost you the War. Are you going to let him spoil the Peace?&quot; James Scott, his chairman at East Fife, wrote of &quot;a swarm of women going from door to door indulging in a slander for which they had not a shadow of proof. This was used for such a purpose as to influence the female vote very much against you.&quot;

At the poll on 14 December, Lloyd George&#x27;s coalition won a landslide, with Asquith and every other former Liberal Cabinet minister losing his seat. Margot later recorded having telephoned Liberal headquarters for the results: &quot;Give me the East Fife figures: Asquith 6994—Sprott [&quot;sic&quot;] 8996.&quot; She said she had exclaimed &quot;Asquith beat? ... Thank God!&quot; Augustine Birrell also wrote to him &quot;You are surely better off out of it for the time, than watching Ll.G. lead apes to Hell&quot;. But for Asquith personally, &quot;the blow was crippling, a personal humiliation which destroyed his hope of exercising any influence on the peace settlement.&quot;

===1919: out of Parliament===
Asquith remained leader of the Liberal Party, despite McKenna vainly urging him, almost immediately after the election, to offer his resignation to the National Liberal Federation and help with building an alliance with Labour. At first Asquith was extremely unpopular, and there is no evidence that he was invited to address any Liberal Association anywhere in the country for the first six months of 1919. He continued to be calumnied in the press and Parliament over the supposed presence of Germans in Downing Street during the war.

Although accounts differ as to the exact numbers, around 29 uncouponed Liberals had been elected, only three with any junior ministerial experience, not all of them opponents of the coalition. There was widespread discontent at Asquith&#x27;s leadership, and Sir T. A. Bramsdon, who said that he had been elected at Portsmouth only by promising &quot;not&quot; to support Asquith, protested openly at his remaining leader from outside the Commons. At first Lloyd George extended the government whip to &quot;all&quot; Liberal MPs. On 3 February 23 non-coalition Liberals formed themselves into a &quot;Free Liberal&quot; group (soon known as the &quot;Wee Frees&quot; after a Scottish religious sect of that name); they accepted Asquith&#x27;s appointment of Sir Donald Maclean as chairman in his absence but insisted that G.R. Thorne, whom Asquith had appointed Chief Whip, hold that job jointly with J.M. Hogge, of whom Asquith and Maclean had a low opinion. After a brief attempt to set up a joint committee with the Coalition Liberal MPs to explore reunion, the &quot;Wee Frees&quot; resigned the government whip on 4 April, although some Liberal MPs still remained of uncertain allegiance. The Liberals won by-elections in March and April 1919, but thereafter Labour performed better than the Liberals in by-elections.

In April 1919 Asquith gave a weak speech to Liberal candidates, his first public speech since the election. In Newcastle (15 May) he gave a slightly stronger speech, encouraged by his audience to &quot;Hit Out!&quot; Asquith was also disappointed by the &quot;terms and spirit&quot; of the Treaty of Versailles in May, but did not oppose it very strongly in public. On 31 July 1919, after a lunch in honour of former Supreme Allied Commander Ferdinand Foch, Asquith wrote &quot;he talked a lot of nonsense about Germany sinking never to rise again.&quot;

In August 1919 Asquith was asked to preside over a Royal Commission into the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, although the report when it came was, in line with Asquith&#x27;s own academic views, somewhat conservative. The commission began hearings in January 1920; many dons would have preferred Haldane as chair. Asquith&#x27;s public rehabilitation continued with the receipt in late 1919 of the 1914 Star, the British War Medal and the Victory Medal, honours which the War Office, under Churchill, had originally intended only to be awarded to Lloyd George, until the King insisted Asquith receive them also.

Maclean and others urged Asquith to stand in the Spen Valley by-election in December 1919, but it is unclear whether he ever considered the idea. This was just as well, as it had become clear that Labour were going to fight the seat hard and they defeated Sir John Simon when Lloyd George insisted on splitting the Liberal vote by running a Coalition Liberal candidate.

===Paisley===

A Parliamentary seat was essential if Asquith was again to play any serious part in future events.
By the autumn of 1919 J.M. Hogge was openly critical of Asquith&#x27;s leadership, and by January 1920 it was rumoured that he had given Asquith an ultimatum that unless he returned to Parliament in a by-election the Independent Liberal MPs would repudiate him as their leader (had he lost a by-election, his position would have been untenable anyway, as he well knew).

In January 1920, an opportunity arose at Paisley, in Scotland like his previous seat, after the death of the Liberal MP. The Liberals had held the seat by only 106 votes in 1918. Asquith&#x27;s adoption was not a foregone conclusion: the local Association was split between pro- and anti-coalition factions, and he was selected by a vote of 20:17 by the executive and then 92:75 of the wider members. He was formally adopted on 21 January 1920 and soon united the local Liberal Association behind him. Asquith was lukewarm at the thought of returning to Scotland, and regarded his gamble with trepidation, although he grew more confident as the campaign progressed. Travelling with Margot, his daughter Violet and a small staff, Asquith directed most of his campaign not against Labour, who were already in second place, but against the Coalition, calling for a less harsh line on German reparations and the Irish War of Independence. Some &quot;thought fit to compare [the campaign] with Gladstone&#x27;s Midlothian campaign, although Asquith himself was more circumspect.

The result was stupendous, with Asquith defeating his Labour opponent by a majority of over 2000 votes, with the Coalition candidate a very poor third. Violet was ecstatic: &quot;every star in the political skies favoured Father when we left Paisley, he became there what he has never before been in his life, the &#x27;popular&#x27; candidate, the darling of the crowd.&quot; The poll was up by 8,000 from 1918. Asquith&#x27;s surprise victory was helped by the support of the press baron Lord Rothermere.

He was seen off by tumultuous crowds at Glasgow, and greeted by further crowds at Euston the next morning, and along the road on his first return to Parliament. However, he received only a chilly greeting inside the Chamber, and no personal congratulations from Coalition politicians, except from Lord Cave, who was later to defeat him for the Chancellorship of Oxford University in 1925.

===Leader of the Opposition: 1920–1921===
Paisley was a false dawn, for the Liberals and for Asquith personally. Jenkins wrote that &quot;The post-war Liberal day never achieved more than a grey and short-lived light. By 1924, it was dusk again. By 1926, for Asquith, it was political night.&quot; Maurice Cowling characterised Asquith at this time as &quot;a dignified wreck, neither effective in the House of Commons nor attractive as a public reputation, (who) drank too much and (who) had lost touch with the movement of events and the spirit of the time.&quot;

Money, or its lack, also became an increasing concern. Margot&#x27;s extravagance was legendary and Asquith was no longer earning either the legal fees or the prime ministerial salary they had enjoyed in earlier years. Additionally, there were on-going difficulties with Margot&#x27;s inheritance. In 1920, as an economy measure, 20 Cavendish Square was sold to Viscountess Cowdray and Asquith and Margot moved to 44, Bedford Square.

Criticism of Asquith&#x27;s weak leadership continued. Lloyd George&#x27;s mistress Frances Stevenson wrote (18 March) that he was &quot;finished ... no fight left in him&quot;; the press baron Lord Rothermere, who had supported him at Paisley, wrote on 1 April of his &quot;obvious incapacity for the position he is expected to fill&quot;. In fact Asquith spoke in the House of Commons far more frequently than he had ever previously done when not a minister. He also spoke frequently around the country, in June 1921 topping the Liberal Chief Whip&#x27;s list of the most active speakers. The issue was the quality of his contributions. Asquith still maintained friendly relations with Lloyd George, although Margot made no secret of her enmity for him.

Until the Paisley by-election Asquith had accepted that the next government must be some kind of Liberal-Labour coalition, but Labour had distanced themselves because of his policies on the mines, the Russo-Polish War, education, the prewar secret treaties and the suppression of the Easter Rebellion. The success of Anti-Waste League candidates at by-elections made leading Liberals feel that there was a strong anti-Coalition vote which might be tapped by a wider-based and more credible opposition. By late June 1921 Asquith&#x27;s leadership was still under strong attack from within the Wee Free group, although Frances Stevenson&#x27;s claim in her diary that most of them now wanted Lloyd George as their leader is not corroborated by the report in &quot;The Times&quot;. Lord Robert Cecil, a moderate and pro-League of Nations Conservative, had been having talks with Edward Grey about a possible coalition, and Asquith and leading Liberals Crewe, Runciman and Maclean had a meeting with them on 5 July 1921, and two subsequent ones. Cecil wanted a genuine coalition rather than a &quot;de facto&quot; Liberal government, with Grey rather than Asquith as prime minister, but the Liberals did not, and little came of the plans.

Asquith did fiercely oppose &quot;the hellish policy of reprisals&quot; in Ireland, impressing the young Oswald Mosley. J.M. Hogge even urged Sir Donald Maclean (31 August) to &quot;knock Asquith into the middle of next week&quot; and seize back the chairmanship of the Liberal MPs. Late in 1921 the National Liberal Federation adopted an industrial programme without Asquith&#x27;s agreement. On 24 October 1921 Asquith commented &quot;if one tries to strike a bold true note half one&#x27;s friends shiver and cower, and implore one not to get in front of the band&quot;.

===Leader of the Opposition: 1922===
In January 1922 C.P. Scott of the &quot;Manchester Guardian&quot; told Asquith that he supported a centre-left grouping, but only if moderate Labour was included—in reality Labour leaders were unable to deliver the support of their local members for such a realignment. Asquith achieved more success with a major speech at Westminster Central Hall in January 1922, in reply to a speech by Lloyd George a few days earlier. Asquith had with some difficulty been persuaded to make the maximum possible reference to his renewed alliance with Grey, but Haldane had refused to join the platform. Five days later Churchill replied with a pro-Coalition speech in which he accused Asquith and other Liberals of having &quot;stood carefully aside&quot; during the war, causing deep offence.

By the summer of 1922 Asquith&#x27;s interest in politics was at a very low ebb. He was observed to be very heavily drunk and was helped up the stairs by Lloyd George at a party of Sir Philip Sassoon&#x27;s on 16 July 1922. His reputation was further damaged by his portrayal in Aldous Huxley&#x27;s novel &quot;Crome Yellow&quot; and by the publication of the first volume of Margot&#x27;s memoirs, which sold well in the UK and the United States, but were thought an undignified way for a former prime minister to make money. On 13 September 1922 Sir Donald Maclean told Harold Laski that Asquith was devoted to bridge and small talk and did not do enough real work. Asquith was increasingly attracted by the thought of making money from writing, with Churchill doing very well from his &quot;The World Crisis&quot; and Lloyd George rumoured to be being paid handsomely for his memoirs (which in the event did not appear until the mid-1930s). Asquith&#x27;s books &quot;The Genesis of the War&quot; finally appeared in September 1923 and &quot;Studies and Sketches&quot; in 1924. His second son Herbert recorded, &quot;A large part of my father&#x27;s later years was occupied with authorship and it was during this period that he wrote most of his longer books.&quot;

Asquith played no part in Lloyd George&#x27;s fall from power in October 1922, which happened because the rank-and-file majority of his Conservative coalition partners, led by Stanley Baldwin and Lloyd George&#x27;s former colleague Law, deserted him. Law formed a purely Conservative government, and the following month, at the 1922 general election, Asquith ceased to be Leader of the Opposition as more Labour MPs were elected than the two Liberal factions combined. 138 Labour members outnumbered the combined Liberal number of 117, with 60 Asquith supporters and 57 &quot;National Liberals&quot; (adherents to Lloyd George). Asquith had thought Paisley would be safe but was only narrowly returned with a 316 majority (50.5 per cent of the votes cast in a two-candidate battle with Labour), despite a rise in the Liberal vote. He put this down to the 5,000 unemployed at Paisley after the slump of 1920–1921. He wrote that he &quot;gloated&quot; over the senior Coalition Liberals—Churchill, Hamar Greenwood, Freddie Guest and Edwin Montagu—who lost their seats.

===Liberal reunion===
In March 1923 a petition for reunion among Liberal backbenchers received 73 signatures, backed by the Lloyd Georgeite &quot;Daily Chronicle&quot; and the Asquithian &quot;Liberal Magazine&quot;. But reunion was opposed by senior Asquithian Liberals like Sir John Simon, Viscount Gladstone and Charles Masterman, and as late as 30 June by journalists such as H. W. Massingham and Gardiner of &quot;The Nation&quot;. Viscount Gladstone felt that &quot;it was generally recognised that Asquith was no longer effective as an active leader&quot; but that Lloyd George must not succeed him. By July Asquith was superficially friendly to Lloyd George and consulted him, but he did not include him in the Shadow Cabinet. Asquith wanted Lloyd George to make the first move but although the latter put out feelers to senior Asquith supporters he insisted that he was &quot;neither a suppliant nor a penitent&quot;. M.S.R. Kinnear writes that Asquith felt that with Lloyd George&#x27;s faction declining in strength he had everything to gain by waiting, while too quick an approach would antagonise the Labour leaders who hated Lloyd George and whose support he might need for a future Lib-Lab coalition. Kinnear also argues that Asquith&#x27;s &quot;gloating&quot; over the defeat of Coalition Liberals in 1922 is evidence that &quot;the most important factor influencing Asquith against quick reunion was his personal dislike of Lloyd George and his desire for vengeance.&quot;

The political situation was transformed when Baldwin, now prime minister, came out in favour of Protection at Plymouth on 22 October 1923. Coming out for Free Trade himself, Lloyd George was obliged, at least formally, to submit to Asquith&#x27;s leadership. Parliament was dissolved. Asquith and Lloyd George reached agreement on 13 November, followed by a Free Trade manifesto, followed by a more general one. Lloyd George, accompanied by his daughter Megan, came to Paisley to speak in Asquith&#x27;s support on 24 November.

Asquith fought an energetic national campaign on free trade in 1923, with echoes of 1903.
He spoke at Nottingham and Manchester, but did not privately expect more than 200 Liberals to be elected—although he hoped to overtake Labour and become Leader of the Opposition once again—and hoped for Baldwin to win by a tiny majority.

The poll at Paisley was split by an independent extreme socialist and a Conservative. Asquith won with 33.4 per cent of the vote. Nationally, the outcome of the election in December 1923 was a hung Parliament (258 Conservatives, 191 Labour, 158 Liberals); the Liberals had gained seats but were still in third place. A quarter of the seats were held by majority less than 1,000. In general, Asquith Liberals did better than Lloyd George Liberals, which Gladstone and Maclean saw as a reason to prevent close co-operation between the factions.

===Putting Labour in power===
There was no question of the Liberals supporting a continuation of the Conservative government, not least as it was feared that an alliance of the two &quot;bourgeois&quot; parties would antagonise Labour. Asquith commented that &quot;If a Labour Government is ever to be tried in this country, as it will be sooner or later, it could hardly be tried under safer conditions&quot;. Asquith&#x27;s decision to support a minority Labour Government was seconded by Lloyd George and approved by a party meeting on 18 December.

Baldwin&#x27;s view was similar, as he rejected Sir Robert Horne&#x27;s scheme for a Conservative-Liberal pact. Roy Douglas called the decision to put in Ramsay MacDonald &quot;the most disastrous single action ever performed by a Liberal towards his party.&quot; Other historians such as Trevor Wilson and Koss reject this view, arguing that Asquith had little choice.

Asquith was never in doubt as to the correctness of his approach, although a deluge of correspondence urged him to save the country from Socialism. He wrote on 28 December &quot;I have been intreated during these weeks, cajoled, wheedled, almost caressed, tortured, threatened, brow-beaten and all but blackmailed to step in as the saviour of society.&quot;

The Liberals thus supported Britain&#x27;s first ever (minority) Labour Government under Ramsay MacDonald. The Liberal Party voted for the Labour amendment to the Address, causing Baldwin to resign (Asquith believed that Baldwin could have ignored the vote and carried on attempting to govern without a majority). He thought the new Labour Government &quot;a beggarly array&quot; although he remarked that the Foreign Office staff were glad to see the back of &quot;the Archduke Curzon&quot;. Asquith believed that MacDonald would soon be discredited both in the eyes of the country and of his own more extreme supporters, and the Liberal revival would continue.

===Labour government and the Campbell Case===
Asquith&#x27;s decision only hastened his party&#x27;s destruction, the Conservative Austen Chamberlain writing to his colleague Sir Samuel Hoare, &quot;We have got (unexpectedly and by our own blunders and Asquith&#x27;s greater folly) a second chance. Have we got the wit to take it?&quot;

Relations with Labour soon became very tense, with Liberal MPs increasingly angered at having to support a Labour Government which treated them with such open hostility. Many Liberals were also angered at MacDonald&#x27;s pursuit of a trade agreement with the Soviet Union, although Asquith rather less so. The intervention of a Labour candidate at a by-election in Oxford in June handed the seat to the Conservatives.

As Asquith brought MacDonald in so, later in the same year, he had significant responsibility for forcing him out over the Campbell Case and the Russian Treaty. The Conservatives proposed a vote of censure against the Government for withdrawing their prosecution for sedition against the &quot;Daily Worker&quot;, and Asquith moved an amendment calling for a select committee (the same tactic he had employed over the Marconi scandal and the Maurice Debate). Asquith&#x27;s contribution to the debate showed an increasingly rare return to Parliamentary form. &quot;Almost every one of his delightful sentences filled the Chamber with laughter.&quot;
Asquith&#x27;s motion was passed by 364–198. As in the Maurice Debate, his sense of political tactics was, in Jenkins&#x27; view, overcome by his sense of Parliamentary propriety. He could not bring himself to withdraw the amendment, but could not support the government either.

===1924 election===
Instead of resigning MacDonald requested, and was granted, a General Election. The 1924 election was intended by MacDonald to cripple the Liberals, and it did. Lloyd George refused to hand over money from his fund until he had more say over the Liberal whips office, Liberal Party Headquarters at Arlington Street and an election there was a chance of winning.

Meetings at Paisley were tumultuous and Asquith was barracked by hecklers singing &quot;The Red Flag&quot;. Asquith was widely expected to lose his seat and did so by 2,228. He received 46.5 per cent of the vote in his final parliamentary election, a straight fight against Labour. Violet wrote, &quot;Father was absolutely controlled. He just said to me, &#x27;I&#x27;m out by 2,000&#x27;.&quot;

It was a political, as well as a personal, disaster. Baldwin won a landslide victory, with over &quot;400 Conservatives returned and only 40 Liberals&quot;, far behind Labour which entrenched its position as the &quot;chief party of Opposition.&quot; Labour&#x27;s vote actually increased somewhat (partly as a result of their fielding more candidates than before). The Liberal vote collapsed, much of it coalescing to the Conservatives as a result of the scare around the forged Zinoviev Letter.

The Liberal grandees, who hated Lloyd George, did not press Asquith to retire. Sir Robert Hudson and Maclean called on him (31 October) and insisted he firmly keep the chair at the next meeting and nominate the new Chief Whip himself.

===Elevation===
The 1924 election was Asquith&#x27;s last Parliamentary campaign, and there was no realistic chance of a return to the Commons. He told Charles Masterman &quot;I&#x27;d sooner go to hell than to Wales,&quot; the only part of the country where Liberal support remained strong. The King offered him a peerage (4 November 1924). Asquith felt he was not rich enough to accept, and would have preferred to die a commoner like Pitt or Gladstone. He accepted in January 1925 after a holiday in Egypt with his son Arthur. He deliberately chose the title &quot;Earl of Oxford&quot;, saying it had a splendid history as the title chosen by Robert Harley, a Tory statesman of Queen Anne&#x27;s reign. He was thought by some to have delusions of grandeur, Lady Salisbury writing to him that the title was &quot;like a suburban villa calling itself Versailles.&quot; Asquith found the controversy amusing but the College of Heralds insisted that he add &quot;and Asquith&quot; to the final title, after protests from Harley&#x27;s family. In practice he was known as &quot;Lord Oxford&quot;. He never enjoyed the House of Lords, and thought the quality of debates there poor.

In 1924 the Liberal party had only been able to put up 343 candidates due to lack of money. At one point the Liberal Shadow Cabinet suggested obtaining the opinion of a Chancery Lawyer as to whether the Liberal Party was entitled under trust law to Lloyd George&#x27;s money, which he had obtained from the sale of honours. On 29 January 1925, at a two-day London convention, Asquith launched a Million Fund Appeal in an unsuccessful attempt to raise Liberal Party funds independent of Lloyd George.

=== Oxford University chancellor election ===

One more disappointment remained. In 1925 he stood for the Chancellorship of Oxford University, vacant on the death of Lord Curzon. He was eminently suited and was described by Lord Birkenhead, one of his many Conservative supporters, as &quot;the greatest living Oxonian.&quot;

Asquith suspected he might lose because of country clergy&#x27;s hostility to Welsh Disestablishment, blaming &quot;Zadok the Priest and Abiathar the Priest—with their half-literate followers in the rural parsonages&quot;. The election was also seen as a settling of party scores and a mockery of his title. He lost to the Conservative candidate, Lord Cave, by 987 votes to 441 on 20 March. He claimed to be &quot;more disappointed than surprised&quot;, but his friend Desmond MacCarthy wrote that it affected him &quot;more than any disappointment, save one, in his life after he ceased to be Prime Minister.&quot;

On 17 March 1925 Asquith was appointed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, and in May 1925 he accepted the Order of the Garter from Baldwin, who was known to be a personal admirer of his.

===Resignation===
Difficulties continued with Lloyd George, who had been chairman of the Liberal MPs since 1924, over the party leadership and over party funds. In the autumn of 1925 Hobhouse, Runciman and the industrialist Sir Alfred Mond protested to Asquith at Lloyd George organising his own campaign for reform of land ownership. Asquith was &quot;not enthusiastic&quot; but Lloyd George ignored him and arranged for Asquith to be sent reports and calculations (&quot;Lord Oxford likes sums&quot; he wrote). At a meeting on 25 November 1925 Grey, Maclean, Simon, Gladstone and Runciman urged Asquith to have a showdown with Lloyd George over money. Asquith wanted to think it over, and at the December 1925 Federation executive he left the meeting before the topic came up. To the horror of his followers Asquith reached an agreement in principle with Lloyd George over land reform on 2 December, then together they presented plans to the National Liberal Federation on 26 February 1926. But, wrote Maclean, &quot;in private Asquith&#x27;s language about Lloyd George was lurid.&quot;

In January 1926 Mond withdrew his financial support from the Liberal Party. The loss of wealthy donors and the failure of the Million Fund Appeal further weakened Asquith&#x27;s position, and there is some evidence that his frequent requests for money irritated donors like Sir Robert Perks who had given a good deal to the Party over the years, and that outside his inner circle of devotees he was bad at keeping on good terms with potential donors.

This was followed by a near final breach with Lloyd George over the General Strike. The Liberal Shadow Cabinet unequivocally backed Baldwin&#x27;s handling of the strike on 3 May. Asquith viewed the strike as &quot;criminal folly&quot; and condemned it in the House of Lords, whilst in the Commons Sir John Simon declared it to be illegal. But whereas Asquith and Grey both contributed to the &quot;British Gazette&quot;, Churchill&#x27;s pro-government newssheet, Lloyd George, who had not previously expressed a contrary opinion at Shadow Cabinet, wrote an article for the American press more sympathetic to the strikers, and did not attend the Shadow Cabinet on 10 May, sending his apologies on &quot;policy grounds&quot;. Asquith at first assumed him to be trying to ingratiate himself with the churches and Labour, but then (20 May) sent him a public letter rebuking him for not attending the meeting to discuss his opinions with colleagues in private.

In private, both sides were incandescent; one of Asquith&#x27;s colleagues describing him as &quot;far more indignant at L.G. than I have ever seen&quot;, whilst Lloyd George expressed his private feelings in a letter to Frances Stevenson on 24 May &quot;(Asquith) is a silly old man drunk with hidden conceit. When he listens to those poor creatures he has a weakness for gathering around him he generally makes a fool of himself. They are really &#x27;beat&#x27;. Dirty dogs—and bitches.&quot;

Lloyd George&#x27;s letter of 10 May had not been published, making it appear that Asquith had fired the first shot, and Lloyd George sent a moderate public reply, on 25 May. Asquith then wrote another public letter (1 June) stating that he regarded Lloyd George&#x27;s behaviour as tantamount to resignation, the same as if a Cabinet Minister had refused to abide by the principle of collective responsibility. Twelve leading Liberals (including Grey, Lord Buckmaster, Simon, Maclean and Runciman) wrote in Asquith&#x27;s support to &quot;The Times&quot; (1 June). However, Lloyd George had more support amongst the wider party than amongst the grandees. The executive of the National Liberal Federation, despite backing Asquith by 16:8, had already urged a reconciliation in late May, and the London Liberal Candidates&#x27; Association (3 June) and the Liberal MPs (8 June) did the same. Asquith had planned to launch a fightback at the National Liberal Federation in Weston-Super-Mare, due on 17 June, but on the eve of the conference he suffered a stroke (12 June) which put him out of action for three months.

Margot is said to have later claimed that her husband regretted the breach and had acted after several rich donors had threatened to quit. Asquith finally resigned the Liberal leadership on 15 October 1926.

== Final years: 1926–1928 ==

Asquith filled his retirement with reading, writing, a little golf, travelling and meeting with friends. Since 1918 he had developed an interest in modern painting and sculpture.

His health remained reasonable, almost to the end, though financial concerns increasingly beset him. A perhaps surprising contributor to an endowment fund established to support Asquith in 1927 was Lord Beaverbrook (the former Max Aitken), who contributed £1,000. Violet was highly embarrassed by her step-mother&#x27;s attempts to enlist the aid of Aitken, Lord Reading and others of her husband&#x27;s friends and acquaintances. &quot;It is monstrous that other people (should) be made to foot Margot&#x27;s bridge bills. How she has dragged his name through the mud!&quot;

Asquith suffered a second stroke in January 1927, disabling his left leg for a while and leaving him a wheelchair-user for the spring and early summer of 1927. Asquith&#x27;s last visit was to see the widowed Venetia Montagu in Norfolk. On his return to The Wharf, in autumn 1927, he was unable to get out of his car and &quot;he was never again able to go upstairs to his own room.&quot; He suffered a third stroke at the end of 1927. His last months were difficult, and he became increasingly confused, his daughter Violet writing, &quot;To watch Father&#x27;s glorious mind breaking up and sinking—like a great ship—is a pain beyond all my imagining.&quot;

==Death==
Asquith died, aged 75, at The Wharf on the morning of 15 February 1928. &quot;He was buried, at his own wish, with great simplicity,&quot; in the churchyard of All Saints&#x27; at Sutton Courtenay, his gravestone recording his name, title, and the dates of his birth and death. A blue plaque records his long residence at 20 Cavendish Square and a memorial tablet was subsequently erected in Westminster Abbey. Viscount Grey, with Haldane Asquith&#x27;s oldest political friend, wrote, &quot;I have felt (his) death very much: it is true that his work was done but we were very close together for so many years. I saw the beginning of his Parliamentary life; and to witness the close is the end of a long chapter of my own.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s will was proved on 9 June 1928, with his estate amounting to £9345 9s. 2d. (roughly equivalent to £ in ).

==Descendants==

Asquith had five children by his first wife, Helen, and two surviving children (three others died at birth or in infancy) by his second wife, Margot.

His eldest son, Raymond, after an academic career that outstripped his father&#x27;s was killed at the Somme in 1916. His second son Herbert (1881–1947) became a writer and poet and married Cynthia Charteris. His later life was marred by alcoholism. His third son Arthur (1883–1939) became a soldier and businessman. His only daughter by his first wife, Violet, later Violet Bonham Carter (1887–1969), became a well-regarded writer and a life peeress as Baroness Asquith of Yarnbury. She married Asquith&#x27;s Personal Private Secretary Maurice Bonham Carter in 1915. His fourth son Cyril (1890–1954) was born on the day Asquith became a QC and later became a Law Lord.

His two children by Margot were Elizabeth, later Princess Antoine Bibesco (1897–1945), a writer, who also struggled with alcohol, and Anthony Asquith (1902–1968), known as &quot;Puffin&quot;, a film-maker, whose life was also severely affected by alcoholism.

Among his living descendants are his great-granddaughter, the actress Helena Bonham Carter (born 1966), and two great-grandsons, Dominic Asquith, a former British High Commissioner to India, and Raymond Asquith, 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith, who inherited Asquith&#x27;s earldom. Another leading British actress, Anna Chancellor (born 1965), is Asquith&#x27;s great-great-granddaughter on her mother&#x27;s side.

== Assessment ==

According to Matthew, &quot;Asquith&#x27;s decision for war with Germany was the most important taken by a British prime minister in the twentieth century, and was more important than any prime ministerial decision of the nineteenth century. It not only dictated the involvement of the United Kingdom in war but affected much of the pattern of imperial, foreign, and economic history for the rest of the century.&quot; Matthew deemed the decision Asquith&#x27;s, in that without prime ministerial support, it was not likely Britain would have entered the war. Given the deep divisions in the Liberal Party, Pearce and Goodlad said &quot;it was a measure of [Asquith&#x27;s] skill that he took Britain into the war with only two relatively minor Cabinet ministers ... choosing to resign&quot;.

Asquith&#x27;s reputation will always be heavily influenced by his downfall at the height of the First World War. In 1970, Basil Liddell Hart summed up opinion as to the reasons for his fall: &quot;Lloyd George [came to] power as the spokesman for a widespread demand for a more vigorous as well as a more efficient prosecution of the war.&quot; Asquith&#x27;s collegiate approach; his tendency to &quot;wait and see&quot;; his stance as the chairman of the cabinet, rather than leader of a government—&quot;content to preside without directing&quot;; his &quot;contempt for the press, regard[ing] journalists as ignorant, spiteful and unpatriotic&quot;; and his weakness for alcohol—&quot;I had occasion to speak to the P.M. twice yesterday and on both occasions I was nearly gassed by the alcoholic fumes he discharged&quot;; all contributed to a prevailing sense that Asquith was unable to rise to &quot;the necessities of total warfare.&quot; Grigg concludes, &quot;In certain vital respects, he was not qualified to run the war. A great head of government in peacetime, by the end of 1916 he was in a general state of decline, his obvious defects as a war leader [exposed].&quot;

Cassar, reflecting on Asquith&#x27;s work to bring a united country to war, and his efforts in the year thereafter, goes towards a reassessment: &quot;His achievements are sufficiently impressive to earn him a place as one of the outstanding figures of the Great War&quot;. His contemporary opponent, Lord Birkenhead paid tribute to his bringing Britain united into the War, &quot;A statesman who rendered great service to his country at a time when no other living Englishman could have done what he did.&quot; The Coalition Whip, William Bridgeman, provided an alternative Conservative view, comparing Lloyd George to Asquith at the time of the latter&#x27;s fall: &quot;[H]owever unpopular or mistrusted [Lloyd George] was in the House, he carried much more weight in the Country than Asquith, who was almost everywhere looked on as a lazy and dilatory man.&quot; Sheffield and Bourne provide a recent historical reassessment: &quot;Asquith&#x27;s governments arguably took all the key decisions of the War: the decision to intervene, to send the BEF; to raise a mass volunteer army; to start and end the Gallipoli Campaign; the creation of a Coalition government; the mobilisation of industry; the introduction of conscription.&quot; The weight of opinion continues to agree with Asquith&#x27;s own candid assessment, in a letter written in the midst of war in July 1916: &quot;I am [as usual] encompassed by a cloud of worries, anxieties, problems and the rest. &#x27;The time is out of joint&#x27; and sometimes I am tempted to say with Hamlet &#x27;O cursed spite, that ever I was born to set it right.&#x27; Perhaps I wasn&#x27;t.&quot;

Asquith&#x27;s fall also saw the end of the &quot;Liberal Party as one of the great parties of state.&quot; According to Koss, Asquith&#x27;s memory, &quot;has lingered over the successive crises that continued to afflict his party. Each glimmer of a Liberal revival has enhanced his historical stature, if only as the victim or agent of the Liberal decline.&quot; After 1922, the Liberals did not hold office again, except as junior partners in coalition governments in 1931–1932, in 1940–1945, and (as today&#x27;s Liberal Democrats) in 2010–2015. Leonard considers that responsibility for this must also be carried, in part, by Asquith, &quot;this gifted, fastidious, proud yet ultimately indecisive man must bear his share of the blame.&quot;

Koss concludes that, in a &quot;long, eventful and complex career, [that] does not admit easily of a summing up, Asquith&#x27;s failings were no less manifest than his achievements.&quot; Michael and Eleanor Brock maintain that &quot;his peacetime record of legislative achievement should not be overshadowed by his wartime inadequacy.&quot; Of those achievements, his colleague Lord Buckmaster wrote, &quot;The dull senses and heavy lidded eyes of the public prevent them from seeing now all that you have accomplished, but history will record it and the accomplishment is vast.&quot; Among his greatest domestic accomplishments, reform of the House of Lords is at the zenith. Yet Asquith&#x27;s premiership was also marked by many difficulties, leading McKenna to write in his memoirs, &quot;friends began to wonder whether the highest statesmanship consisted of overcoming one crisis by creating another&quot;. Hazlehurst, writing in 1970, felt there was still much to be gleaned from a critical review of Asquith&#x27;s peacetime premiership, &quot;certainly, the record of a prime minister under whom the nation goes to the brink of civil war [over Ireland] must be subjected to the severest scrutiny.&quot;

Perhaps Asquith&#x27;s greatest personal attainment was his parliamentary dominance. From his earliest days in the House, &quot;he spoke with the authority of a leader and not as a backbencher.&quot; As Campbell-Bannerman&#x27;s &quot;sledgehammer&quot;, his &quot;debating power was unequalled.&quot; Lord Curzon extolled his skill in parliamentary dialectic: &quot;Whenever I have heard him on a first-rate occasion, there rises in my mind the image of some great military parade. The words, the arguments, the points, follow each other with the steady tramp of regiments across the field; each unit is in its place, the whole marching in rhythmical order; the sunshine glints on the bayonets and ever, and anon, is heard the roll of the drums.&quot;

Jenkins considered Asquith as foremost amongst the great social reforming premiers of the twentieth century. His Government&#x27;s social and political reforms were unprecedented and far-sighted, &quot;paving the way for the welfare state legislation of the Attlee government in 1945–1951 as well as Blair&#x27;s constitutional reforms after 1997.&quot; According to Roy Hattersley, a changed Britain entered the war in 1914, &quot;the political, social and cultural revolution had already happened. Modern Britain was born in the opening years of the twentieth century.&quot; Asquith also worked strenuously to secure a settlement of the Irish question and, although unsuccessful, his work contributed to the 1922 settlement. Lastly, as a &quot;great head of a Cabinet&quot;, Asquith directed and developed the talents of an extraordinary array of parliamentarians, for an extraordinarily long period. Hazlehurst contends that this &quot;ability to keep so gifted and divergently-inclined a group in harness (was) one of his major achievements.&quot;

Overall, the Brocks argue that &quot;on the basis of his achievements 1908 to 1914 he must rank among the greatest British statesmen of any era.&quot; His oldest political and personal friend, Haldane, wrote to Asquith on the latter&#x27;s final resignation: &quot;My Dear A., a time has come in both of our lives when the bulk of work has been done. That work does not pass away. It is not by overt signs that its enduring character is to be judged. It is by the changes made in the spirit of things into which the work has entered.&quot;

==See also==
* Liberalism in the United Kingdom

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* Adams, R. J. Q. &#x27;&quot;Andrew Bonar Law and the fall of the Asquith Coalition: The December 1916 cabinet crisis&quot;, &quot;Canadian Journal of History&quot; (1997) 32#2 pp 185–200 online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* ; online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* McEwen, J. M. “The Press and the Fall of Asquith.” &quot;Historical Journal&quot; 21#4 (1978), pp. 863–83. online
* McGill, Barry. “Asquith’s Predicament, 1914-1918.” &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 39#3 (1967), pp. 283–303. online
* 
* Marriott, J. A. R. &quot;Modern England, 1885–1945&quot; (1948) pp 275–390 on Asquith as prime minister. online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* vol 2 from 1912 online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Primary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Asquith, H H, Dr Johnson and Fanny Burney, paper read to the Johnson Club and privately published by Sir Charles Russell, 1923.
* Adams, Ralph JQ. &quot;Asquith&#x27;s choice: the May Coalition and the coming of conscription, 1915–1916.&quot; &quot;Journal of British Studies&quot; 25.3 (1986): 243–263.
* Ball, Stuart, &quot;Asquith&#x27;s Decline and the General Election of 1918&quot;, &quot;Scottish Historical Review&quot;, vol. 61, no. 171 (1982): 44–61.
* 
* Dangerfield, George. &quot;The Strange Death of Liberal England&quot; (1935) online 
* Eccleshall, Robert, and Graham Walker, eds. &quot;Biographical Dictionary of British Prime Ministers&quot; (1998) pp. 244–251. online
* online
* Hay, James Roy. &quot;Origins of the Liberal Welfare Reforms, 1906–14&quot; (1975) 78pp online
* Jenkins, Roy, &quot;Asquith&quot; (Collins, 1964)
* 
* Koss, Stephen E. &quot;The Destruction of Britain&#x27;s Last Liberal Government&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 40#2 (1968), pp. 257–277 online
* Koss, Stephen, &quot;Asquith&quot; (Allen Lane, 1976)
* Koss, Stephen, &quot;Asquith versus Lloyd George: the last phase and beyond&quot;, in Alan Sked &amp; Chris Cook (eds), &quot;Crisis and Controversy: Essays in Honour of A.J.P. Taylor&quot; (Macmillan, 1976): 66-89 
* Little, John Gordon. &quot;H.H. Asquith and Britain&#x27;s Manpower Problem, 1914–1915.&quot; &quot;History&quot; 82.267 (1997): 397–409.
* Martin, Ged. &quot;Asquith, the Maurice Debate and the Historians.&quot; &quot;Australian Journal of Politics &amp; History&quot; 31.3 (1985): 435–444.
* Quinault, Roland. &quot;Asquith&#x27;s Liberalism&quot;. &quot;History&quot; 77.249 (1992): 33–49.
* Quinault, Roland. &quot;Asquith: A Prime Minister at War&quot;. &quot;History Today&quot; (2014) 64#5 pp 40–46.
* Wilson, Trevor. &quot;The Downfall of the Liberal Party, 1914–1935&quot; (1966) excerpt

==External links==

* Bodleian Library catalogue record (finding aid) of H.H. Asquith&#x27;s private papers
* Bodleian Library catalogue record (finding aid) of Margot Asquith&#x27;s private papers
* Bodleian Library catalogue record (finding aid) of Lady Violet Bonham Carter&#x27;s private papers
* Catalogue record of items related to Asquith and Women&#x27;s Suffrage held at The Women&#x27;s Library at the Library of the London School of Economics
* Tregidga, Garry: Asquith, Herbert Henry, in: 1914–1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Asquith biography from BBC History
* Asquith entry in Encyclopædia Britannica
* Blue plaque to Asquith on his house in Sutton Courtenay, Oxfordshire Blue Plaques Scheme
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="0" end="53" title="H. H. Asquith" label="Herbert Henry Asquith, 1st Earl of Oxford and Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="121" end="128" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="148" end="184" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="271" end="290" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="338" end="362" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q59554918" start="416" end="441" title="Liberal welfare reforms" label="major liberal legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="478" end="492" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794097" start="523" end="584" title="British entry into World War I" label="Great Britain and the British Empire into the First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="689" end="707" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="721" end="741" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="873" end="896" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="921" end="930" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328347" start="974" end="983" title="East Fife (UK Parliament constituency)" label="East Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="1049" end="1063" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q108441485" start="1067" end="1099" title="Liberal government, 1892–1895" label="Gladstone&amp;#x27;s fourth ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888019" start="1151" end="1164" title="1895 United Kingdom general election" label="1895 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106618" start="1296" end="1324" title="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman" label="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="1352" end="1379" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="1557" end="1577" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593116" start="1602" end="1623" title="South Africa Act 1909" label="South Africa Act 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075752" start="1650" end="1675" title="January 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="election for January 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="1729" end="1748" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076583" start="1764" end="1797" title="December 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="general election in December 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="1824" end="1843" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="2002" end="2017" title="Irish Home Rule" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932090" start="2042" end="2053" title="Larne gun-running" label="gun running"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="2382" end="2409" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217172" start="2650" end="2707" title="Asquith coalition ministry" label="coalition with the Conservatives and Labour early in 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="2790" end="2808" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="2988" end="3009" title="British welfare state" label="British welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021179" start="3340" end="3346" title="Morley, West Yorkshire" label="Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="3355" end="3379" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="3617" end="3630" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="3767" end="3776" title="Roundhead" label="Roundhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436038" start="3777" end="3794" title="Farnley Wood Plot" label="Farnley Wood Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033744" start="4023" end="4035" title="wool-stapler" label="wool-trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q201812" start="4048" end="4060" title="Huddersfield" label="Huddersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="4095" end="4112" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="4130" end="4137" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609711" start="4626" end="4638" title="Stephen Koss" label="Stephen Koss"/>
<link wikidata="Q194417" start="4738" end="4753" title="social mobility" label="social mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="5046" end="5057" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928264" start="5315" end="5335" title="Huddersfield College" label="Huddersfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="5354" end="5362" title="boarding school" label="boarders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508374" start="5366" end="5380" title="Fulneck School" label="Fulneck School"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="5384" end="5399" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="5412" end="5417" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145336" start="6024" end="6040" title="H. C. G. Matthew" label="H. C. G. Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654767" start="6327" end="6348" title="City of London School" label="City of London School"/>
<link wikidata="Q531606" start="6398" end="6410" title="E. A. Abbott" label="E. A. Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="6744" end="6752" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779557" start="6823" end="6840" title="Guildhall Library" label="Guildhall Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="6915" end="6931" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7284" end="7291" title="Newgate Prison#Executions" label="Newgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="7340" end="7349" title="classics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="7350" end="7361" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="7365" end="7388" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q817565" start="7518" end="7533" title="Benjamin Jowett" label="Benjamin Jowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q369621" start="7777" end="7788" title="T. H. Green" label="T. H. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994249" start="7790" end="7832" title="White&amp;#x27;s Professor of Moral Philosophy" label="White&amp;#x27;s Professor of Moral Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q323488" start="8136" end="8147" title="Roy Jenkins" label="Roy Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157937" start="8281" end="8293" title="Oxford Union" label="Oxford Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218687" start="8321" end="8334" title="J. A. Spender" label="J. A. Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q759134" start="8339" end="8352" title="Cyril Asquith" label="Cyril Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="8494" end="8510" title="disestablishment" label="disestablishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="8568" end="8587" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q356361" start="8649" end="8662" title="Alfred Milner" label="Alfred Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q918351" start="8854" end="8899" title="1874 United Kingdom general election" label="General Election in January and February 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q314773" start="8917" end="8940" title="Lord Randolph Churchill" label="Lord Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033405" start="8992" end="9001" title="Woodstock (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594838" start="9024" end="9046" title="List of Presidents of the Oxford Union" label="President of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843023" start="9050" end="9062" title="Trinity Term" label="Trinity Term"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="9492" end="9504" title="double first" label="double first"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647565" start="9508" end="9523" title="Mods and Greats" label="Mods and Greats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="9568" end="9574" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020456" start="9722" end="9740" title="Newton Wallop, 6th Earl of Portsmouth" label="Viscount Lymington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326358" start="9778" end="9796" title="Earl of Portsmouth" label="Earl of Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="9955" end="9974" title="temperance movement" label="temperance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="10021" end="10031" title="Puritanism" label="Puritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166008" start="10321" end="10324" title="University don" label="don"/>
<link wikidata="Q69482" start="10469" end="10487" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="10502" end="10511" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260670" start="10537" end="10546" title="pupillage" label="pupillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q867307" start="10553" end="10566" title="Charles Bowen, 1st Baron Bowen" label="Charles Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="10575" end="10592" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967012" start="10837" end="10843" title="Brief (law)" label="briefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="11769" end="11778" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134060" start="11806" end="11821" title="Raymond Asquith" label="Raymond Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q55418967" start="11873" end="11889" title="Katharine Asquith" label="Katharine Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927525" start="11903" end="11918" title="John Francis Fortescue Horner" label="Sir John Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516791" start="11964" end="11979" title="Herbert Asquith (poet)" label="Herbert Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699902" start="12025" end="12047" title="Lady Cynthia Charteris" label="Lady Cynthia Charteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933848" start="12061" end="12126" title="Hugo Charteris, 11th Earl of Wemyss" label="Hugo Richard Charteris, 11th Earl of Wemyss and 7th Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797853" start="12172" end="12186" title="Arthur Asquith" label="Arthur Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246604" start="12270" end="12308" title="John Manners-Sutton, 3rd Baron Manners" label="John Manners-Sutton, 3rd Baron Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527461" start="12355" end="12369" title="Violet Asquith" label="Violet Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q333617" start="12422" end="12443" title="Maurice Bonham Carter" label="Maurice Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q759134" start="12491" end="12534" title="Cyril Asquith, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone" label="Cyril Asquith, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12613" end="12640" title="Adrian Donald Wilde Pollock" label="Adrian Donald Wilde Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790750" start="12821" end="12834" title="The Spectator" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="13096" end="13103" title="Toryism" label="Toryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="13561" end="13574" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q871232" start="13817" end="13823" title="editorial" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="13840" end="13853" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528843" start="13988" end="14000" title="Robert Samuel Wright" label="R. S. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="14041" end="14053" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14134" end="14150" title="Law Officers of the Crown#England and Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594668" start="14158" end="14163" title="Treasury devil" label="devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="14363" end="14378" title="W. E. Gladstone" label="W. E. Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q387458" start="14439" end="14453" title="Charles Bradlaugh" label="Bradlaugh case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="14478" end="14494" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708915" start="14496" end="14511" title="Henry James, 1st Baron James of Hereford" label="Sir Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="14867" end="14882" title="Irish Home Rule" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888016" start="14901" end="14919" title="1886 United Kingdom general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328347" start="14956" end="14965" title="East Fife (UK Parliament constituency)" label="East Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222752" start="15001" end="15018" title="John Boyd Kinnear" label="John Boyd Kinnear"/>
<link wikidata="Q334078" start="15109" end="15124" title="Richard Haldane" label="Richard Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637673" start="15233" end="15248" title="Haddingtonshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Haddingtonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397257" start="15268" end="15281" title="1885 United Kingdom general election" label="December 1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="15558" end="15574" title="Liberal Unionist" label="Liberal Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q457287" start="16276" end="16288" title="Anthony Hope" label="Anthony Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q334633" start="16796" end="16814" title="Cunninghame Graham" label="Cunninghame Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325388" start="16896" end="16911" title="Bloody Sunday (1887)" label="a demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="16915" end="16931" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897005" start="16984" end="17001" title="unlawful assembly" label="unlawful assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729581" start="17112" end="17127" title="Henry Vizetelly" label="Henry Vizetelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="17200" end="17204" title="Émile Zola" label="Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138346" start="17225" end="17229" title="Nana (novel)" label="Nana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165442" start="17243" end="17254" title="Pot-Bouille" label="Pot-Bouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755607" start="17271" end="17279" title="La Terre" label="La Terre"/>
<link wikidata="Q334027" start="17489" end="17508" title="Charles Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen" label="Sir Charles Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258150" start="17516" end="17545" title="Parnell Commission" label="Parnell Commission of Enquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="17683" end="17705" title="Charles Stuart Parnell" label="Charles Stuart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088471" start="17746" end="17767" title="Phoenix Park killings" label="Phoenix Park killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18221" end="18244" title="The Manchester Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="18662" end="18682" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448659" start="18800" end="18818" title="Royal baccarat scandal" label="Tranby Croft libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610522" start="18926" end="18958" title="Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co" label="Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="19163" end="19176" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="19285" end="19291" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20005749" start="19387" end="19399" title="Mount Street" label="Mount Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q124184" start="19401" end="19408" title="Mayfair" label="Mayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888018" start="19455" end="19484" title="1892 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of July 1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="19684" end="19698" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282162" start="20018" end="20030" title="Disestablishmentarianism" label="disestablish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="20035" end="20050" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="20226" end="20235" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125254" start="20363" end="20375" title="Featherstone" label="Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="20675" end="20689" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="20700" end="20717" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="20719" end="20732" title="Lord Rosebery" label="Lord Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="20834" end="20861" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q775821" start="20863" end="20883" title="Sir William Harcourt" label="Sir William Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20948" end="20965" title="Little Englander#History" label="Little Englanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396333" start="21080" end="21094" title="Margot Tennant" label="Margot Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495317" start="21242" end="21274" title="St George&amp;#x27;s, Hanover Square" label="St George&amp;#x27;s, Hanover Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526303" start="21307" end="21339" title="Sir Charles Tennant, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Charles Tennant, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q360844" start="21722" end="21737" title="Anthony Asquith" label="Anthony Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q529558" start="21780" end="21797" title="Elizabeth Asquith" label="Elizabeth Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853679" start="21852" end="21867" title="Antoine Bibesco" label="Antoine Bibesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888019" start="21913" end="21942" title="1895 United Kingdom general election" label="general election of July 1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="22004" end="22018" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q157159" start="22545" end="22561" title="Abbas II of Egypt" label="Khedive of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="23201" end="23227" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q106618" start="23229" end="23257" title="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman" label="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="23290" end="23298" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="23632" end="23650" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="23728" end="23735" title="protectionism" label="tariffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="23844" end="23854" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q19008" start="24442" end="24456" title="Arthur Balfour" label="Arthur Balfour"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="24554" end="24569" title="King Edward VII" label="King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q335187" start="24679" end="24694" title="Sir Edward Grey" label="Sir Edward Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="25116" end="25134" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q188999" start="25338" end="25356" title="Austen Chamberlain" label="Austen Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q338114" start="25835" end="25852" title="Sir Charles Dilke" label="Sir Charles Dilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118615" start="25917" end="25925" title="supertax" label="supertax"/>
<link wikidata="Q132790" start="26667" end="26675" title="Biarritz" label="Biarritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417253" start="26733" end="26745" title="Kissing hands" label="kissed hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146296" start="26771" end="26786" title="Hôtel du Palais" label="Hôtel du Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="27156" end="27173" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="27200" end="27231" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188683" start="27307" end="27324" title="crossed the floor" label="crossed the floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q334352" start="27460" end="27475" title="Edward Marjoribanks, 2nd Baron Tweedmouth" label="Lord Tweedmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="27481" end="27508" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="27547" end="27576" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q336771" start="27578" end="27588" title="Victor Bruce, 9th Earl of Elgin" label="Lord Elgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q333710" start="28257" end="28273" title="Reginald McKenna" label="Reginald McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30722989" start="28760" end="28769" title="Workweek and weekend" label="weekender"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="28864" end="28872" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979180" start="28951" end="28960" title="Mill House and The Wharf, Sutton Courtenay" label="The Wharf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006998" start="28981" end="28997" title="Sutton Courtenay" label="Sutton Courtenay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055036" start="29063" end="29079" title="Cavendish Square" label="Cavendish Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="29132" end="29147" title="Contract bridge" label="Contract bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q167717" start="29444" end="29459" title="Venetia Stanley (1887–1948)" label="Venetia Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088702" start="29985" end="29994" title="Lady Tree" label="Lady Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="30510" end="30519" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q333085" start="30707" end="30717" title="David Owen" label="David Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="31506" end="31519" title="upper chamber" label="upper chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="32551" end="32560" title="Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="32580" end="32590" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="33024" end="33044" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="33130" end="33144" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q926871" start="33206" end="33212" title="Direct tax" label="direct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771708" start="33217" end="33225" title="Indirect tax" label="indirect"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="33437" end="33447" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q335193" start="33928" end="33939" title="Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe" label="Northcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="33953" end="33962" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="33983" end="33993" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="34238" end="34242" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="34346" end="34365" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="34451" end="34462" title="Dreadnought" label="Dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q337386" start="34591" end="34605" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Lord Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="34651" end="34665" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6070614" start="34729" end="34750" title="Irish Church Act 1869" label="Irish Church Act 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="34759" end="34783" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="Third Reform Act in 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="35097" end="35103" title="Confidence and supply" label="supply"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35366" end="35375" title="Legislative session#United Kingdom" label="prorogued"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075752" start="35605" end="35634" title="January 1910 general election" label="January 1910 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="36342" end="36348" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394879" start="36462" end="36477" title="hung parliament" label="hung parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q123488303" start="36608" end="36625" title="Nationalist Party (Ireland)" label="Irish Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="36781" end="36791" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="36796" end="36813" title="Lord John Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="38265" end="38284" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="38917" end="38925" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076583" start="39621" end="39657" title="December 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="another general election in December"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="40545" end="40549" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="41230" end="41240" title="10 Downing Street" label="Number Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831979" start="43511" end="43531" title="Trade Union Act 1913" label="Trade Union Act 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739367" start="43547" end="43563" title="Osborne judgment" label="Osborne judgment"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="43767" end="43782" title="old-age pension" label="old-age pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455048" start="44262" end="44282" title="Eucharistic Congress" label="Eucharistic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="44322" end="44352" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44358" end="44373" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="44446" end="44463" title="Blessed Sacrament" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q729679" start="44637" end="44660" title="Francis Cardinal Bourne" label="Francis Cardinal Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711221" start="44666" end="44691" title="Archbishop of Westminster" label="Archbishop of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347324" start="44898" end="44915" title="Herbert Gladstone" label="Herbert Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q333111" start="45082" end="45092" title="Lord Ripon" label="Lord Ripon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981877" start="45353" end="45361" title="Welsh Church Act 1914" label="the bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649241" start="45534" end="45543" title="Suspensory Act 1914" label="suspended"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618091" start="46504" end="46516" title="Annie Kenney" label="Annie Kenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q50291133" start="46518" end="46533" title="Adelaide Knight" label="Adelaide Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q63442093" start="46539" end="46555" title="Jane Sbarborough" label="Jane Sbarborough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46955" end="46967" title="Olive Fargus" label="Olive Fargus"/>
<link wikidata="Q70694988" start="46972" end="46989" title="Catherine Corbett" label="Catherine Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="47120" end="47128" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="47473" end="47494" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="47544" end="47570" title="private member&amp;#x27;s bill" label="private member&amp;#x27;s bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="48428" end="48465" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="Representation of the People Act 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q225392" start="48675" end="48687" title="John Redmond" label="John Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="48781" end="48796" title="Irish Home Rule" label="Irish Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q123488303" start="49173" end="49196" title="Irish Nationalist Party" label="Irish Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="49883" end="49903" title="Third Home Rule Bill" label="Third Home Rule Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q177235" start="51275" end="51288" title="Edward Carson" label="Edward Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895348" start="51297" end="51314" title="Dublin University (constituency)" label="Dublin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="51439" end="51448" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="52146" end="52152" title="County Tyrone" label="Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127576" start="52732" end="52754" title="Ulster Volunteer Force" label="Ulster Volunteer Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="52779" end="52791" title="Orange Lodge" label="Orange Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194930" start="53197" end="53213" title="Curragh incident" label="Curragh incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105456" start="53359" end="53369" title="John Seely" label="John Seely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364768" start="53424" end="53436" title="Hubert Gough" label="Hubert Gough"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="53817" end="53832" title="Sir John French" label="Sir John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932090" start="54208" end="54251" title="Larne gun-running" label="landed a large cargo of guns and ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="54255" end="54260" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="55108" end="55138" title="Government of Ireland Act 1914" label="Government of Ireland Act 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649241" start="55193" end="55212" title="Suspensory Act 1914" label="Suspensory Act 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="55549" end="55565" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q167455" start="55624" end="55668" title="First Moroccan Crisis" label="an ongoing crisis between France and Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763720" start="56296" end="56311" title="Anglo-German naval arms race" label="naval arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q163573" start="56385" end="56405" title="Algeciras Conference" label="Algeciras Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="56556" end="56568" title="dreadnoughts" label="dreadnoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q333710" start="56574" end="56590" title="Reginald McKenna" label="Reginald McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="56619" end="56646" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="57399" end="57412" title="Agadir Crisis" label="Agadir Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="57578" end="57598" title="Mansion House speech" label="Mansion House speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q333519" start="57662" end="57677" title="Viscount Morley" label="Viscount Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697247" start="58161" end="58172" title="Paul Cambon" label="Paul Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="58532" end="58567" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="58571" end="58579" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="58814" end="58820" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193151" start="59822" end="59832" title="Armageddon" label="Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="60377" end="60390" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Kaiser&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="60408" end="60412" title="Nicholas II" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="61320" end="61338" title="Basil Liddell Hart" label="Basil Liddell Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="61618" end="61621" title="GMT" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q336421" start="61754" end="61764" title="Robert Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe" label="Lord Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333091" start="62197" end="62211" title="Sir John Simon" label="Sir John Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470852" start="62216" end="62230" title="William Lygon, 7th Earl Beauchamp" label="Lord Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q333519" start="62308" end="62319" title="John Morley" label="John Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q337515" start="62324" end="62334" title="John Burns" label="John Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="62887" end="62896" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="63204" end="63230" title="Lord Kitchener of Khartoum" label="Lord Kitchener of Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="63854" end="63881" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q687572" start="63895" end="63918" title="Battle of the Frontiers" label="Battle of the Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190712" start="64011" end="64036" title="First Battle of the Marne" label="First Battle of the Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="64071" end="64097" title="Attrition warfare" label="attritional trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="64699" end="64712" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507478" start="65606" end="65628" title="First Asquith ministry" label="Liberal administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217172" start="65651" end="65666" title="Asquith coalition ministry" label="first coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="65762" end="65782" title="Dardanelles Campaign" label="Dardanelles Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q334999" start="66085" end="66099" title="Admiral Fisher" label="Admiral Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="66105" end="66119" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="68083" end="68092" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084065" start="68136" end="68161" title="Charles à Court Repington" label="Charles à Court Repington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636256" start="68204" end="68226" title="Battle of Aubers Ridge" label="Battle of Aubers Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002754" start="68303" end="68319" title="Shell Crisis of 1915" label="the Shell Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335193" start="68461" end="68477" title="Lord Northcliffe" label="Lord Northcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="68608" end="68623" title="Sir John French" label="Sir John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006750" start="68947" end="68958" title="C. P. Scott" label="C. P. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="68980" end="69003" title="The Manchester Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q332572" start="69386" end="69399" title="Edwin Montagu" label="Edwin Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="70594" end="70621" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q166663" start="71963" end="71972" title="Bonar Law" label="Bonar Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="72809" end="72845" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526233" start="73023" end="73039" title="Charles Hobhouse" label="Charles Hobhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446566" start="73645" end="73666" title="Ministry of Munitions" label="Ministry of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q335480" start="73750" end="73764" title="Maurice Hankey" label="Maurice Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931607" start="73843" end="73868" title="Munitions of War Act 1915" label="Munitions of War Act 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446566" start="73953" end="73974" title="Minister of Munitions" label="Minister of Munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246815" start="74015" end="74032" title="J. A. R. Marriott" label="J. A. R. Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703236" start="74645" end="74665" title="David Lindsay, 27th Earl of Crawford" label="The Earl of Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543875" start="75083" end="75097" title="George Riddell, 1st Baron Riddell" label="George Riddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162774" start="75733" end="75745" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q338427" start="76303" end="76313" title="Edward Stanley, 17th Earl of Derby" label="Lord Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261508" start="76411" end="76423" title="Derby Scheme" label="Derby Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q373940" start="76510" end="76526" title="Sir Henry Wilson" label="Sir Henry Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="76555" end="76564" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852175" start="77295" end="77315" title="Military Service Act 1916" label="Military Service Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074958" start="78271" end="78287" title="Irish Volunteers" label="Irish Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190570" start="78307" end="78325" title="Irish Citizen Army" label="Irish Citizen Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="78376" end="78382" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="78965" end="78974" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="79031" end="79037" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245157" start="79663" end="79677" title="Battle of Loos" label="Battle of Loos"/>
<link wikidata="Q335059" start="79770" end="79785" title="Sir John French" label="Sir John French"/>
<link wikidata="Q312564" start="80113" end="80129" title="Sir Douglas Haig" label="Sir Douglas Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q438200" start="80523" end="80544" title="Sir William Robertson" label="Sir William Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="80548" end="80583" title="Chief of the Imperial General Staff" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="81572" end="81580" title="Salonika Campaign" label="Salonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="81635" end="81641" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q156554" start="81789" end="81810" title="The Battle of Jutland" label="The Battle of Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17326575" start="81909" end="81920" title="Thomas Legh, 2nd Baron Newton" label="Lord Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060844" start="81922" end="81939" title="Paymaster General" label="Paymaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060785" start="82324" end="82349" title="HMS Hampshire (1903)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Hampshire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="82913" end="82934" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="82988" end="82991" title="Siege of Kut" label="Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q335480" start="82993" end="83011" title="Maurice Hankey, 1st Baron Hankey" label="Sir Maurice Hankey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="83312" end="83331" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134060" start="83440" end="83447" title="Raymond Asquith" label="Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381142" start="83472" end="83499" title="Battle of Flers–Courcelette" label="Battle of Flers–Courcelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q221967" start="84224" end="84242" title="Brusilov Offensive" label="Brusilov Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q553157" start="84249" end="84265" title="Romania during World War I" label="ruin of Roumania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654789" start="84843" end="84857" title="R. J. Q. Adams" label="R. J. Q. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="85234" end="85241" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="85776" end="85786" title="Max Aitken" label="Max Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q337386" start="86180" end="86194" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Lord Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="86311" end="86325" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q336421" start="86471" end="86481" title="Robert Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe" label="Lord Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747863" start="86706" end="86721" title="Hyde Park Hotel" label="Hyde Park Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="86752" end="86762" title="Max Aitken" label="Max Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q95948312" start="88587" end="88601" title="Reginald Pound" label="Reginald Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q336483" start="88660" end="88670" title="Harold Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Rothermere" label="Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q188999" start="91495" end="91513" title="Austen Chamberlain" label="Austen Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q271878" start="91515" end="91526" title="Lord Curzon" label="Lord Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12702" start="91531" end="91548" title="Lord Robert Cecil" label="Lord Robert Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q334088" start="92810" end="92829" title="Christopher Addison" label="Christopher Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q117075266" start="93087" end="93100" title="The Garden Suburb" label="Garden Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319593" start="93396" end="93415" title="Reynold&amp;#x27;s News" label="Reynold&amp;#x27;s News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720160" start="93479" end="93492" title="Henry Dalziel, 1st Baron Dalziel of Kirkcaldy" label="Henry Dalziel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945597" start="95350" end="95362" title="John Ramsden (historian)" label="John Ramsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543161" start="95649" end="95662" title="Walmer Castle" label="Walmer Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236417" start="96960" end="96970" title="John Grigg" label="John Grigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q335324" start="98063" end="98074" title="Duff Cooper" label="Duff Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581777" start="98115" end="98137" title="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Gate" label="Queen Anne&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534567" start="99099" end="99114" title="Geoffrey Dawson" label="Geoffrey Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335218" start="103087" end="103101" title="Herbert Samuel" label="Herbert Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="104645" end="104665" title="A. J. P. Taylor" label="A.J.P. Taylor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105303" end="105314" title="War Cabinet#First World War" label="War Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417253" start="105393" end="105405" title="Kissing hands" label="kissed hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="106222" end="106225" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="106259" end="106274" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="107282" end="107297" title="Sir Robert Peel" label="Sir Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974093" start="107886" end="107913" title="National Liberal Federation" label="National Liberal Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722720" start="108133" end="108147" title="A. G. Gardiner" label="A. G. Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605160" start="108151" end="108177" title="The Daily News (UK)" label="&amp;quot;The Daily News&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797853" start="109155" end="109161" title="Arthur Asquith" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452944" start="109567" end="109588" title="Frederick Maurice (British Army officer, born 1871)" label="Sir Frederick Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682012" start="109666" end="109693" title="Misleading of parliament" label="misled the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921673" start="110301" end="110313" title="H. A. Gwynne" label="H. A. Gwynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750567" start="110335" end="110351" title="The Morning Post" label="The Morning Post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111908" end="111923" title="Romanes Lecture#1910s" label="Romanes Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q467787" start="112032" end="112053" title="Lady Ottoline Morrell" label="Lady Ottoline Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q876417" start="112460" end="112486" title="Second Battle of the Marne" label="Second Battle of the Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="112627" end="112633" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137907" start="113005" end="113011" title="Coalition Coupon" label="Coupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q823412" start="113544" end="113575" title="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster" label="St Margaret&amp;#x27;s, Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="113865" end="113885" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="the Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042701" start="114351" end="114364" title="1918 United Kingdom general election" label="1918 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525966" start="114831" end="114846" title="Alexander Sprot" label="Alexander Sprot"/>
<link wikidata="Q333216" start="116117" end="116134" title="Augustine Birrell" label="Augustine Birrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787822" start="117251" end="117265" title="Thomas Bramsdon" label="T. A. Bramsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453390" start="117664" end="117700" title="Free Church of Scotland (since 1900)" label="Scottish religious sect of that name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294786" start="117747" end="117765" title="Sir Donald Maclean" label="Sir Donald Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543807" start="117811" end="117822" title="George Rennie Thorne" label="G.R. Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948955" start="117890" end="117900" title="James Hogge" label="J.M. Hogge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="118603" end="118623" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192615" start="118755" end="118769" title="Ferdinand Foch" label="Ferdinand Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701938" start="119273" end="119282" title="1914 Star" label="1914 Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q920315" start="119288" end="119305" title="British War Medal" label="British War Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410805" start="119314" end="119327" title="Victory Medal (United Kingdom)" label="Victory Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616107" start="119537" end="119560" title="1919 Spen Valley by-election" label="Spen Valley by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125170" start="120385" end="120392" title="Paisley (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="121252" end="121277" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="121333" end="121349" title="Gladstone&amp;#x27;s" label="Gladstone&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842599" start="121350" end="121369" title="Midlothian campaign" label="Midlothian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q336483" start="121909" end="121924" title="Harold Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Rothermere" label="Lord Rothermere"/>
<link wikidata="Q800751" start="122009" end="122015" title="Euston railway station" label="Euston"/>
<link wikidata="Q334436" start="122224" end="122233" title="Lord Cave" label="Lord Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612753" start="123246" end="123265" title="Weetman Pearson, 1st Viscount Cowdray" label="Viscountess Cowdray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893581" start="123302" end="123316" title="Bedford Square" label="Bedford Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q668356" start="123403" end="123420" title="Frances Stevenson" label="Frances Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="124277" end="124293" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Russo-Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774308" start="124393" end="124410" title="Anti-Waste League" label="Anti-Waste League"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="124893" end="124910" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q333376" start="125032" end="125040" title="Walter Runciman, 1st Viscount Runciman of Doxford" label="Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="125417" end="125430" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006750" start="125940" end="125950" title="C.P. Scott" label="C.P. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="125964" end="125983" title="Manchester Guardian" label="Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81473" start="126247" end="126271" title="Westminster Central Hall" label="Westminster Central Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528499" start="126891" end="126905" title="Philip Sassoon" label="Philip Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="126985" end="126998" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187582" start="127018" end="127030" title="Crome Yellow" label="Crome Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q470890" start="127279" end="127291" title="Harold Laski" label="Harold Laski"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018262" start="127501" end="127517" title="The World Crisis" label="The World Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="128154" end="128169" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084303" start="128307" end="128328" title="1922 United Kingdom general election" label="1922 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974098" start="128555" end="128572" title="National Liberal Party (UK, 1922)" label="National Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260911" start="128872" end="128890" title="Depression of 1920–21" label="slump of 1920–1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644085" start="128975" end="128990" title="Hamar Greenwood" label="Hamar Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425074" start="128992" end="129005" title="Freddie Guest" label="Freddie Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q74707" start="129193" end="129208" title="Daily Chronicle" label="Daily Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898523" start="129362" end="129379" title="Charles Masterman" label="Charles Masterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730225" start="129427" end="129443" title="H. W. Massingham" label="H. W. Massingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753134" start="129466" end="129476" title="The Nation and Athenaeum" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="130635" end="130645" title="Protectionism" label="Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808694" start="130993" end="130998" title="Megan Lloyd George" label="Megan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084294" start="131558" end="131583" title="1923 United Kingdom general election" label="election in December 1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241043" start="132542" end="132558" title="Sir Robert Horne" label="Sir Robert Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65029826" start="132606" end="132617" title="Roy Douglas (academic)" label="Roy Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="133289" end="133295" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="133313" end="133329" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q333429" start="134063" end="134079" title="Samuel Hoare, 1st Viscount Templewood" label="Sir Samuel Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="134487" end="134499" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115564" start="134578" end="134607" title="1924 Oxford by-election" label="by-election in Oxford in June"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028009" start="134770" end="134783" title="Campbell Case" label="Campbell Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948306" start="134941" end="134953" title="Daily Worker (UK)" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894011" start="135065" end="135080" title="Marconi scandal" label="Marconi scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632991" start="135680" end="135693" title="1924 United Kingdom general election" label="1924 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q10695766" start="136047" end="136059" title="The Red Flag" label="The Red Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591374" start="136837" end="136852" title="Zinoviev Letter" label="Zinoviev Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="137528" end="137532" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q332499" start="137737" end="137750" title="Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer" label="Robert Harley"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="137772" end="137782" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q987664" start="137828" end="137849" title="delusions of grandeur" label="delusions of grandeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="137943" end="137953" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="138007" end="138025" title="College of Heralds" label="College of Heralds"/>
<link wikidata="Q786481" start="138047" end="138070" title="Earl of Oxford and Asquith" label="&amp;quot;and Asquith&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="138440" end="138448" title="Court of Chancery" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378681" start="138507" end="138516" title="English trust law" label="trust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566685" start="138878" end="138913" title="Chancellorship of Oxford University" label="Chancellorship of Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q333683" start="138996" end="139011" title="F. E. Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead" label="Lord Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q140100" start="139215" end="139231" title="Zadok" label="Zadok the Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q321804" start="139236" end="139255" title="Abiathar" label="Abiathar the Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q334436" start="139446" end="139455" title="Lord Cave" label="Lord Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239423" start="139568" end="139585" title="Desmond MacCarthy" label="Desmond MacCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="139762" end="139801" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="139835" end="139854" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q333591" start="140141" end="140156" title="Sir Alfred Mond" label="Sir Alfred Mond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528834" start="141286" end="141298" title="Robert Perks" label="Robert Perks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="141524" end="141542" title="1926 United Kingdom general strike" label="the General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925726" start="141859" end="141874" title="British Gazette" label="British Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q668356" start="142640" end="142657" title="Frances Stevenson" label="Frances Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589442" start="143369" end="143384" title="Lord Buckmaster" label="Lord Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="144649" end="144665" title="Lord Beaverbrook" label="Lord Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q336036" start="144809" end="144821" title="Rufus Isaacs, 1st Marquess of Reading" label="Lord Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q17529167" start="145859" end="145875" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; Church, Sutton Courtenay" label="All Saints&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="146091" end="146108" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134060" start="146736" end="146743" title="Raymond Asquith" label="Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516791" start="146853" end="146860" title="Herbert Asquith (poet)" label="Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699902" start="146910" end="146927" title="Lady Cynthia Asquith" label="Cynthia Charteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797853" start="146984" end="146990" title="Arthur Asquith" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527461" start="147074" end="147108" title="Violet Bonham Carter" label="Violet, later Violet Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147231" end="147257" title="Personal Private Secretary" label="Personal Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q333617" start="147258" end="147279" title="Maurice Bonham Carter" label="Maurice Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q759134" start="147304" end="147309" title="Cyril Asquith, Baron Asquith of Bishopstone" label="Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q610320" start="147381" end="147389" title="Law Lord" label="Law Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q529558" start="147424" end="147465" title="Elizabeth Bibesco" label="Elizabeth, later Princess Antoine Bibesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q360844" start="147526" end="147541" title="Anthony Asquith" label="Anthony Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="147722" end="147742" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221764" start="147781" end="147796" title="Dominic Asquith" label="Dominic Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298569" start="147847" end="147894" title="Raymond Asquith, 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith" label="Raymond Asquith, 3rd Earl of Oxford and Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q433089" start="147967" end="147982" title="Anna Chancellor" label="Anna Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q333683" start="150367" end="150382" title="F. E. Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead" label="Lord Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="152229" end="152246" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971922" start="152648" end="152655" title="Michael Brock" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589442" start="152839" end="152854" title="Lord Buckmaster" label="Lord Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q333692" start="154795" end="154809" title="Roy Hattersley" label="Roy Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969734" start="156037" end="156069" title="Liberalism in the United Kingdom" label="Liberalism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654789" start="156110" end="156125" title="Adams, R. J. Q." label="Adams, R. J. Q."/>
<link wikidata="Q1507199" start="157335" end="157354" title="Dangerfield, George" label="Dangerfield, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766900" start="157362" end="157398" title="The Strange Death of Liberal England" label="The Strange Death of Liberal England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030967" start="159130" end="159154" title="The Women&amp;#x27;s Library" label="The Women&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524238" start="159206" end="159221" title="Tregidga, Garry" label="Tregidga, Garry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87231" wikidata="Q334401" url="?curid=87231" title="Surveillance">
<text>Surveillance is the monitoring of behavior, many activities, or information for the purpose of information gathering, influencing, managing, or directing. This can include observation from a distance by means of electronic equipment, such as closed-circuit television (CCTV), or interception of electronically transmitted information like Internet traffic. Increasingly, governments may also obtain consumer data through the purchase of online information, effectively expanding surveillance capabilities through commercially available digital records. It can also include simple technical methods, such as human intelligence gathering and postal interception.

Surveillance is used by citizens, for instance for protecting their neighborhoods. It is widely used by governments for intelligence gathering, including espionage, prevention of crime, the protection of a process, person, group or object, or the investigation of crime. It is also used by criminal organizations to plan and commit crimes, and by businesses to gather intelligence on criminals, their competitors, suppliers or customers. Religious organizations charged with detecting heresy and heterodoxy may also carry out surveillance.
Auditors carry out a form of surveillance.

Surveillance can unjustifiably violate people&#x27;s privacy and is often criticized by civil liberties activists. Democracies may have laws that seek to restrict governmental and private use of surveillance, whereas authoritarian governments seldom have any domestic restrictions.

Espionage is by definition covert and typically illegal according to the rules of the observed party, whereas most types of surveillance are overt and are considered legal or legitimate by state authorities. International espionage seems to be common among all types of countries.

==Methods==

===Computer===


The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of data and traffic on the Internet. In the United States for example, under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all phone calls and broadband Internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) are required to be available for unimpeded real-time monitoring by federal law enforcement agencies.

There is far too much data on the Internet for human investigators to manually search through all of it. Therefore, automated Internet surveillance computers sift through the vast amount of intercepted Internet traffic to identify and report to human investigators the traffic that is considered interesting or suspicious. This process is regulated by targeting certain &quot;trigger&quot; words or phrases, visiting certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or online chat with suspicious individuals or groups. Billions of dollars per year are spent by agencies, such as the NSA, the FBI and the now-defunct Information Awareness Office, to develop, purchase, implement, and operate systems such as Carnivore, NarusInsight, and ECHELON to intercept and analyze all of this data to extract only the information which is useful to law enforcement and intelligence agencies.

Computers can be a surveillance target because of the personal data stored on them. If someone is able to install software, such as the FBI&#x27;s Magic Lantern and CIPAV, on a computer system, they can easily gain unauthorized access to this data. Such software could be installed physically or remotely. Another form of computer surveillance, known as van Eck phreaking, involves reading electromagnetic emanations from computing devices in order to extract data from them at distances of hundreds of meters. The NSA runs a database known as &quot;Pinwale&quot;, which stores and indexes large numbers of emails of both American citizens and foreigners. Additionally, the NSA runs a program known as PRISM, which is a data mining system that gives the United States government direct access to information from technology companies. Through accessing this information, the government is able to obtain search history, emails, stored information, live chats, file transfers, and more. This program generated huge controversies in regards to surveillance and privacy, especially from U.S. citizens.

===Telephones===

The official and unofficial tapping of telephone lines is widespread. In the United States for instance, the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) requires that all telephone and VoIP communications be available for real-time wiretapping by Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies. Two major telecommunications companies in the U.S.—AT&amp;T Inc. and Verizon—have contracts with the FBI, requiring them to keep their phone call records easily searchable and accessible for Federal agencies, in return for $1.8 million per year. Between 2003 and 2005, the FBI sent out more than 140,000 &quot;National Security Letters&quot; ordering phone companies to hand over information about their customers&#x27; calling and Internet histories. About half of these letters requested information on U.S. citizens.

Human agents are not required to monitor most calls. Speech-to-text software creates machine-readable text from intercepted audio, which is then processed by automated call-analysis programs, such as those developed by agencies such as the Information Awareness Office, or companies such as Verint, and Narus, which search for certain words or phrases, to decide whether to dedicate a human agent to the call.

Law enforcement and intelligence services in the United Kingdom and the United States possess technology to activate the microphones in cell phones remotely, by accessing phones&#x27; diagnostic or maintenance features in order to listen to conversations that take place near the person who holds the phone.

The StingRay tracker is an example of one of these tools used to monitor cell phone usage in the United States and the United Kingdom. Originally developed for counterterrorism purposes by the military, they work by broadcasting powerful signals that cause nearby cell phones to transmit their IMSI number, just as they would to normal cell phone towers. Once the phone is connected to the device, there is no way for the user to know that they are being tracked. The operator of the stingray is able to extract information such as location, phone calls, and text messages, but it is widely believed that the capabilities of the StingRay extend much further. A lot of controversy surrounds the StingRay because of its powerful capabilities and the secrecy that surrounds it.

Mobile phones are also commonly used to collect location data. The geographical location of a mobile phone (and thus the person carrying it) can be determined easily even when the phone is not being used, using a technique known as multilateration to calculate the differences in time for a signal to travel from the cell phone to each of several cell towers near the owner of the phone. The legality of such techniques has been questioned in the United States, in particular whether a court warrant is required. Records for &quot;one&quot; carrier alone (Sprint), showed that in a given year federal law enforcement agencies requested customer location data 8 million times.

In response to customers&#x27; privacy concerns in the post Edward Snowden era, Apple&#x27;s iPhone 6 has been designed to disrupt investigative wiretapping efforts. The phone encrypts e-mails, contacts, and photos with a code generated by a complex mathematical algorithm that is unique to an individual phone, and is inaccessible to Apple. The encryption feature on the iPhone 6 has drawn criticism from FBI director James B. Comey and other law enforcement officials since even lawful requests to access user content on the iPhone 6 will result in Apple supplying &quot;gibberish&quot; data that requires law enforcement personnel to either break the code themselves or to get the code from the phone&#x27;s owner. Because the Snowden leaks demonstrated that American agencies can access phones anywhere in the world, privacy concerns in countries with growing markets for smart phones have intensified, providing a strong incentive for companies like Apple to address those concerns in order to secure their position in the global market.

Apple has made several moves to emphasize their concern for privacy, in order to appeal to more consumers. In 2011, Apple stopped the use of permanent device identifiers, and in 2019, they banned the ability of third parties to track on children&#x27;s apps.

Although the CALEA requires telecommunications companies to build into their systems the ability to carry out a lawful wiretap, the law has not been updated to address the issue of smart phones and requests for access to e-mails and metadata. The Snowden leaks show that the NSA has been taking advantage of this ambiguity in the law by collecting metadata on &quot;at least hundreds of millions&quot; of &quot;incidental&quot; targets from around the world. The NSA uses an analytic tool known as CO-TRAVELER in order to track people whose movements intersect and to find any hidden connections with persons of interest.

The Snowden leaks have also revealed that the British Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) can access information collected by the NSA on American citizens. Once the data has been collected, the GCHQ can hold on to it for up to two years. The deadline can be extended with the permission of a &quot;senior UK official&quot;.

===Cameras===

Surveillance cameras, or security cameras, are video cameras used for the purpose of observing an area. They are often connected to a recording device or IP network, and may be watched by a security guard or law enforcement officer. Cameras and recording equipment used to be relatively expensive and required human personnel to monitor camera footage, but analysis of footage has been made easier by automated software that organizes digital video footage into a searchable database, and by video analysis software (such as VIRAT and HumanID). The amount of footage is also drastically reduced by motion sensors which record only when motion is detected. With cheaper production techniques, surveillance cameras are simple and inexpensive enough to be used in home security systems, and for everyday surveillance. Video cameras are one of the most common methods of surveillance.

As of 2016, there are about 350 million surveillance cameras worldwide. About 65% of these cameras are installed in Asia. The growth of CCTV has been slowing in recent years. In 2018, China was reported to have a huge surveillance network of over 170 million CCTV cameras with 400 million new cameras expected to be installed in the next three years, many of which use facial recognition technology.

In the United States, the Department of Homeland Security awards billions of dollars per year in Homeland Security grants for local, state, and federal agencies to install modern video surveillance equipment. For example, the city of Chicago, Illinois, recently used a $5.1 million Homeland Security grant to install an additional 250 surveillance cameras, and connect them to a centralized monitoring center, along with its preexisting network of over 2000 cameras, in a program known as Operation Virtual Shield. Speaking in 2009, Chicago Mayor Richard Daley announced that Chicago would have a surveillance camera on every street corner by 2016. New York City received a $350 million grant towards the development of the Domain Awareness System, which is an interconnected system of sensors including 18,000 CCTV cameras used for continual surveillance of the city by both police officers and artificial intelligence systems.

In the United Kingdom, the vast majority of video surveillance cameras are not operated by government bodies, but by private individuals or companies, especially to monitor the interiors of shops and businesses. According to 2011 Freedom of Information Act requests, the total number of local government operated CCTV cameras was around 52,000 over the entirety of the UK. The prevalence of video surveillance in the UK is often overstated due to unreliable estimates being requoted; for example one report in 2002 extrapolated from a very small sample to estimate the number of cameras in the UK at 4.2 million (of which 500,000 were in Greater London). More reliable estimates put the number of private and local government operated cameras in the United Kingdom at around 1.85 million in 2011.

In the Netherlands, one example city where there are cameras is The Hague. There, cameras are placed in city districts in which the most illegal activity is concentrated. Examples are the red-light districts and the train stations.

As part of China&#x27;s Golden Shield Project, several U.S. corporations, including IBM, General Electric, and Honeywell, have been working closely with the Chinese government to install millions of surveillance cameras throughout China, along with advanced video analytics and facial recognition software, which will identify and track individuals everywhere they go. They will be connected to a centralized database and monitoring station, which will, upon completion of the project, contain a picture of the face of every person in China: over 1.3 billion people. Lin Jiang Huai, the head of China&#x27;s &quot;Information Security Technology&quot; office (which is in charge of the project), credits the surveillance systems in the United States and the U.K. as the inspiration for what he is doing with the Golden Shield Project.
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is funding a research project called Combat Zones That See that will link up cameras across a city to a centralized monitoring station, identify and track individuals and vehicles as they move through the city, and report &quot;suspicious&quot; activity (such as waving arms, looking side-to-side, standing in a group, etc.).

At Super Bowl XXXV in January 2001, police in Tampa, Florida, used Identix&#x27;s facial recognition software, FaceIt, to scan the crowd for potential criminals and terrorists in attendance at the event (it found 19 people with pending arrest warrants).

Governments often initially claim that cameras are meant to be used for traffic control, but many of them end up using them for general surveillance. For example, Washington, D.C. had 5,000 &quot;traffic&quot; cameras installed under this premise, and then after they were all in place, networked them all together and then granted access to the Metropolitan Police Department, so they could perform &quot;day-to-day monitoring&quot;.

The development of centralized networks of CCTV cameras watching public areas—linked to computer databases of people&#x27;s pictures and identity (biometric data), able to track people&#x27;s movements throughout the city, and identify whom they have been with—has been argued by some to present a risk to civil liberties. Trapwire is an example of such a network.

===Social network analysis===

One common form of surveillance is to create maps of social networks based on data from social networking sites such as Facebook, MySpace, Twitter as well as from traffic analysis information from phone call records such as those in the NSA call database, and others. These social network &quot;maps&quot; are then data mined to extract useful information such as personal interests, friendships &amp; affiliations, wants, beliefs, thoughts, and activities.

Many U.S. government agencies such as the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) are investing heavily in research involving social network analysis. The intelligence community believes that the biggest threat to U.S. power comes from decentralized, leaderless, geographically dispersed groups of terrorists, subversives, extremists, and dissidents. These types of threats are most easily countered by finding important nodes in the network, and removing them. To do this requires a detailed map of the network.

Jason Ethier of Northeastern University, in his study of modern social network analysis, said the following of the Scalable Social Network Analysis Program developed by the Information Awareness Office:

AT&amp;T developed a programming language called &quot;Hancock&quot;, which is able to sift through enormous databases of phone call and Internet traffic records, such as the NSA call database, and extract &quot;communities of interest&quot;—groups of people who call each other regularly, or groups that regularly visit certain sites on the Internet. AT&amp;T originally built the system to develop &quot;marketing leads&quot;, but the FBI has regularly requested such information from phone companies such as AT&amp;T without a warrant, and, after using the data, stores all information received in its own databases, regardless of whether or not the information was ever useful in an investigation.

Some people believe that the use of social networking sites is a form of &quot;participatory surveillance&quot;, where users of these sites are essentially performing surveillance on themselves, putting detailed personal information on public websites where it can be viewed by corporations and governments. In 2008, about 20% of employers reported using social networking sites to collect personal data on prospective or current employees.

===Biometric===

Biometric surveillance is a technology that measures and analyzes human physical and/or behavioral characteristics for authentication, identification, or screening purposes. Examples of physical characteristics include fingerprints, DNA, and facial patterns. Examples of mostly behavioral characteristics include gait (a person&#x27;s manner of walking) or voice.

Facial recognition is the use of the unique configuration of a person&#x27;s facial features to accurately identify them, usually from surveillance video. Both the Department of Homeland Security and DARPA are heavily funding research into facial recognition systems. The Information Processing Technology Office ran a program known as Human Identification at a Distance which developed technologies that are capable of identifying a person at up to by their facial features.

Another form of behavioral biometrics, based on affective computing, involves computers recognizing a person&#x27;s emotional state based on an analysis of their facial expressions, how fast they are talking, the tone and pitch of their voice, their posture, and other behavioral traits. This might be used for instance to see if a person&#x27;s behavior is suspect (looking around furtively, &quot;tense&quot; or &quot;angry&quot; facial expressions, waving arms, etc.).

A more recent development is DNA profiling, which looks at some of the major markers in the body&#x27;s DNA to produce a match. The FBI is spending $1 billion to build a new biometric database, which will store DNA, facial recognition data, iris/retina (eye) data, fingerprints, palm prints, and other biometric data of people living in the United States. The computers running the database are contained in an underground facility about the size of two American football fields.

The Los Angeles Police Department is installing automated facial recognition and license plate recognition devices in its squad cars, and providing handheld face scanners, which officers will use to identify people while on patrol.

Facial thermographs are in development, which allow machines to identify certain emotions in people such as fear or stress, by measuring the temperature generated by blood flow to different parts of the face. Law enforcement officers believe that this has potential for them to identify when a suspect is nervous, which might indicate that they are hiding something, lying, or worried about something.

In his paper in Ethics and Information Technology, Avi Marciano maps the harms caused by biometric surveillance, traces their theoretical origins, and brings these harms together in one integrative framework to elucidate their cumulative power. Marciano proposes four types of harms: Unauthorized use of bodily information, denial or limitation of access to physical spaces, bodily social sorting, and symbolic ineligibility through construction of marginality and otherness. Biometrics&#x27; social power, according to Marciano, derives from three main features: their complexity as &quot;enigmatic technologies&quot;, their objective-scientific image, and their increasing agency, particularly in the context of automatic decision-making.

===Aerial===

Aerial surveillance is the gathering of surveillance, usually visual imagery or video, from an airborne vehicle—such as an unmanned aerial vehicle, helicopter, or spy plane. Military surveillance aircraft use a range of sensors (e.g. radar) to monitor the battlefield.

Digital imaging technology, miniaturized computers, and numerous other technological advances over the past decade have contributed to rapid advances in aerial surveillance hardware such as micro-aerial vehicles, forward-looking infrared, and high-resolution imagery capable of identifying objects at extremely long distances. For instance, the MQ-9 Reaper, a U.S. drone plane used for domestic operations by the Department of Homeland Security, carries cameras that are capable of identifying an object the size of a milk carton from altitudes of , and has forward-looking infrared devices that can detect the heat from a human body at distances of up to . In an earlier instance of commercial aerial surveillance, the Killington Mountain ski resort hired &#x27;eye in the sky&#x27; aerial photography of its competitors&#x27; parking lots to judge the success of its marketing initiatives as it developed starting in the 1950s.

The United States Department of Homeland Security is in the process of testing UAVs to patrol the skies over the United States for the purposes of critical infrastructure protection, border patrol, &quot;transit monitoring&quot;, and general surveillance of the U.S. population. Miami-Dade police department ran tests with a vertical take-off and landing UAV from Honeywell, which is planned to be used in SWAT operations. Houston&#x27;s police department has been testing fixed-wing UAVs for use in &quot;traffic control&quot;.

The United Kingdom, as well, is working on plans to build up a fleet of surveillance UAVs ranging from micro-aerial vehicles to full-size drones, to be used by police forces throughout the U.K.

In addition to their surveillance capabilities, MAVs are capable of carrying tasers for &quot;crowd control&quot;, or weapons for killing enemy combatants.

Programs such as the Heterogeneous Aerial Reconnaissance Team program developed by DARPA have automated much of the aerial surveillance process. They have developed systems consisting of large teams drone planes that pilot themselves, automatically decide who is &quot;suspicious&quot; and how to go about monitoring them, coordinate their activities with other drones nearby, and notify human operators if something suspicious is occurring. This greatly increases the amount of area that can be continuously monitored, while reducing the number of human operators required. Thus a swarm of automated, self-directing drones can automatically patrol a city and track suspicious individuals, reporting their activities back to a centralized monitoring station.
In addition, researchers also investigate possibilities of autonomous surveillance by large groups of micro aerial vehicles stabilized by decentralized bio-inspired swarming rules.

===Corporate===

Corporate surveillance is the monitoring of a person or group&#x27;s behavior by a corporation. The data collected is most often used for marketing purposes or sold to other corporations, but is also regularly shared with government agencies. It can be used as a form of business intelligence, which enables the corporation to better tailor their products and/or services to be desirable by their customers. Although there is a common belief that monitoring can increase productivity, it can also create consequences such as increasing chances of deviant behavior and creating punishments that are not equitable to their actions. Additionally, monitoring can cause resistance and backlash because it insinuates an employer&#x27;s suspicion and lack of trust.

===Data mining and profiling===
Data mining is the application of statistical techniques and programmatic algorithms to discover previously unnoticed relationships within the data. Data profiling in this context is the process of assembling information about a particular individual or group in order to generate a profile — that is, a picture of their patterns and behavior. Data profiling can be an extremely powerful tool for psychological and social network analysis. A skilled analyst can discover facts about a person that they might not even be consciously aware of themselves.

Economic (such as credit card purchases) and social (such as telephone calls and emails) transactions in modern society create large amounts of stored data and records. In the past, this data was documented in paper records, leaving a &quot;paper trail&quot;, or was simply not documented at all. Correlation of paper-based records was a laborious process—it required human intelligence operators to manually dig through documents, which was time-consuming and incomplete, at best.

But today many of these records are electronic, resulting in an &quot;electronic trail&quot;. Every use of a bank machine, payment by credit card, use of a phone card, call from home, checked out library book, rented video, or otherwise complete recorded transaction generates an electronic record. Public records—such as birth, court, tax and other records—are increasingly being digitized and made available online. In addition, due to laws like CALEA, web traffic and online purchases are also available for profiling. Electronic record-keeping makes data easily collectable, storable, and accessible—so that high-volume, efficient aggregation and analysis is possible at significantly lower costs.

Information relating to many of these individual transactions is often easily available because it is generally not guarded in isolation, since the information, such as the title of a movie a person has rented, might not seem sensitive. However, when many such transactions are aggregated they can be used to assemble a detailed profile revealing the actions, habits, beliefs, locations frequented, social connections, and preferences of the individual. This profile is then used, by programs such as ADVISE and TALON, to determine whether the person is a military, criminal, or political threat.

In addition to its own aggregation and profiling tools, the government is able to access information from third parties—for example, banks, credit companies or employers, etc.—by requesting access informally, by compelling access through the use of subpoenas or other procedures, or by purchasing data from commercial data aggregators or data brokers. The United States has spent $370 million on its 43 planned fusion centers, which are national network of surveillance centers that are located in over 30 states. The centers will collect and analyze vast amounts of data on U.S. citizens. It will get this data by consolidating personal information from sources such as state driver&#x27;s licensing agencies, hospital records, criminal records, school records, credit bureaus, banks, etc.—and placing this information in a centralized database that can be accessed from all of the centers, as well as other federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies.

Under &quot;United States v. Miller&quot; (1976), data held by third parties is generally not subject to Fourth Amendment warrant requirements.

===Human operatives===
A tail may surreptitiously track and report on the movements and contacts of a person of interest. Such following by one or more people may provide useful in formation in relatively densely populated urban environments.

Organizations that have enemies who wish to gather information about the groups&#x27; members or activities face the issue of potential infiltration.

In addition to operatives&#x27; infiltrating an organization, the surveilling party may exert pressure on certain members of the target organization to act as informants (i.e., to disclose the information they hold on the organization and its members).

Fielding operatives is very expensive, and governments with wide-reaching electronic surveillance tools at their disposal, rather than gathering the sort of information which operatives can provide, may use less problematic forms of surveillance—such as those mentioned above. Nevertheless, the use of human infiltrators remains common. For instance, in 2007 documents surfaced showing that the FBI planned to field a total of 15,000 undercover agents and informants in response to an anti-terrorism directive (issued by President George W. Bush in 2004) that ordered intelligence and law-enforcement agencies to increase their HUMINT capabilities.

In some home invasion cases, thieves may use &quot;” to determine if a victim&#x27;s property such as a collection of firearms are worth stealing.

===Satellite imagery===

On May 25, 2007, the U.S. Director of National Intelligence Michael McConnell authorized the National Applications Office (NAO) of the Department of Homeland Security to allow local, state, and domestic Federal agencies to access imagery from military intelligence Reconnaissance satellites and Reconnaissance aircraft sensors which can now be used to observe the activities of U.S. citizens. The satellites and aircraft sensors will be able to penetrate cloud cover, detect chemical traces, and identify objects in buildings and &quot;underground bunkers&quot;, and will provide real-time video at much higher resolutions than the still-images produced by programs such as Google Earth.

===Identification and credentials===
One of the simplest forms of identification is the carrying of credentials. Some nations have an identity card system to aid identification, whilst others are considering it but face public opposition. Other documents, such as passports, driver&#x27;s licenses, library cards, banking or credit cards are also used to verify identity.

If the form of the identity card is &quot;machine-readable&quot;, usually using an encoded magnetic stripe or identification number (such as a Social Security number), it corroborates the subject&#x27;s identifying data. In this case it may create an electronic trail when it is checked and scanned, which can be used in profiling, as mentioned above.

===Wireless tracking===
This section refers to methods that involve the monitoring of tracking devices through the aid of wireless signals.

====Mobile phones====
Mobile carrier antennas are also commonly used to collect geolocation data on mobile phones. The geographical location of a powered mobile phone (and thus the person carrying it) can be determined easily (whether it is being used or not), using a technique known as multilateration to calculate the differences in time for a signal to travel from the cell phone to each of several cell towers near the owner of the phone. Dr. Victor Kappeler of Eastern Kentucky University indicates that police surveillance is a strong concern, stating the following statistics from 2013:

A comparatively new off-the-shelf surveillance device is an IMSI-catcher, a telephone eavesdropping device used to intercept mobile phone traffic and track the movement of mobile phone users. Essentially a &quot;fake&quot; mobile tower acting between the target mobile phone and the service provider&#x27;s real towers, it is considered a man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack. IMSI-catchers are used in some countries by law enforcement and intelligence agencies, but their use has raised significant civil liberty and privacy concerns and is strictly regulated in some countries.

In March 2020, British daily The Guardian, based on the claims of a whistleblower, accused the government of Saudi Arabia of exploiting global mobile telecom network weaknesses to spy on its citizens traveling around the United States. The data shared by the whistleblower in support of the claims, showed that a systematic spying campaign was being run by the kingdom exploiting the flaws of SS7, a global messaging system. The data showed that millions of secret tracking commands originated from Saudi in a duration of four-months, starting from November 2019.

====RFID tagging====
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) tagging is the use of very small electronic devices (called &quot;RFID tags&quot;) which are applied to or incorporated into a product, animal, or person for the purpose of identification and tracking using radio waves. The tags can be read from several meters away. They are extremely inexpensive, costing a few cents per piece, so they can be inserted into many types of everyday products without significantly increasing the price, and can be used to track and identify these objects for a variety of purposes.

Some companies appear to be &quot;tagging&quot; their workers by incorporating RFID tags in employee ID badges. Workers in U.K. considered strike action in protest of having themselves tagged; they felt that it was dehumanizing to have all of their movements tracked with RFID chips. Some critics have expressed fears that people will soon be tracked and scanned everywhere they go. On the other hand, RFID tags in newborn baby ID bracelets put on by hospitals have foiled kidnappings.

In a 2003 editorial, CNET News.com&#x27;s chief political correspondent, Declan McCullagh, speculated that, soon, every object that is purchased, and perhaps ID cards, will have RFID devices in them, which would respond with information about people as they walk past scanners (what type of phone they have, what type of shoes they have on, which books they are carrying, what credit cards or membership cards they have, etc.). This information could be used for identification, tracking, or targeted marketing. , this has largely not come to pass.

====RFID tagging on humans====


A human microchip implant is an identifying integrated circuit device or RFID transponder encased in silicate glass and implanted in the body of a human being. A subdermal implant typically contains a unique ID number that can be linked to information contained in an external database, such as personal identification, medical history, medications, allergies, and contact information.

Several types of microchips have been developed in order to control and monitor certain types of people, such as criminals, political figures and spies, a &quot;killer&quot; tracking chip patent was filed at the German Patent and Trademark Office (DPMA) around May 2009.

Verichip is an RFID device produced by a company called Applied Digital Solutions (ADS). Verichip is slightly larger than a grain of rice, and is injected under the skin. The injection reportedly feels similar to receiving a shot. The chip is encased in glass, and stores a &quot;VeriChip Subscriber Number&quot; which the scanner uses to access their personal information, via the Internet, from Verichip Inc.&#x27;s database, the &quot;Global VeriChip Subscriber Registry&quot;. Thousands of people have already had them inserted. In Mexico, for example, 160 workers at the Attorney General&#x27;s office were required to have the chip injected for identity verification and access control purposes.

Implantable microchips have also been used in healthcare settings, but ethnographic researchers have identified a number of ethical problems with such uses; these problems include unequal treatment, diminished trust, and possible endangerment of patients.

===Radar===

===Geolocation devices===
====Global Positioning System====


In the U.S., police have planted hidden GPS tracking devices in people&#x27;s vehicles to monitor their movements, without a warrant. In early 2009, they were arguing in court that they have the right to do this.

Several cities are running pilot projects to require parolees to wear GPS devices to track their movements when they get out of prison.

===Devices===

Covert listening devices and video devices, or &quot;bugs&quot;, are hidden electronic devices which are used to capture, record, and/or transmit data to a receiving party such as a law enforcement agency.

The U.S. has run numerous domestic intelligence operations, such as COINTELPRO, which have bugged the homes, offices, and vehicles of thousands of U.S. citizens, usually political activists, subversives, and criminals.

Law enforcement and intelligence services in the U.K. and the United States possess technology to remotely activate the microphones in cell phones, by accessing the phone&#x27;s diagnostic/maintenance features, in order to listen to conversations that take place nearby the person who holds the phone.

===Postal services===
As more people use faxes and e-mail the significance of surveilling the postal system is decreasing, in favor of Internet and telephone surveillance. But interception of post is still an available option for law enforcement and intelligence agencies, in certain circumstances. This is not a common practice, however, and entities like the US Army require high levels of approval to conduct.

The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and Federal Bureau of Investigation have performed twelve separate mail-opening campaigns targeted towards U.S. citizens. In one of these programs, more than 215,000 communications were intercepted, opened, and photographed.

===Stakeout===

A stakeout is the coordinated surveillance of a location or person. Stakeouts are generally performed covertly and for the purpose of gathering evidence related to criminal activity. The term derives from the practice by land surveyors of using survey stakes to measure out an area before the main building project begins.

===Internet of things===
The Internet of Things (IoT), is a network of physical devices. These devices can collect data to one another without human intervention. IoTs can be used for identification, monitoring, location tracking, and health tracking. While IoTs can be used as time-saving tools that make activities simpler, they raise the concern of government surveillance and privacy regarding how data will be used.

==Controversy==
===Support===

Supporters of surveillance systems believe that these tools can help protect society from terrorists and criminals. They argue that surveillance can reduce crime by three means: by deterrence, by observation, and by reconstruction. Surveillance can deter by increasing the chance of being caught, and by revealing the modus operandi. This requires a minimal level of invasiveness.

Another method on how surveillance can be used to fight criminal activity is by linking the information stream obtained from them to a recognition system (for instance, a camera system that has its feed run through a facial recognition system). This can for instance auto-recognize fugitives and direct police to their location.

A distinction here has to be made however on the type of surveillance employed. Some people that support video surveillance in city streets may not support indiscriminate telephone taps and vice versa. Besides the types, the way in which this surveillance is done also matters a lot; i.e. indiscriminate telephone taps are supported by much fewer people than say telephone taps done only to people suspected of engaging in illegal activities.

Surveillance can also be used to give human operatives a tactical advantage through improved situational awareness, or through the use of automated processes, i.e. video analytics. Surveillance can help reconstruct an incident and prove guilt through the availability of footage for forensics experts. Surveillance can also influence subjective security if surveillance resources are visible or if the consequences of surveillance can be felt.

Some of the surveillance systems (such as the camera system that has its feed run through a facial recognition system mentioned above) can also have other uses besides countering criminal activity. For instance, it can help in retrieving runaway children, abducted or missing adults and mentally disabled people. 
Other supporters simply believe that there is nothing that can be done about the loss of privacy, and that people must become accustomed to having no privacy. As Sun Microsystems CEO Scott McNealy said: &quot;You have zero privacy anyway. Get over it.&quot;

Another common argument is: &quot;If you aren&#x27;t doing something wrong then you don&#x27;t have anything to fear.&quot; That is, one does not have a right to privacy regarding illegal activities, while those following the law suffer no harm from surveillance and so have no standing to object to it. Beyond the heroically self-serving identification of what is wrong with what is illegal, the ethical fly in this ointment is the tacit premise that the individual has no duty to preserve the health of the state—the antithesis of the principle that only the consent of the governed can adequately serve as the moral foundation of a (just) state and warrant the vast gulf between its power (and agency) and that of the individual. 

===Opposition===

With the advent of programs such as the Total Information Awareness program and ADVISE, technologies such as high speed surveillance computers and biometrics software, and laws such as the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act, governments now possess an unprecedented ability to monitor the activities of their subjects. Many civil rights and privacy groups, such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and American Civil Liberties Union, have expressed concern that by allowing continual increases in government surveillance of citizens we will end up in a mass surveillance society, with extremely limited, or non-existent political and/or personal freedoms. Fears such as this have led to numerous lawsuits such as &quot;Hepting v. AT&amp;T&quot;.

Some critics state that the claim made by supporters should be modified to read: &quot;As long as we do what we&#x27;re told, we have nothing to fear.&quot; For instance, a person who is part of a political group which opposes the policies of the national government, might not want the government to know their names and what they have been reading, so that the government cannot easily subvert their organization, arrest, or kill them. Other critics state that while a person might not have anything to hide right now, the government might later implement policies that they do wish to oppose, and that opposition might then be impossible due to mass surveillance enabling the government to identify and remove political threats. Further, other critics point to the fact that most people &quot;do&quot; have things to hide. For example, if a person is looking for a new job, they might not want their current employer to know this. Also if an employer wishes total privacy to watch over their own employee and secure their financial information it may become impossible, and they may not wish to hire those under surveillance.

In December 2017, the Government of China took steps to oppose widespread surveillance by security-company cameras, webcams, and IP cameras after tens-of-thousands were made accessible for internet viewing by IT company Qihoo

====Totalitarianism====
Programs such as the Total Information Awareness program, and laws such as the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act have led many groups to fear that society is moving towards a state of mass surveillance with severely limited personal, social, political freedoms, where dissenting individuals or groups will be strategically removed in COINTELPRO-like purges.

Kate Martin, of the Center For National Security Studies said of the use of military spy satellites being used to monitor the activities of U.S. citizens: &quot;They are laying the bricks one at a time for a police state.&quot;

Some point to the blurring of lines between public and private places, and the privatization of places traditionally seen as public (such as shopping malls and industrial parks) as illustrating the increasing legality of collecting personal information. Traveling through many public places such as government offices is hardly optional for most people, yet consumers have little choice but to submit to companies&#x27; surveillance practices. Surveillance techniques are not created equal; among the many biometric identification technologies, for instance, face recognition requires the least cooperation. Unlike automatic fingerprint reading, which requires an individual to press a finger against a machine, this technique is subtle and requires little to no consent.

====Psychological/social effects====

Some critics, such as Michel Foucault, believe that in addition to its obvious function of identifying and capturing individuals who are committing undesirable acts, surveillance also functions to create in everyone a feeling of always being watched, so that they become self-policing. This allows the State to control the populace without having to resort to physical force, which is expensive and otherwise problematic.

With the development of digital technology, individuals have become increasingly perceptible to one another, as surveillance becomes virtual. Online surveillance is the utilization of the internet to observe one&#x27;s activity. Corporations, citizens, and governments participate in tracking others&#x27; behaviours for motivations that arise out of business relations, to curiosity, to legality. In her book &quot;Superconnected&quot;, Mary Chayko differentiates between two types of surveillance: vertical and horizontal. Vertical surveillance occurs when there is a dominant force, such as the government that is attempting to control or regulate the actions of a given society. Such powerful authorities often justify their incursions as a means to protect society from threats of violence or terrorism. Some individuals question when this becomes an infringement on civil rights.

Horizontal diverges from vertical surveillance as the tracking shifts from an authoritative source to an everyday figure, such as a friend, coworker, or stranger that is interested in one&#x27;s mundane activities. Individuals leave traces of information when they are online that reveal their interests and desires of which others observe. While this can allow people to become interconnected and develop social connections online, it can also increase potential risk to harm, such as cyberbullying or censoring/stalking by strangers, reducing privacy.

In addition, Simone Browne argues that surveillance wields an immense racializing quality such that it operates as &quot;racializing surveillance.&quot; Browne uses racializing surveillance to refer to moments when enactments of surveillance are used to reify boundaries, borders, and bodies along racial lines and where the outcome is discriminatory treatment of those who are negatively racialized by such surveillance. Browne argues racializing surveillance pertains to policing what is &quot;in or out of place.&quot;

====Privacy====
Numerous civil rights groups and privacy groups oppose surveillance as a violation of people&#x27;s right to privacy. Such groups include: Electronic Privacy Information Center, Electronic Frontier Foundation, American Civil Liberties Union and Privacy International.

There have been several lawsuits such as &quot;Hepting v. AT&amp;T&quot; and &quot;EPIC v. Department of Justice&quot; by groups or individuals, opposing certain surveillance activities.

Legislative proceedings such as those that took place during the Church Committee, which investigated domestic intelligence programs such as COINTELPRO, have also weighed the pros and cons of surveillance.

==== Court cases ====

&quot;People vs. Diaz&quot; (2011) was a court case in the realm of cell phone privacy, even though the decision was later overturned. In this case, Gregory Diaz was arrested during a sting operation for attempting to sell ecstasy. During his arrest, police searched Diaz&#x27;s phone and found more incriminating evidence including SMS text messages and photographs depicting illicit activities. During his trial, Diaz attempted to have the information from his cell phone removed from evidence, but the courts deemed it as lawful and Diaz&#x27;s appeal was denied on the California State Court level and, later, the Supreme Court level. Just three short years after, this decision was overturned in the case &quot;Riley vs. California&quot; (2014).

&quot;Riley vs. California&quot; (2014) was a U.S. Supreme Court case in which a man was arrested for his involvement in a drive-by shooting. A few days after the shooting the police made an arrest of the suspect (Riley), and, during the arrest, the police searched him. However, this search was not only of Riley&#x27;s person, but also the police opened and searched his cell phone, finding pictures of other weapons, drugs, and of Riley showing gang signs. In court, the question arose whether searching the phone was lawful or if the search was protected by the 4th amendment of the constitution. The decision held that the search of Riley&#x27;s cell phone during the arrest was illegal, and that it was protected by the 4th Amendment.

==Countersurveillance, inverse surveillance, sousveillance==
Countersurveillance is the practice of avoiding surveillance or making surveillance difficult. Developments in the late twentieth century have caused counter surveillance to dramatically grow in both scope and complexity, such as the Internet, increasing prevalence of electronic security systems, high-altitude (and possibly armed) UAVs, and large corporate and government computer databases. Other examples include encrypted messenger apps such as Signal and privacy cryptocurrencies such as Monero and ZCash.

Inverse surveillance is the practice of the reversal of surveillance on other individuals or groups (e.g., citizens photographing police). Well-known examples include George Holliday&#x27;s recording of the Rodney King beating and the organization Copwatch, which attempts to monitor police officers to prevent police brutality. Counter-surveillance can be also used in applications to prevent corporate spying, or to track other criminals by certain criminal entities. It can also be used to deter stalking methods used by various entities and organizations.

&quot;Sousveillance&quot; is inverse surveillance, involving the recording by private individuals, rather than government or corporate entities.

==Popular culture==
===In literature===
* George Orwell&#x27;s novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot; portrays a fictional totalitarian surveillance society with a very simple mass surveillance system consisting of human operatives, informants, and two-way &quot;telescreens&quot; in people&#x27;s homes. Because of the impact of this book, mass-surveillance technologies are commonly called &quot;Orwellian&quot; when considered problematic.
* The book &quot;The Handmaid&#x27;s Tale&quot;, as well as a film and TV series based on it, portray a totalitarian Christian theocracy where all citizens are kept under constant surveillance.
* In the book &quot;The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo&quot;, Lisbeth Salander uses computers to get information on people, as well as other standard surveillance methods, as a freelancer.
* &quot;V for Vendetta,&quot; a British graphic novel written by Alan Moore
* David Egger&#x27;s novel &quot;The Circle&quot; exhibits a world where a single company called &quot;The Circle&quot; produces all of the latest and highest quality technologies from computers and smartphones, to surveillance cameras known as &quot;See-Change cameras&quot;. This company became associated with politics when it started a movement where politicians went &quot;transparent&quot; by wearing See-Change cameras to prevent the public from keeping secrets about their daily work activity. In this society, sharing personal information and experiences becomes mandatory because The Circle believes everyone should have access to all information freely. However, as Eggers illustrates, this takes a toll on the individuals and disrupts power between governments and private companies. The Circle presents extreme ideologies surrounding mandatory surveillance. Eamon Bailey, one of the Wise Men, or founders of The Circle, believes that possessing the tools to access information about anything or anyone, should be a human right given to all of the world&#x27;s citizens. By eliminating all secrets, any behaviour that has been deemed shameful will either become normalized or no longer considered shocking. Negative actions will eventually be eradicated from society altogether, through the fear of being exposed to other citizens This would be achieved partly by everyone going transparent, which Bailey highly supports. However, none of the Wise Men ever became transparent themselves. One primary goal of The Circle is to have all of the world&#x27;s information filtered through The Circle, a process they call &quot;Completion&quot;. A single, private company would then have full access and control over all information and privacy of individuals and governments. Ty Gospodinov, the first founder of The Circle, has significant concerns about the completion of the circle. He warns that this step would give The Circle too much power and control, quickly leading to totalitarianism.

===In music===
* The Dead Kennedys&#x27; song &quot;I Am The Owl&quot; is about government surveillance and social engineering of political groups.
* The Vienna Teng song &quot;Hymn of Acxiom&quot; is about corporate data collection and surveillance.

===Onscreen===
* The film &quot;Gattaca&quot; portrays a society that uses biometric surveillance to distinguish between people who are genetically engineered &quot;superior&quot; humans and genetically natural &quot;inferior&quot; humans.
* In the movie &quot;Minority Report&quot;, the police and government intelligence agencies use micro aerial vehicles in SWAT operations and for surveillance purposes.
* HBO&#x27;s crime-drama series &quot;The Sopranos&quot; regularly portrays the FBI&#x27;s surveillance of the DiMeo Crime Family. Audio devices they use include &quot;bugs&quot; placed in strategic locations (e.g., in &quot;I Dream of Jeannie Cusamano&quot; and &quot;Mr. Ruggerio&#x27;s Neighborhood&quot;) and hidden microphones worn by operatives (e.g., in &quot;Rat Pack&quot;) and informants (e.g., in &quot;Funhouse&quot;, &quot;Proshai, Livushka&quot; and &quot;Members Only&quot;). Visual devices include hidden still cameras (e.g., in &quot;Pax Soprana&quot;) and video cameras (e.g., in &quot;Long Term Parking&quot;).
* The movie &quot;THX-1138&quot; portrays a society wherein people are drugged with sedatives and antidepressants, and have surveillance cameras watching them everywhere they go.
* The movie &quot;The Lives of Others&quot; portrays the monitoring of East Berlin by agents of the Stasi, the GDR&#x27;s secret police.
* The movie &quot;The Conversation&quot; portrays many methods of audio surveillance.
* The movie &quot;V for Vendetta&quot;, a 2005 dystopian political thriller film directed by James McTeigue and written by the Wachowskis, is about British government trying to brainwash people by media, obtain their support by fearmongering, monitor them by mass surveillance devices, and suppress or kill any political or social objection.
* The movie &quot;Enemy of the State&quot; a 1998 American action-thriller film directed by Tony Scott is about using U.S. citizens&#x27; data to search their background and surveillance devices to capture everyone that is identified as &quot;enemy&quot;.
*The British TV series &quot;The Capture&quot; explores the potential for video surveillance to be manipulated in order to support a conviction to pursue a political agenda.

==See also==
* Computer and network surveillance 
* Mass surveillance
* Sousveillance 
* Surveillance aircraft 
* Surveillance art
* Surveillance capitalism
* Surveillance system monitor
* Trapwire
* Participatory surveillance
* PRISM (surveillance program)
* The Age of Surveillance Capitalism
* Vulkan files leak
* Surveillance in New Zealand
* Surveillance in the Ottoman Empire

==References==
==Further reading==
* Allmer, Thomas. (2012). &quot;Towards a Critical Theory of Surveillance in Informational Capitalism&quot;. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. 
* Andrejevic, Mark. 2007. &quot;iSpy: Surveillance and Power in the Interactive Era&quot;. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. 
* Ball, Kirstie, Kevin D. Haggerty, and David Lyon, eds. (2012). &quot;Routledge Handbook of Surveillance Studies&quot;. New York: Routledge. 
* Brayne, Sarah. (2020). &quot;Predict and Surveil: Data, Discretion, and the Future of Policing&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Browne, Simone. (2015). &quot;Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness&quot;. Durham: Duke University Press. 
* Coleman, Roy, and Michael McCahill. 2011. &quot;Surveillance &amp; Crime&quot;. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage. 
* Feldman, Jay. (2011). &quot;Manufacturing Hysteria: A History of Scapegoating, Surveillance, and Secrecy in Modern America&quot;. New York, NY: Pantheon Books. 
* Fuchs, Christian, Kees Boersma, Anders Albrechtslund, and Marisol Sandoval, eds. (2012). &quot;Internet and Surveillance: The Challenges of Web 2.0 and Social Media&quot;. New York: Routledge. 
* Garfinkel, Simson, &quot;Database Nation; The Death of Privacy in the 21st Century&quot;. O&#x27;Reilly &amp; Associates, Inc. 
* Gilliom, John. (2001). &quot;Overseers of the Poor: Surveillance, Resistance, and the Limits of Privacy&quot;, University Of Chicago Press, 
* Haque, Akhlaque. (2015). Surveillance, Transparency and Democracy: Public Administration in the Information Age. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa, AL. 
* Harris, Shane. (2011). &quot;The Watchers: The Rise of America&#x27;s Surveillance State&quot;. London, UK: Penguin Books Ltd. 
* Hier, Sean P., &amp; Greenberg, Joshua (Eds.). (2009). &quot;Surveillance: Power, Problems, and Politics&quot;. Vancouver, CA: UBC Press. 
* Jensen, Derrick and Draffan, George (2004) &quot;Welcome to the Machine: Science, Surveillance, and the Culture of Control&quot; Chelsea Green Publishing Company. 
* Lewis, Randolph. (2017). &quot;Under Surveillance: Being Watched in Modern America&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
* Lyon, David (2001). &quot;Surveillance Society: Monitoring in Everyday Life&quot;. Philadelphia: Open University Press. 
* Lyon, David (Ed.). (2006). &quot;Theorizing Surveillance: The Panopticon and Beyond&quot;. Cullompton, UK: Willan Publishing. 
* Lyon, David (2007) &quot;Surveillance Studies: An Overview&quot;. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
* Matteralt, Armand. (2010). &quot;The Globalization of Surveillance&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
* Monahan, Torin, ed. (2006). &quot;Surveillance and Security: Technological Politics and Power in Everyday Life&quot;. New York: Routledge. 
* Monahan, Torin. (2010). &quot;Surveillance in the Time of Insecurity&quot;. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
* Monahan, Torin, and David Murakami Wood, eds. (2018). &quot;Surveillance Studies: A Reader&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Parenti, Christian &quot;The Soft Cage: Surveillance in America From Slavery to the War on Terror&quot;, Basic Books, 
* Petersen, J.K. (2012) &quot;Handbook of Surveillance Technologies, Third Edition&quot;, Taylor &amp; Francis: CRC Press, 1020 pp., 
* Staples, William G. (2000). &quot;Everyday Surveillance: Vigilance and Visibility in Post-Modern Life&quot;. Lanham, MD: Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers. 
* Yan, W. (2019). &quot;Introduction to Intelligent Surveillance: Surveillance Data Capture, Transmission, and Analytics &quot;. Springer Publishers. 

===General information===
* (Volume 66, Number 3, July–August)
* ACLU, &quot;The Surveillance-Industrial Complex: How the American Government Is Conscripting Businesses and Individuals in the Construction of a Surveillance Society&quot;
* Balkin, Jack M. (2008). &quot;The Constitution in the National Surveillance State&quot;, Yale Law School
* Bibo, Didier and Delmas-Marty, &quot;The State and Surveillance: Fear and Control&quot;
* EFF Privacy Resources
* EPIC Privacy Resources
* ICO. (September 2006). &quot;A Report on the Surveillance Society for the Information Commissioner by the Surveillance Studies Network&quot;.
* Privacy Information Center 

===Historical information===
* COINTELPRO—FBI counterintelligence programs designed to neutralize political dissidents
* Reversing the Whispering Gallery of Dionysius – A Short History of Electronic Surveillance in the United States

===Legal resources===
*EFF Legal Cases
*Guide to lawful intercept legislation around the world

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="0" end="12" title="Surveillance" label="Surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="131" end="139" title="managing" label="managing"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="242" end="267" title="closed-circuit television" label="closed-circuit television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="339" end="355" title="Internet traffic" label="Internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="371" end="382" title="Government" label="governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278300" start="399" end="412" title="Customer data" label="consumer data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="607" end="635" title="Human intelligence (intelligence gathering)" label="human intelligence gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234048" start="640" end="659" title="postal interception" label="postal interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="766" end="776" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160650" start="1023" end="1042" title="Industrial espionage" label="gather intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="1100" end="1109" title="Religious" label="Religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="1147" end="1153" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="1158" end="1168" title="heterodoxy" label="heterodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10949665" start="1202" end="1209" title="Auditor" label="Auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="1299" end="1306" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="1334" end="1349" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="1361" end="1372" title="Democracies" label="Democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="1463" end="1476" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="1529" end="1538" title="Espionage" label="Espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="1751" end="1760" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="1911" end="1915" title="data mining" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="1920" end="1927" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1935" end="1943" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="1989" end="2038" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="2702" end="2707" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="2826" end="2829" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2835" end="2838" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="2859" end="2887" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q594062" start="2950" end="2959" title="Carnivore (FBI)" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q647506" start="2961" end="2973" title="Narus (company)" label="NarusInsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q217386" start="2979" end="2986" title="ECHELON" label="ECHELON"/>
<link wikidata="Q163751" start="3271" end="3284" title="Magic Lantern (spyware)" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122348" start="3289" end="3294" title="CIPAV" label="CIPAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q900897" start="3478" end="3495" title="van Eck phreaking" label="van Eck phreaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196571" start="3674" end="3681" title="Pinwale" label="Pinwale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420597" start="3826" end="3831" title="PRISM (surveillance program)" label="PRISM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388277" start="3937" end="3957" title="technology companies" label="technology companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4319" end="4332" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="4351" end="4400" title="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="4564" end="4592" title="telecommunications companies" label="telecommunications companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="4605" end="4618" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="4623" end="4630" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777765" start="4864" end="4888" title="National Security Letter" label="National Security Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="5128" end="5142" title="Speech-to-text" label="Speech-to-text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="5315" end="5343" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921363" start="5366" end="5372" title="Verint" label="Verint"/>
<link wikidata="Q647506" start="5378" end="5383" title="Narus (company)" label="Narus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617439" start="5799" end="5807" title="Stingray phone tracker" label="StingRay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317648" start="6089" end="6100" title="Mobile identification number" label="IMSI number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146298" start="6803" end="6818" title="multilateration" label="multilateration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="6918" end="6929" title="cell towers" label="cell towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="7308" end="7322" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="7393" end="7404" title="wiretapping" label="wiretapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="7594" end="7604" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="8203" end="8208" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="8292" end="8297" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="8565" end="8570" title="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act" label="CALEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="8773" end="8780" title="e-mails" label="e-mails"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="8785" end="8793" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="8827" end="8830" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q220798" start="9229" end="9267" title="Government Communications Headquarters" label="Government Communications Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="9679" end="9689" title="IP network" label="IP network"/>
<link wikidata="Q856887" start="9715" end="9729" title="security guard" label="security guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="9733" end="9756" title="law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="10000" end="10008" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907059" start="10050" end="10055" title="VIRAT" label="VIRAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="10060" end="10067" title="Human Identification at a Distance" label="HumanID"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113427" start="10591" end="10609" title="mass surveillance in China" label="China was reported"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="10776" end="10805" title="Facial recognition system" label="facial recognition technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10815" end="10828" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="10834" end="10865" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889538" start="10905" end="10929" title="Homeland Security grants" label="Homeland Security grants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="11042" end="11049" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097694" start="11297" end="11321" title="Operation Virtual Shield" label="Operation Virtual Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q539814" start="11355" end="11368" title="Richard M. Daley" label="Richard Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11457" end="11470" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236742" start="11532" end="11555" title="Domain Awareness System" label="Domain Awareness System"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906484" start="11704" end="11735" title="Artificial intelligence for video surveillance" label="artificial intelligence systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11745" end="11759" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087334" start="11968" end="11994" title="Freedom of Information Act 2000" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12376" end="12390" title="London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q272888" start="12724" end="12742" title="red-light district" label="red-light district"/>
<link wikidata="Q615446" start="12793" end="12814" title="Golden Shield Project" label="Golden Shield Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="12853" end="12856" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="12858" end="12874" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="12880" end="12889" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q904852" start="12926" end="12944" title="Politics of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13000" end="13005" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407599" start="13027" end="13042" title="video analytics" label="video analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="13608" end="13649" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150694" start="13695" end="13716" title="Combat Zones That See" label="Combat Zones That See"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="13988" end="14003" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909124" start="14052" end="14066" title="Identix Incorporated" label="Identix&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132995" start="14312" end="14327" title="Road traffic control" label="traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="14823" end="14832" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="14982" end="14997" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449930" start="14999" end="15007" title="Trapwire" label="Trapwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551269" start="15126" end="15141" title="Social network analysis" label="social networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="15161" end="15184" title="social networking sites" label="social networking sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="15193" end="15201" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="15203" end="15210" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="15212" end="15219" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="15236" end="15252" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907611" start="15310" end="15327" title="NSA call database" label="NSA call database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="15347" end="15361" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="15388" end="15398" title="data mining" label="data mined"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="15574" end="15615" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="15629" end="15653" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="15669" end="15700" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="15923" end="15933" title="terrorists" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="15935" end="15946" title="subversives" label="subversives"/>
<link wikidata="Q466439" start="15948" end="15958" title="extremists" label="extremists"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="15964" end="15974" title="dissidents" label="dissidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="16312" end="16340" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907611" start="16518" end="16535" title="NSA call database" label="NSA call database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="17870" end="17888" title="Facial recognition system" label="Facial recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="18070" end="18075" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="18142" end="18182" title="Information Processing Technology Office" label="Information Processing Technology Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="18206" end="18240" title="Human Identification at a Distance" label="Human Identification at a Distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185804" start="18395" end="18414" title="affective computing" label="affective computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="18849" end="18862" title="DNA profiling" label="DNA profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18347161" start="19274" end="19297" title="American football field" label="American football field"/>
<link wikidata="Q518031" start="19382" end="19407" title="Automatic number plate recognition" label="license plate recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q15757508" start="19953" end="19986" title="Ethics and Information Technology" label="Ethics and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="20816" end="20839" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="20841" end="20851" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q623344" start="20856" end="20865" title="surveillance aircraft" label="spy plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q623344" start="20876" end="20897" title="surveillance aircraft" label="surveillance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q773392" start="21153" end="21174" title="micro-aerial vehicles" label="micro-aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q682023" start="21176" end="21200" title="forward-looking infrared" label="forward-looking infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q816695" start="21308" end="21319" title="MQ-9 Reaper" label="MQ-9 Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="21376" end="21407" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q682023" start="21521" end="21545" title="forward-looking infrared" label="forward-looking infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220539" start="21683" end="21702" title="Killington Mountain" label="Killington Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="21898" end="21911" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="21912" end="21943" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q124345947" start="22041" end="22075" title="critical infrastructure protection" label="critical infrastructure protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q508378" start="22098" end="22116" title="Intelligent transportation system" label="transit monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="22258" end="22267" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q324563" start="22300" end="22304" title="SWAT" label="SWAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22428" end="22442" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q773392" start="22527" end="22548" title="micro-aerial vehicles" label="micro-aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="22562" end="22568" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9137247" start="22696" end="22701" title="taser" label="taser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872073" start="22713" end="22726" title="crowd control" label="crowd control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747201" start="22797" end="22837" title="Heterogeneous Aerial Reconnaissance Team" label="Heterogeneous Aerial Reconnaissance Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="22859" end="22864" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353185" start="24005" end="24026" title="business intelligence" label="business intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="24526" end="24537" title="Data mining" label="Data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172167" start="24675" end="24689" title="Data profiling" label="Data profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551269" start="24941" end="24964" title="social network analysis" label="social network analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="25231" end="25235" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q181487" start="25321" end="25332" title="paper trail" label="paper trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q845916" start="25633" end="25649" title="Digital footprint" label="electronic trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="26011" end="26016" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="CALEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071343" start="26544" end="26554" title="government databases" label="aggregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551269" start="26665" end="26683" title="social network analysis" label="social connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q290716" start="26767" end="26773" title="ADVISE" label="ADVISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525917" start="26778" end="26783" title="TALON (database)" label="TALON"/>
<link wikidata="Q943505" start="27275" end="27289" title="fusion centers" label="fusion centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893395" start="27837" end="27860" title="United States v. Miller" label="United States v. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="27930" end="27946" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388641" start="27995" end="27999" title="tailing (disambiguation)" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="28524" end="28534" title="informants" label="informants"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038047" start="28704" end="28722" title="surveillance tools" label="surveillance tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="29014" end="29017" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="29150" end="29164" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="29247" end="29253" title="HUMINT" label="HUMINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560381" start="29277" end="29290" title="home invasion" label="home invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="29387" end="29394" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154057" start="29468" end="29501" title="Director of National Intelligence" label="Director of National Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379781" start="29502" end="29519" title="John Michael McConnell" label="Michael McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336833" start="29535" end="29563" title="National Applications Office" label="National Applications Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="29577" end="29608" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="29685" end="29706" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="29707" end="29731" title="Reconnaissance satellite" label="Reconnaissance satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="29737" end="29760" title="Reconnaissance aircraft" label="Reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q42274" start="30116" end="30128" title="Google Earth" label="Google Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="30265" end="30278" title="Identity document" label="identity card"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="30395" end="30403" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="30406" end="30427" title="driver&amp;#x27;s license" label="driver&amp;#x27;s license"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367654" start="30430" end="30442" title="library card" label="library card"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="30456" end="30467" title="credit card" label="credit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612679" start="30647" end="30669" title="Social Security number" label="Social Security number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420972" start="30943" end="30958" title="tracking device" label="tracking device"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146298" start="31286" end="31301" title="multilateration" label="multilateration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="31401" end="31412" title="cell towers" label="cell towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423310" start="31654" end="31666" title="IMSI-catcher" label="IMSI-catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="31670" end="31693" title="Telephone tapping" label="telephone eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332343" start="31817" end="31829" title="cell site" label="mobile tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="31933" end="31950" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="32010" end="32025" title="law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="32030" end="32051" title="Intelligence agency" label="intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="32200" end="32212" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="32239" end="32252" title="whistleblower" label="whistleblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="32280" end="32292" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="32392" end="32405" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="32495" end="32501" title="spying" label="spying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139465" start="32564" end="32567" title="Signalling System No. 7" label="SS7"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="32757" end="32787" title="Radio-frequency identification" label="Radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="33449" end="33462" title="strike action" label="strike action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495037" start="33525" end="33537" title="dehumanisation" label="dehumanizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="34289" end="34307" title="targeted marketing" label="targeted marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="34453" end="34457" title="RFID" label="RFID"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="34481" end="34495" title="silicate glass" label="silicate glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660337" start="34542" end="34559" title="subdermal implant" label="subdermal implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557259" start="35039" end="35047" title="Verichip" label="Verichip"/>
<link wikidata="Q245359" start="35264" end="35268" title="Injection (medicine)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q228502" start="35716" end="35730" title="access control" label="access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="36114" end="36117" title="Global positioning system" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="36440" end="36463" title="Covert listening device" label="Covert listening device"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="36715" end="36725" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="36817" end="36836" title="political activists" label="political activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="36838" end="36849" title="subversives" label="subversives"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="36855" end="36864" title="criminals" label="criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="37593" end="37620" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="37625" end="37656" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="38007" end="38015" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="38027" end="38044" title="criminal activity" label="criminal activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="38084" end="38097" title="land surveyor" label="land surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q811934" start="38108" end="38121" title="survey stakes" label="survey stakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="38216" end="38234" title="Internet of Things" label="Internet of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="38730" end="38740" title="terrorists" label="terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="38745" end="38754" title="criminals" label="criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="38958" end="38972" title="modus operandi" label="modus operandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407599" start="39960" end="39975" title="video analytics" label="video analytics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="40717" end="40733" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668164" start="40738" end="40751" title="Scott McNealy" label="Scott McNealy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627872" start="40848" end="40930" title="nothing to hide argument" label="If you aren&amp;#x27;t doing something wrong then you don&amp;#x27;t have anything to fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156611" start="41607" end="41634" title="Total Information Awareness" label="Total Information Awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q290716" start="41647" end="41653" title="ADVISE" label="ADVISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q647506" start="41676" end="41709" title="NarusInsight" label="high speed surveillance computers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41714" end="41724" title="Surveillance#Biometric" label="biometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="41756" end="41805" title="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="41906" end="41918" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="41923" end="41930" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="41951" end="41981" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="41986" end="42016" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="42137" end="42154" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732094" start="42303" end="42322" title="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T" label="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427360" start="43590" end="43599" title="IP camera" label="IP camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267707" start="43681" end="43686" title="Qihoo" label="Qihoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156611" start="43733" end="43760" title="Total Information Awareness" label="Total Information Awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="43791" end="43840" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="43912" end="43929" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="44062" end="44072" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="44822" end="44831" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="44875" end="44891" title="face recognition" label="face recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="45149" end="45164" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q64748175" start="45988" end="45999" title="Mary Chayko" label="Mary Chayko"/>
<link wikidata="Q494348" start="46923" end="46936" title="cyberbullying" label="cyberbullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q52493422" start="47005" end="47018" title="Simone Browne" label="Simone Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="47540" end="47552" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="47564" end="47571" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383251" start="47670" end="47707" title="Electronic Privacy Information Center" label="Electronic Privacy Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="47709" end="47739" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="47741" end="47771" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q72781" start="47776" end="47797" title="Privacy International" label="Privacy International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732094" start="47847" end="47866" title="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T" label="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323883" start="47883" end="47912" title="EPIC v. Department of Justice" label="EPIC v. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089721" start="48053" end="48069" title="Church Committee" label="Church Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="48129" end="48139" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166020" start="48218" end="48252" title="People v. Diaz" label="&amp;quot;People vs. Diaz&amp;quot; (2011)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107826" start="48970" end="49009" title="Riley v. California" label="&amp;quot;Riley vs. California&amp;quot; (2014)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="49016" end="49034" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q281720" start="49773" end="49792" title="Countersurveillance" label="Countersurveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="50053" end="50069" title="security systems" label="security systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="50106" end="50110" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479702" start="50286" end="50306" title="Inverse surveillance" label="Inverse surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q338389" start="50453" end="50468" title="Rodney King" label="George Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q338389" start="50493" end="50504" title="Rodney King" label="Rodney King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996885" start="50534" end="50542" title="Copwatch" label="Copwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996993" start="50597" end="50613" title="police brutality" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479702" start="50853" end="50866" title="Sousveillance" label="Sousveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="51035" end="51048" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="51068" end="51088" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="51116" end="51128" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="51169" end="51186" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541914" start="51453" end="51477" title="The Handmaid&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Handmaid&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="51563" end="51572" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678288" start="51650" end="51681" title="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo" label="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191282" start="51689" end="51705" title="Lisbeth Salander" label="Lisbeth Salander"/>
<link wikidata="Q103411" start="51824" end="51838" title="V for Vendetta" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="51856" end="51869" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205739" start="51881" end="51891" title="Alan Moore" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q589497" start="51894" end="51912" title="Dave Eggers" label="David Egger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385288" start="51925" end="51935" title="The Circle (Eggers novel)" label="The Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="53876" end="53891" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="53915" end="53928" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q376934" start="54002" end="54020" title="Social engineering (security)" label="social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q453390" start="54048" end="54059" title="Vienna Teng" label="Vienna Teng"/>
<link wikidata="Q491800" start="54178" end="54185" title="Gattaca" label="Gattaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="54221" end="54230" title="biometric" label="biometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q244604" start="54407" end="54422" title="Minority Report (film)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q773392" start="54482" end="54503" title="micro aerial vehicles" label="micro aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q324563" start="54507" end="54511" title="SWAT" label="SWAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="54556" end="54559" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23628" start="54592" end="54604" title="The Sopranos" label="The Sopranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443156" start="54665" end="54683" title="DiMeo Crime Family" label="DiMeo Crime Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="54722" end="54726" title="Covert listening device" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435590" start="54779" end="54806" title="I Dream of Jeannie Cusamano" label="I Dream of Jeannie Cusamano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508175" start="54823" end="54855" title="Mr. Ruggerio&amp;#x27;s Neighborhood" label="Mr. Ruggerio&amp;#x27;s Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295391" start="54921" end="54929" title="Rat Pack (The Sopranos)" label="Rat Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q944740" start="54968" end="54976" title="Funhouse (The Sopranos)" label="Funhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508158" start="54990" end="55007" title="Proshai, Livushka" label="Proshai, Livushka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13514780" start="55024" end="55036" title="Members Only (The Sopranos)" label="Members Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151191" start="55068" end="55088" title="hidden cameras" label="hidden still cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442891" start="55105" end="55116" title="Pax Soprana" label="Pax Soprana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503495" start="55158" end="55175" title="Long Term Parking" label="Long Term Parking"/>
<link wikidata="Q783365" start="55202" end="55210" title="THX-1138" label="THX-1138"/>
<link wikidata="Q153882" start="55381" end="55400" title="The Lives of Others" label="The Lives of Others"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037" start="55434" end="55445" title="East Berlin" label="East Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="55463" end="55468" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="55474" end="55477" title="East Germany" label="GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009788" start="55518" end="55534" title="The Conversation" label="The Conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320769" start="55566" end="55584" title="Eavesdropping" label="audio surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5890" start="55604" end="55618" title="V for Vendetta (film)" label="V for Vendetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710026" start="55633" end="55642" title="List of dystopian films" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622291" start="55643" end="55666" title="Political thriller" label="political thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q456008" start="55679" end="55693" title="James McTeigue" label="James McTeigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="55709" end="55723" title="the Wachowskis" label="the Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177930" start="55946" end="55964" title="Enemy of the State (film)" label="Enemy of the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="55987" end="55993" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="55994" end="56007" title="thriller film" label="thriller film"/>
<link wikidata="Q193648" start="56020" end="56030" title="Tony Scott" label="Tony Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q67298293" start="56213" end="56224" title="The Capture (TV series)" label="The Capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q651476" start="56374" end="56407" title="Computer and network surveillance" label="Computer and network surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="56411" end="56428" title="Mass surveillance" label="Mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479702" start="56431" end="56444" title="Sousveillance" label="Sousveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623344" start="56448" end="56469" title="Surveillance aircraft" label="Surveillance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647047" start="56473" end="56489" title="Surveillance art" label="Surveillance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096967" start="56492" end="56515" title="Surveillance capitalism" label="Surveillance capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647056" start="56518" end="56545" title="Surveillance system monitor" label="Surveillance system monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449930" start="56548" end="56556" title="Trapwire" label="Trapwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790496" start="56559" end="56585" title="Participatory surveillance" label="Participatory surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420597" start="56588" end="56616" title="PRISM (surveillance program)" label="PRISM (surveillance program)"/>
<link wikidata="Q75804726" start="56619" end="56653" title="The Age of Surveillance Capitalism" label="The Age of Surveillance Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117349286" start="56656" end="56673" title="Vulkan files leak" label="Vulkan files leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q122363718" start="56676" end="56703" title="Surveillance in New Zealand" label="Surveillance in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136103" start="56706" end="56740" title="Surveillance in the Ottoman Empire" label="Surveillance in the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521264" start="57926" end="57943" title="Garfinkel, Simson" label="Garfinkel, Simson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199836" start="58631" end="58646" title="Jensen, Derrick" label="Jensen, Derrick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87233" wikidata="Q17011956" url="?curid=87233" title="Electronic tagging">
<text>Electronic tagging is a form of surveillance that uses an electronic device affixed to a person.

In some jurisdictions, an electronic tag fitted above the ankle is used for people as part of their bail or probation conditions. It is also used in healthcare settings and in immigration contexts. Electronic tagging can be used in combination with the global positioning system (GPS), but for short-range monitoring of a person that wears an electronic tag, radio frequency technology can be used.

== History ==
The electronic monitoring of humans found its first commercial applications in the 1980s. Portable transceivers that could record the location of volunteers were first developed by a group of researchers at Harvard University in the early 1960s. The researchers cited the psychological perspective of B. F. Skinner as underpinning for their academic project. The portable electronic tag was called &quot;behavior transmitter-reinforcer&quot; and could transmit data two-ways between a &quot;base station&quot; and a volunteer who simulated a &quot;young adult offender&quot;. Messages were supposed to be sent to the tag, so as to provide positive reinforcement to the young offender and thus assist in rehabilitation. The head of this research project was Ralph Kirkland Schwitzgebel and his twin brother collaborator, Robert Schwitzgebel (family name later shortened to Gable). The main base-station antenna was mounted on the roof of the Old Cambridge Baptist Church; the minister was the dean of the Harvard Divinity School.

Reviewers of the prototype electronic tagging strategy were sceptical. In 1966, the &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot; ridiculed the electronic tags as &quot;Schwitzgebel Machine&quot; and a myth emerged, according to which the prototype electronic tagging project used brain implants and transmitted verbal instructions to volunteers. The editor of a well-known U.S. government publication, &quot;Federal Probation&quot;, rejected a manuscript submitted by Ralph Kirkland Schwitzgebel, and included a letter which read in part: &quot;I get the impression from your article that we are going to make automatons out of our parolees and that the parole officer of the future will be an expert in telemetry, sitting at his large computer, receiving calls day and night, and telling his parolees what to do in all situations and circumstances [...] Perhaps we should also be thinking about using electronic devices to rear our children. Since they do not have built-in consciences to tell them right from wrong, all they would have to do is to push the &#x27;mother&#x27; button, and she would take over the responsibility for decision-making.&quot; Laurence Tribe in 1973 published information on the failed attempts by those involved in the project to find a commercial application for electronic tagging.

In the U.S., the 1970s saw an end of rehabilitative sentencing, including for example discretionary parole release. Those found guilty of a criminal offense were sent to prison, leading to sudden increase in the prison population. Probation became more common, as judges saw the potential of electronic tagging, leading to an increasing emphasis on surveillance. Advances in computer-aided technology made offender monitoring feasible and affordable. After all, the Schwitzgebel prototype had been built out of surplus missile tracking equipment. A collection of early electronic monitoring equipment is housed at the National Museum of Psychology in Akron, Ohio.

The attempt to monitor offenders became until, in 1982, Arizona state district judge, Jack Love, convinced a former sales representative of Honeywell Information Systems, Michael T. Goss, to start a monitoring company, National Incarceration Monitor and Control Services (NIMCOS). The NIMCOS company built several credit card-sized transmitters that could be strapped onto an ankle. The electronic ankle tag transmitted a radio signal every 60 seconds, which could be picked up by a receiver that was no more than away from the electronic tag. The receiver could be connected to a telephone, so that the data from the electronic ankle tag could be sent to a mainframe computer. The design aim of the electronic tag was the reporting of a potential home detention breach. In 1983, judge Jack Love in a state district court imposed home curfew on three offenders who had been sentenced to probation. The home detention was a probation condition and entailed 30 days of electronic monitoring at home. The NIMCOS electronic ankle tag was trialed on those three probationers, two of whom re-offended. Thus, while the goal of home confinement was satisfied, the aim of reducing crime through probation was not.

==Additional technologies==

===Sweat alcohol content monitor===
According to Alcohol Monitoring Systems (AMS), Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring (SCRAM) is currently available in 35 U.S. states.

On 31 March 2021, in England, so-called sobriety tags started being rolled out for some offenders who commit alcohol-related crimes after testing the tags in Wales in October of the previous year. It monitors sweat samples every 30 minutes and alerts the probation service if alcohol is detected.

== Non-justice-system uses ==
=== Medical and health ===
The use of electronic monitoring in medical practice, especially as it relates to the tagging of the elderly and people with dementia, has generated controversy and media attention. Elderly people in care homes can be tagged with the same electronic monitors used to keep track of young offenders. For people suffering from dementia, electronic monitoring might be beneficially used to prevent them from wandering away. The controversy regarding medical use relates to two arguments, one about the safety of the patients and the other about their privacy and human rights. At over 40%, there is a high prevalence of wandering among patients with dementia. Of the several methods deployed to keep them from wandering, it is reported that 44% of wanderers with dementia have been kept behind closed doors at some point. Other solutions have included constant surveillance, use of makeshift alarms and, the use of various drugs that carry the risk of adverse effects.

=== Commercial ===
Smartphones feature location-based apps to use information from global positioning system (GPS) networks to determine the phone&#x27;s approximate location.

=== Parental ===
A company in Japan has created GPS-enabled uniforms and backpacks. School children in distress can hit a button on electronic devices in their uniforms or backpacks, immediately summoning a security agent to their location.

=== Vehicular ===
Public transport vehicles are outfitted with electronic monitoring devices that communicate with GPS systems, tracking their location. App developers have integrated this technology with mobile apps. Now, passengers are able to receive accurate public transit timetables.

== Effectiveness ==

The use of ankle bracelets, or other electronic monitoring devices, have proven to be effective in research studies and possibly deter crime.

Several factors have been identified as necessary to render electronic monitoring effective: appropriately selecting offenders, robust and appropriate technology, fitting tags promptly, responding to breaches promptly, and communication between the criminal justice system and contractors. The Quaker Council for European Affairs thinks that for electronic monitoring to be effective, it should serve to halt a developing criminal career.

The National Audit Office in England and Wales commissioned a survey to examine the experiences of electronically monitored offenders and the members of their family. The survey revealed that there was common agreement among survey respondents that electronic monitoring was a more effective punitive measure than fines, and that it was generally more effective than community service. An interviewed offender is credited with saying: &quot;You learn more about other crimes [in prison] and I think it gives you a taste to do other crimes because you&#x27;ve sat listening to other people.&quot;

In 2006, Kathy Padgett, William Bales, and Thomas Bloomberg conducted an evaluation of 75,661 Florida offenders placed on home detention from 1998 to 2002, in which only a small percentage of these offenders was made to wear an electronic monitoring device. Offenders with electronic tagging were compared to those on home detention without. The factors thought to influence the success or failure of community supervision, including type of electronic monitoring device used and criminal history, were measured. The results showed that offenders who wore electronic tags were both 91.2 percent less likely to abscond and 94.7 percent less likely to commit new offenses, than unmonitored offenders.

== Criticisms ==
The electronic monitoring of a person, on whom an electronic tag is fitted, does not physically restrain this person from leaving a certain area, nor does it prevent this person from the primary aim of probation. Furthermore, the public perception of home detention is that it is a form of lenient punishment.

In the US in 1990, Ronald Corbett and Gary T. Marx criticized the use of electronic monitoring in a paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Criminology, Baltimore. In the paper, which was later published in the Justice Quarterly, the authors described &#x27;the new surveillance&#x27; technology as sharing some ethos with the information-gathering techniques found in maximum-security prisons, thereby allowing them to diffuse into the broader society. They remarked that &#x27;we appear to be moving toward, rather than away from, becoming a &quot;maximum-security society&quot;. The authors acknowledged the data mining capacity of electronic monitoring devices when they stated that &quot;data in many different forms, from widely separated geographical areas, organizations, and time periods, can easily be merged and analyzed&quot;.

In 2013, it was reported that many electronic monitoring programs throughout the US were not staffed appropriately. George Drake, a consultant who worked on improving the systems said &quot;Many times when an agency is budgeted for electronic-monitoring equipment, it is only budgeted for the devices themselves&quot;. He added that the situation was &#x27;like buying a hammer and expecting a house to be built. It&#x27;s simply a tool, and it requires a professional to use that tool and run the program.&#x27; Drake warned that programs can get out of control if officials do not develop stringent protocols for how to respond to alerts and do not manage how alerts are generated: &quot;I see agencies with so many alerts that they can&#x27;t deal with them,&quot; Drake said. &quot;They end up just throwing their hands up and saying they can&#x27;t keep up with them.&quot; In Colorado, a review of alert and event data, obtained from the Colorado Department of Corrections under an open-records request, was conducted by matching the names of parolees who appeared in that data with those who appeared in jail arrest records. The data revealed that 212 parole officers were saddled with the duty of responding to nearly 90,000 alerts and notification generated by electronic monitoring devices in the six months reviewed.

== Notable instances ==
* Eva Kaili, former Vice President of the European Parliament, was released to house arrest in her Brussels apartment with an electronic ankle bracelet in April 2023, after being detained in Haren Prison for four months as part of the Qatargate affair.
* English professional footballer Jermaine Pennant played a Premier League match in 2005 while wearing an electronic tag; he had received the tag for drunk-driving and driving while disqualified.
* Lindsay Lohan failed to appear at a mandatory hearing, and a warrant was issued for her arrest. The judge ordered Lohan to wear a SCRAM bracelet, an electronic device that monitors the sweat for alcohol and alerts authorities if prohibited substances are consumed.
* Roman Polanski, one of the most famous fugitives from American justice in the world, was arrested in 2009 in Switzerland. The terms of his release included $4.5 million bail, house arrest wearing an ankle bracelet at his chalet, known as Milky Way, in the Swiss ski resort of Gstaad, after having spent sixty-seven days in a Zürich detention centre.
* Bernard Madoff, the financier accused in a $50 billion fraud case before trial was ordered under house arrest, with electronic monitoring, and posting $10 million bail against his $7 million Manhattan apartment, and against his wife&#x27;s homes in Montauk, NY, and Palm Beach, FL.
* Dr. Dre (Andre Young), American rapper and record producer, was arrested in 1992 for assaulting record producer Damon Thomas and later pleaded guilty to assault on a police officer, eventually serving house arrest and wearing a police monitoring ankle bracelet.
*Anna Sorokin (Anna Delvey), a Russian con-artist who was convicted on multiple counts of theft and grand larceny. After release from prison, she was detained by immigration authorities for overstaying her visa and put under house arrest, requiring her to wear an ankle monitor to ensure she complies with the conditions of her release.
*Nicolas Sarkozy, former French president, who was found guilty of illegal attempts to secure favors from a judge. France&#x27;s highest appeals court ordered him in December 2024 to wear the tag for a year, and he started wearing it in February 2025.

== Jurisdictions ==

=== United Kingdom ===
Those subject to electronic monitoring may be given curfews as part of bail conditions, sentenced under the Criminal Justice Act 2003 in England and Wales (with separate legislation applying in Scotland). Alternatively offenders may be released from a prison on a Home Detention Curfew. Released prisoners under home detention are allowed out during curfew hours only for:
* A wedding or funeral (service only) of a close relative
* A job interview
* Acting as a witness in court
* Emergencies.

Additionally, electronic monitoring may be used for those subject to a curfew given under the Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011 (previously known as a control order under the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005)

Since electronically monitored curfews were rolled out throughout England and Wales their use has increased sharply, from 9,000 cases in 1999–2000 to 53,000 in 2004–05. In 2004–05, the Home Office spent £102.3 million on the electronic monitoring of curfews and electronically monitored curfews are considered cheaper than custody.

Typically, offenders are fitted with an electronic tag around their ankle which sends a regular signal to a receiver unit installed in their home. Some systems are connected to a landline in the case where GSM is not available, whilst most arrangements utilize the mobile phone system to communicate with the monitoring company. If the tag is not functioning or within range of the base station during curfew hours, or if the base is disconnected from the power supply, or the base station is moved then the monitoring company are alerted, who in turn, notify the appropriate authority such as the police, the National Probation Service or the prison the person was released from.

In 2012, the Policy Exchange think tank examined the use of electronic monitoring in England and Wales and made comparisons with technologies and models seen in other jurisdictions, particularly the United States. The report was critical of the Ministry of Justice&#x27;s model of a fully privatized service - which gave little scope for police or probation services to make use of electronic monitoring. The report, Future of Corrections, also criticized the cost of the service, highlighting an apparent differential between what the UK taxpayer was charged and what could be found in the United States.

Subsequently, there were a number of scandals in relation to electronic monitoring in England and Wales, with a criminal investigation opened by the Serious Fraud Office into the activities of Serco and G4S. As a result of the investigation, Serco agreed to repay £68.5 million to the taxpayer and G4S agreed to repay £109 million. The duopoly were subsequently stripped of their contract, with Capita taking over the contract. In 2017, another criminal investigation saw police make a number of arrests in relation to allegations that at least 32 criminals on tag had paid up to £400 to Capita employees in order to have &#x27;loose&#x27; tags fitted, allowing them to remove their tags.

The monitoring of sex offenders via electronic tagging is currently in debate due to certain rights offenders have in England and Wales.

Electronic tagging has begun being used on psychiatric and dementia patients, prompting concern from mental health advocates who state that the practice is demeaning.

In June 2022, the British Home Office announced a one-year pilot to track migrants who arrived on small boats on &quot;dangerous and unnecessary routes&quot; with GPS devices that will help &quot;maintain regular contact&quot; and more &quot;effectively process their claims&quot;.

=== Australia and New Zealand ===
In Australia and New Zealand existing law permits the use of electronic monitoring as condition for bail, probation or parole. But, according to the 2004 &quot;Standard Guidelines for Corrections in Australia&quot; the surveillance must be proportionate to the risk of re-offense. It is also required that, the surveillance of the offender is minimally intrusive for other people who live at the premises. Electronic tagging of a person is part of different electronic monitoring systems in Australia. Correctional agency statistics are collected in Australia for so called &quot;restricted movement orders&quot;. In South Australia, a drive-by facility allows the monitorer to drive past a building in which the tagged person is supposed to be. 

In New Zealand, the electronic tagging of offenders began 1999, when home detention could be imposed instead of imprisonment. By late July 2023, Stuff reported that 2,230 teenagers had been subject to electronic monitoring since 2019, citing figures released by the Department of Corrections. The number of 13 year olds wearing ankle bracelets rose from one in 2019/2020 to nine in 2022/2023. The vast majority teenagers subject to electronic monitoring were males, with 2,011 reported in July 2023.

=== Brazil ===
In August 2010, Brazil awarded a GPS Offender Monitoring contract to kick start its monitoring of offenders and management of the Brazilian governments early release programme.

=== South Africa ===
Electronic monitoring as a pilot project was started in March 2012, involving 150 offenders, mostly prisoners serving life terms. The project was rolled out to reduce the South Africa&#x27;s prison population. It consequently would also reduce the taxpayer&#x27;s burden on correctional facilities. South Africa locks up more people than any other country on the continent.

== See also ==
* Automatic vehicle location
* Decarceration in the United States
* Electronic monitoring in the United States

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17011956" start="0" end="18" title="Electronic tagging" label="Electronic tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="32" end="44" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="198" end="202" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="206" end="215" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="351" end="376" title="global positioning system" label="global positioning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="457" end="472" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="719" end="737" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="813" end="826" title="B. F. Skinner" label="B. F. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321905" start="1151" end="1173" title="positive reinforcement" label="positive reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142602" start="1215" end="1229" title="Rehabilitation (penology)" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083577" start="1453" end="1481" title="Old Cambridge Baptist Church" label="Old Cambridge Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034225" start="1516" end="1539" title="Harvard Divinity School" label="Harvard Divinity School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="1632" end="1650" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994314" start="2684" end="2698" title="Laurence Tribe" label="Laurence Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="2983" end="2999" title="criminal offense" label="criminal offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="3074" end="3083" title="Probation" label="Probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="3192" end="3204" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="3494" end="3505" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="3648" end="3677" title="Honeywell Information Systems" label="Honeywell Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="3930" end="3942" title="radio signal" label="radio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="4089" end="4098" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="4166" end="4184" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="4256" end="4270" title="home detention" label="home detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4942" end="4949" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740594" start="5030" end="5051" title="alcohol-related crime" label="alcohol-related crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5079" end="5084" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="5176" end="5185" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="5197" end="5204" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="5401" end="5409" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967199" start="5892" end="5901" title="Wandering (dementia)" label="wandering"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="6325" end="6350" title="global positioning system" label="global positioning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="6679" end="6695" title="Public transport" label="Public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="6866" end="6876" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268542" start="7410" end="7445" title="Quaker Council for European Affairs" label="Quaker Council for European Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970828" start="7560" end="7581" title="National Audit Office (United Kingdom)" label="National Audit Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098623" start="9219" end="9231" title="Gary T. Marx" label="Gary T. Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q466864" start="9326" end="9357" title="American Society of Criminology" label="American Society of Criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="9359" end="9368" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="9817" end="9828" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420152" start="11401" end="11410" title="Eva Kaili" label="Eva Kaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="11441" end="11460" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="11478" end="11490" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q111728266" start="11590" end="11602" title="Haren Prison" label="Haren Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681322" start="11634" end="11643" title="Qatar corruption scandal at the European Parliament" label="Qatargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="11675" end="11685" title="association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q296416" start="11686" end="11702" title="Jermaine Pennant" label="Jermaine Pennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="11712" end="11726" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309330" start="11802" end="11815" title="drunk-driving" label="drunk-driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q44903" start="11850" end="11863" title="Lindsay Lohan" label="Lindsay Lohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="12117" end="12131" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="12442" end="12448" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q14043" start="12469" end="12483" title="Bernard Madoff" label="Bernard Madoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="12753" end="12760" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080956" start="13016" end="13028" title="Anna Sorokin" label="Anna Sorokin"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="13353" end="13368" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="13720" end="13724" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185562" start="13757" end="13782" title="Criminal Justice Act 2003" label="Criminal Justice Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888325" start="13913" end="13934" title="Home Detention Curfew" label="Home Detention Curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112541" start="14239" end="14295" title="Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011" label="Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165876" start="14319" end="14332" title="control order" label="control order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242388" start="14343" end="14375" title="Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005" label="Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="14890" end="14898" title="landline" label="landline"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="14917" end="14920" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975069" start="15321" end="15347" title="National Probation Service" label="National Probation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="17014" end="17033" title="British Home Office" label="British Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="17316" end="17325" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="17330" end="17341" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628506" start="18206" end="18211" title="Stuff (website)" label="Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260217" start="18327" end="18352" title="Department of Corrections (New Zealand)" label="Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527484" start="19168" end="19194" title="Automatic vehicle location" label="Automatic vehicle location"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376105" start="19197" end="19231" title="Decarceration in the United States" label="Decarceration in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377110" start="19234" end="19276" title="Electronic monitoring in the United States" label="Electronic monitoring in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87235" wikidata="Q320765" url="?curid=87235" title="Covert listening device">
<text>A covert listening device, more commonly known as a bug or a wire, is usually a combination of a miniature radio transmitter with a microphone. The use of bugs, called bugging, or wiretapping is a common technique in surveillance, espionage and police investigations.

Self-contained electronic covert listening devices came into common use with intelligence agencies in the 1950s, when technology allowed for a suitable transmitter to be built into a relatively small package. By 1956, the US Central Intelligence Agency was designing and building &quot;Surveillance Transmitters&quot; that employed transistors, which greatly reduced the size and power consumption. With no moving parts and greater power efficiency, these solid-state devices could be operated by small batteries, which revolutionized the process of covert listening.

A bug does not have to be a device specifically designed for the purpose of eavesdropping. For instance, with the right equipment, it is possible to remotely activate the microphone of cellular phones, even when a call is not being made, to listen to conversations in the vicinity of the phone.

== Dictograph ==
Among the earliest covert listening devices used in the United States of America was the dictograph, an invention of Kelley M. Turner patented in 1906 (US Patent US843186A). It consisted of a microphone in one location and a remote listening post with a speaker that could also be recorded using a phonograph. While also marketed as a device that allowed broadcasting of sounds, or dictating text from one room to a typist in another, it was used in several criminal investigations.

== &quot;Wearing a wire&quot; ==
A &quot;wire&quot; is a device that is hidden or concealed under a person&#x27;s clothes for the purpose of covertly listening to conversations in proximity to the wearer. Wires are typically used in police sting operations in order to gather information about suspects. The wire device transmits to a remote location where law enforcement agents monitor what is being said. 

The act of &quot;wearing a wire&quot; refers to a person knowingly recording the conversation or transmitting the contents of a conversation to a police listening post. Usually, some sort of device is attached to the body in an inconspicuous way, such as taping a microphone wire to their chest. Undercover agents &quot;wearing a wire&quot; is a typical plot element in gangster and police-related movies and television shows. A stereotypical scene might include an individual being suspected by criminals of wearing a hidden microphone, and having their shirt torn open to reveal the deception.

When infiltrating a criminal organization a mole may be given a wire to wear under their clothes.

Wearing a wire is viewed as risky since discovery could lead to violence against the mole or other retaliatory responses.

== Remotely activated mobile phone microphones ==
Mobile phone (cell phone) microphones can be activated remotely, without any need for physical access. This &quot;roving bug&quot; feature has been used by law enforcement agencies and intelligence services to listen in on nearby conversations. A United States court ruled in 1988 that a similar technique used by the FBI against reputed former Gulfport, Mississippi, cocaine dealers after having obtained a court order was permissible. Not only microphones but also seemingly innocuous motion sensors, which can be accessed by third-party apps on Android and iOS devices without any notification to the user, are a potential eavesdropping channel in smartphones.
With the Covid-19 pandemic came an increase in remote work spurring on a new advent of Employee Monitoring Software which remotely collects many forms of data from laptops and smartphones issued by employers, including webcam and microphone data, raising concerns that a new era of corporate spying has shifted the power balance between workers and businesses.

==Automobile computer systems==

In 2003, the FBI obtained a court order to surreptitiously listen in on conversations in a car through the car&#x27;s built-in emergency and tracking security system. A panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals prohibited the use of this technique because it involved deactivating the device&#x27;s security features.

==Audio from optical sources==

A laser microphone can be used to reconstruct audio from a laser beam shot onto an object in a room, or the glass pane of a window.

Researchers have also prototyped a method for reconstructing audio from video of thin objects that can pick up sound vibrations, such as a houseplant or bag of potato chips.

==Examples of use==
* Embassies and other diplomatic posts are often the targets of bugging operations.
** The Soviet embassy in Ottawa was bugged by the Government of Canada and MI5 during its construction in 1956.
** The Russian Embassy in The Hague was bugged by the BVD and the CIA in 1958 and 1959 using an Easy Chair Mark III listening device.
** Extensive bugging of the West German embassy in Moscow by the KGB was discovered by German engineer Horst Schwirkmann, leading to an attack on Schwirkmann in 1964.
** The Great Seal bug was hidden in a copy of the Great Seal of the United States, presented by the Soviet Union to the United States ambassador in Moscow in 1946 and only discovered in 1952. The bug was unusual in that it had no power source or active components, making it much harder to detect—it was a new type of device, called a passive resonant cavity bug. The cavity had a metallic diaphragm that moved in unison with sound waves from a conversation in the room. When illuminated by a radio beam from a remote location, the cavity would return a frequency modulated signal.
** The United States Embassy in Moscow was bugged during its construction in the 1970s by Soviet agents posing as laborers. When discovered in the early 1980s, it was found that even the concrete columns were so riddled with bugs that the building eventually had to be torn down and replaced with a new one, built with US materials and labor.
** In 1984, bugs were discovered in at least 16 IBM Selectric typewriters in the US Embassy in Moscow and the US Consulate in Leningrad. The highly sophisticated devices were planted by the Soviets between 1976 and 1984 and were hidden inside a metal support bar. Information was intercepted by detecting the movements of metal bars inside the typewriter (the so-called latch interposers) by means of magnetometers. The data was then compressed and transmitted in bursts.
** In 1990, it was reported that the embassy of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in Canberra, Australia, had been bugged by the Australian Secret Intelligence Service as part of the UKUSA Project Echelon.
** In 2003, the Pakistani embassy building in London was found bugged; contractors hired by MI5 had planted bugs in the building in 2001.
* During World War II, the Nazis took over a Berlin brothel, Salon Kitty, and used concealed microphones to spy on patrons.
* Also during the war, the British used covert listening devices to monitor captured German fighter pilots being held at Trent Park.
* In the late 1970s, a bug was discovered in a meeting room at the OPEC headquarters in Vienna. The bug intercepted the audio from the PA system via a pickup coil and transmitted it on a frequency near 600 MHz using subcarrier audio masking. It was not discovered who was responsible for planting the bug.
* Colin Thatcher, a Canadian politician, was secretly recorded making statements which would later be used to convict him of his wife&#x27;s murder. The recording device was concealed on a person Thatcher had previously approached for help in the crime.
* Electronic bugging devices were found in March 2003 at offices used by French and German delegations at the European Union headquarters in Brussels. Devices were also discovered at offices used by other delegations. The discovery of the telephone tapping systems was first reported by &quot;Le Figaro&quot; newspaper, which blamed the US.
* The car of Thomas Hentschell, who was involved in the Melbourne gangland killings, was bugged by police.
* In 1999, the US expelled a Russian diplomat, accusing him of using a listening device in a top floor conference room used by diplomats in the United States Department of State headquarters.
* In 2001, the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China announced that it had discovered twenty-seven bugs in a Boeing 767 purchased as an official aircraft of the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Jiang Zemin.
* In 2003, Alastair Campbell (who was Director of Communications and Strategy from 1997 to 2003 for the British Prime Minister) in his memoirs &quot;The Blair Years: The Alastair Campbell Diaries&quot; alleged that two bugs were discovered in the hotel room meant for visiting Prime Minister Tony Blair planted by Indian intelligence agencies. The alleged bug discovery was at a hotel during Blair&#x27;s official visit to New Delhi in 2001. Security services supposedly informed him that the bugs could not be removed without drilling the wall and therefore he changed to another room.
* In 2004, a bug was found in a meeting room at the United Nations offices in Geneva.
* In 2008, it was reported that an electric samovar presented to Elizabeth II in about 1968 by a Soviet aerobatic team was removed from Balmoral Castle as a security precaution amid fears that its wiring could contain a listening device.
* On 6 December 1972, the Central Intelligence Agency placed a wire tap on a multiplex trunk line 24 kilometers southwest of Vinh to intercept Vietnamese communist messages concerning negotiating an end to the Vietnam War.
* The Watergate scandal in the 1970s.

== Listening devices and the UK law ==

The use of listening devices is permitted under UK law providing that they are used in compliance with Data Protection and Human Rights laws. If a government body or organisation intends to use listening or recording devices they must follow the laws put in place by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA). It is usually permitted to record audio covertly in a public setting or one&#x27;s own home.

=== Legal requirements of listening and recording device use ===
It is illegal to use listening or recording devices that are not permitted for public use. Individuals may only use listening or recording devices within reasonable privacy laws for legitimate security and safety reasons. Many people use listening devices on their own property to capture evidence of excessive noise in a neighbour complaint, which is legal in normal circumstances.

=== Legal use of listening and recording devices ===
It is legal to use listening or recording devices in public areas, in an office or business area, or in one&#x27;s own home. Many people use listening devices to record evidence or to take notes for their own reference.

=== Illegal use of listening and recording devices ===
It is illegal to use listening devices on certain Military band and Air Band UHF and FM frequencies - people in the past who have not followed this law have been fined over £10,000. This is because the use of a radio transmission bug that transmits on restricted frequencies contravenes the Telecommunications Act and is illegal. It is also against the law to place a listening or recording device in someone else&#x27;s home. Due to privacy and human rights laws, using a listening or recording device to intrude on the reasonable expectation of privacy of an individual is highly illegal, i.e. placing gadgets in someone&#x27;s home or car to which one does not have permitted access, or in a private area such as a bathroom.

== United States Law on Listening Devices ==
=== Federal laws on Listening Devices ===
Several federal laws were passed by congress that apply nation-wide. Under Title 18 of the US Code § 2251 2(iii)(c) at least one of the parties involved in the communication must have given consent to interception of the communication. This title applies to wire, oral, or any kind of electric communication. This single party consent only applies if one of the parties is an &quot;officer of the United States&quot; (Title 18 of the US Code § 2251 [2d]). Furthermore, congress passed the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA). This act updated the Federal Wiretap Act of 1968. The Federal Wiretap act addressed the interception of conversations over telephone lines, but not interception of computer or other digital data. This act was further updated by the USA Patriot Act to clarify and modernize the ECPA. The ECPA has three title. Title I prohibits attempted or successful interception of or &quot;procure[ment] [of] any other person to intercept or endeavor to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic communication.&quot; It also prohibits the storage of any information obtained via phone calls without consent or illegally obtained though wiretaps. Furthermore, the US passed the Wiretap Act which prohibits unauthorized interception of &quot;wire, oral, or electronic communications&quot; by the government or by private citizens. Furthermore, this act establishes the procedure for government officials to obtain warrants to authorize any wiretapping activates. Such laws were passed in response to congressional investigations that found extensive cases of government and private wiretapping without consent or legal authorization. In the US, electronic surveillance is seen as protected under the Constitution that the Fourth Amendment, which protects against unreasonable search and seizure by the government, which also is seen by the Supreme Court of the United States as electronic surveillance.

=== State to State variation ===
Listening devices are regulated by several legislative bodies in the United States. Laws on listening devices varies between states within the US. Typically the variation comes on whether or not the state is a one or two party consent state. Within one party consent states, only one party must approve the recording, whereas in all party consent states all parties must consent to the recording. In many states, the consent requirements listed below only apply to situations where the parties have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such as private property, and do not apply in public areas. (Protection can apply to conversations in public areas in some circumstances.)

==See also==

* Acoustic cryptanalysis
* Cellphone surveillance
* Communications interception
* Eavesdropping
* Electronic Privacy Information Center
* Espionage
* Greek telephone tapping case 2004-2005
* Mobile phone tracking
* National Cryptologic Museum
* Nonlinear junction detector
* Peter Wright
* Privacy
* Privacy International
* Surveillance
* Technical surveillance counter-measures
* Telephone tapping
* TEMPEST
* Watergate scandal
==References==
== External links ==
* Secret Radio Aerials: Spy antennas everywhere
* French, German EU Offices Bugged - CBS news story
* EU investigates mystery buggings - BBC News story
* &quot;A simple guide to TSCM&quot;, How to protect privacy
* &quot;Listening In: Electronic Eavesdropping in the Cold War Era&quot;. US Department of State, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, 2008
* &quot;Bugging Hotel Rooms&quot;. US Department of Agriculture.
* Covert listening devices on the Crypto Museum website
* Eavesdropping Devices Found in Restaurant - QCC Global News Story
* Some CIA surveillance and bugging devices</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="2" end="25" title="Covert listening device" label="covert listening device"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="52" end="55" title="Covert listening device" label="bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q320765" start="61" end="65" title="Covert listening device" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q190157" start="107" end="124" title="radio transmitter" label="radio transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="132" end="142" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="180" end="191" title="wiretapping" label="wiretapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="217" end="229" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="231" end="240" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="245" end="251" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q47913" start="346" end="367" title="Intelligence agency" label="intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="494" end="521" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="725" end="744" title="Solid-state electronics" label="solid-state devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q320769" start="914" end="927" title="eavesdropping" label="eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283446" start="1875" end="1890" title="sting operation" label="sting operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46961" start="2415" end="2423" title="gangster" label="gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q137350" start="2686" end="2690" title="mole (espionage)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2914" end="2926" title="Mobile phone" label="Mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3232" end="3235" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="3259" end="3280" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3986" end="3989" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358778" start="4155" end="4183" title="9th Circuit Court of Appeals" label="9th Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321229" start="4326" end="4342" title="laser microphone" label="laser microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213283" start="4654" end="4663" title="Embassy" label="Embassies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369847" start="4743" end="4767" title="Embassy of Russia in Ottawa" label="Soviet embassy in Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="4786" end="4806" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q210175" start="4811" end="4814" title="MI5" label="MI5"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="4874" end="4883" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866011" start="4902" end="4905" title="AIVD" label="BVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="4914" end="4917" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078242" start="4944" end="4954" title="Operation Easy Chair" label="Easy Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5010" end="5021" title="West German" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5033" end="5039" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="5047" end="5050" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906547" start="5085" end="5102" title="Horst Schwirkmann" label="Horst Schwirkmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628577" start="5152" end="5170" title="The Great Seal bug" label="The Great Seal bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q171663" start="5199" end="5230" title="Great Seal of the United States" label="Great Seal of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5249" end="5261" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5269" end="5282" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="5297" end="5303" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628577" start="5484" end="5511" title="Thing (listening device)" label="passive resonant cavity bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q181417" start="5703" end="5722" title="Frequency modulation" label="frequency modulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q722374" start="5738" end="5769" title="Embassy of the United States in Moscow" label="United States Embassy in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q429066" start="6122" end="6146" title="IBM Selectric typewriter" label="IBM Selectric typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q722374" start="6155" end="6175" title="Embassy of the United States, Moscow" label="US Embassy in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q468512" start="6184" end="6196" title="List of diplomatic missions of the United States" label="US Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="6475" end="6487" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6598" end="6629" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="6633" end="6641" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6643" end="6652" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181694" start="6677" end="6715" title="Australian Secret Intelligence Service" label="Australian Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197115" start="6731" end="6736" title="UKUSA" label="UKUSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q217386" start="6737" end="6752" title="Project Echelon" label="Project Echelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215201" start="6953" end="6964" title="Salon Kitty" label="Salon Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7137" end="7147" title="Trent Park#Second World War" label="Trent Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="7216" end="7220" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="7237" end="7243" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="7284" end="7293" title="Public address system" label="PA system"/>
<link wikidata="Q586358" start="7365" end="7375" title="subcarrier" label="subcarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145617" start="7457" end="7471" title="Colin Thatcher" label="Colin Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="7475" end="7483" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7782" end="7788" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7793" end="7799" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="7850" end="7858" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="7948" end="7965" title="telephone tapping" label="telephone tapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="8002" end="8011" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778684" start="8106" end="8133" title="Melbourne gangland killings" label="Melbourne gangland killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="8301" end="8334" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586762" start="8335" end="8347" title="Harry S Truman Building" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q936190" start="8364" end="8374" title="Government of China" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8382" end="8413" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="8470" end="8480" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140914" start="8497" end="8514" title="Air transports of heads of state and government" label="official aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="8522" end="8570" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="8572" end="8583" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q653236" start="8596" end="8613" title="Alastair John Campbell" label="Alastair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="8623" end="8662" title="public relations" label="Director of Communications and Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="8877" end="8887" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426814" start="8899" end="8927" title="Intelligence Bureau (India)" label="Indian intelligence agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9224" end="9238" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="9250" end="9256" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q224418" start="9302" end="9309" title="samovar" label="samovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="9323" end="9335" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42049" start="9394" end="9409" title="Balmoral Castle" label="Balmoral Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="9522" end="9549" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q33428" start="9621" end="9625" title="Vinh" label="Vinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9706" end="9717" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="9725" end="9742" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247836" start="10440" end="10451" title="privacy law" label="privacy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858106" start="11520" end="11542" title="expectation of privacy" label="expectation of privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="11840" end="11848" title="United States Congress" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810047" start="11879" end="11887" title="Title 18 of the United States Code" label="Title 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="12025" end="12038" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q52943" start="12068" end="12072" title="Oral Communication" label="oral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810047" start="12221" end="12230" title="Title 18 of the United States Code" label="(Title 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="12511" end="12519" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q221689" start="12579" end="12594" title="Patriot Act" label="USA Patriot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3352077" start="13008" end="13019" title="Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968" label="Wiretap Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="13243" end="13251" title="Court order" label="warrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="13529" end="13541" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q231304" start="13551" end="13567" title="Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="13669" end="13703" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13835" end="13848" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="13891" end="13897" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q955164" start="14458" end="14480" title="Acoustic cryptanalysis" label="Acoustic cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007177" start="14483" end="14505" title="Cellphone surveillance" label="Cellphone surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="14508" end="14535" title="SIGINT" label="Communications interception"/>
<link wikidata="Q320769" start="14538" end="14551" title="Eavesdropping" label="Eavesdropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383251" start="14554" end="14591" title="Electronic Privacy Information Center" label="Electronic Privacy Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="14594" end="14603" title="Espionage" label="Espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602068" start="14606" end="14644" title="Greek telephone tapping case 2004-2005" label="Greek telephone tapping case 2004-2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486969" start="14647" end="14668" title="Mobile phone tracking" label="Mobile phone tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q112368" start="14671" end="14698" title="National Cryptologic Museum" label="National Cryptologic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355141" start="14701" end="14728" title="Nonlinear junction detector" label="Nonlinear junction detector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14731" end="14743" title="Peter Wright (MI5 officer)#Father&amp;#x27;s footsteps" label="Peter Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="14746" end="14753" title="Privacy" label="Privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72781" start="14756" end="14777" title="Privacy International" label="Privacy International"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="14780" end="14792" title="Surveillance" label="Surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q281720" start="14795" end="14834" title="Technical surveillance counter-measures" label="Technical surveillance counter-measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067529" start="14837" end="14854" title="Telephone tapping" label="Telephone tapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213174" start="14857" end="14864" title="Tempest (codename)" label="TEMPEST"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="14867" end="14884" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="15208" end="15230" title="US Department of State" label="US Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241039" start="15232" end="15261" title="Bureau of Diplomatic Security" label="Bureau of Diplomatic Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="15303" end="15331" title="US Department of Agriculture" label="US Department of Agriculture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87240" wikidata="Q310176" url="?curid=87240" title="Martin Amis">
<text>Sir Martin Louis Amis (25 August 1949 – 19 May 2023) was an English novelist, essayist, memoirist, screenwriter and critic. He is best known for his novels &quot;Money&quot; (1984) and &quot;London Fields&quot; (1989). He received the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for his memoir &quot;Experience&quot; and was twice listed for the Booker Prize (shortlisted in 1991 for &quot;Time&#x27;s Arrow&quot; and longlisted in 2003 for &quot;Yellow Dog&quot;). Amis was a professor of creative writing at the University of Manchester&#x27;s Centre for New Writing from 2007 until 2011. In 2008, &quot;The Times&quot; named him one of the 50 greatest British writers since 1945. 

Amis&#x27;s work centres on the excesses of &quot;late-capitalist&quot; Western society, whose perceived absurdity he often satirised through grotesque caricature. He was portrayed by some literary critics as a master of what &quot;The New York Times&quot; called &quot;the new unpleasantness&quot;. He was inspired by Saul Bellow and Vladimir Nabokov, as well as by his father Kingsley Amis. Amis influenced many British novelists of the late 20th and early 21st centuries, including Will Self and Zadie Smith.

A life-long smoker, Amis died from oesophageal cancer at his house in the U.S. state of Florida in 2023. &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote after his death: &quot;To come of reading age in the last three decades of the 20th century – from the oil embargo through the fall of the Berlin Wall, all the way to 9/11 – was to live, it now seems clear, in the Amis Era.&quot;

==Early life==
Amis was born on 25 August 1949 at Radcliffe Maternity Hospital in Oxford, England. His father, novelist Kingsley Amis, was the son of a mustard manufacturer&#x27;s clerk from Clapham, London; his mother, Kingston upon Thames-born Hilary (&quot;Hilly&quot;) Ann Bardwell, was the daughter of a Ministry of Agriculture civil servant. He had an elder brother, Philip; his younger sister, Sally – for whose birth Philip Larkin composed &quot;Born Yesterday&quot; – died in 2000 at the age of 46. His parents married in 1948 in Oxford and divorced when Amis was 12 years old; following the separation, Hilly and the children decamped to Mallorca, Spain, where they stayed for a while with Robert Graves.

Amis attended a number of schools in the 1950s and 1960s, including an international school in Mallorca, Bishop Gore School in Swansea, and Cambridgeshire High School for Boys, where he was described by one headmaster as &quot;unusually unpromising&quot;. The acclaim that followed his father&#x27;s first novel &quot;Lucky Jim&quot; (1954) sent the family to Princeton, New Jersey, in the United States, where his father lectured.

In 1965, at the age of 15, Amis played John Thornton in the film version of Richard Hughes&#x27;s &quot;A High Wind in Jamaica&quot;. At tall, he referred to himself as a &quot;short-arse&quot; while a teenager. His father said Amis was not a bookish child and &quot;read nothing but science fiction till he was fifteen or sixteen&quot;. Amis said he had read little more than comic books until his stepmother, the novelist Elizabeth Jane Howard, introduced him to Jane Austen, whom he often named as his earliest influence. He graduated from Exeter College, Oxford, with a congratulatory first in English, &quot;the sort where you are called in for a viva and the examiners tell you how much they enjoyed reading your papers&quot;.

After graduating from Oxford in 1971, Amis wrote reviews of science-fiction novels under the &quot;nom de plume&quot; &quot;Henry Tilney&quot; (a nod to Austen) in a column for &quot;The Observer&quot;. He found an entry-level job at &quot;The Times Literary Supplement&quot; by the summer of 1972. At the age of 27, he became literary editor of the &quot;New Statesman&quot;, where he cited writer and editor John Gross as his role model, and met Christopher Hitchens, then a feature writer for &quot;The Observer&quot;, who remained Amis&#x27;s closest friend until his death in 2011.

==Early writing==
According to Amis, his father was deeply critical of certain aspects of his work. &quot;I can point out the exact place where he stopped [reading Amis&#x27;s novel &quot;Money&quot;] and sent it twirling through the air; that&#x27;s where the character named Martin Amis comes in.&quot; Kingsley complained: &quot;Breaking the rules, buggering about with the reader, drawing attention to himself.&quot;

His first novel &quot;The Rachel Papers&quot; (1973) – written at Lemmons, the family home in north London – won the Somerset Maugham Award. It tells the story of a bright, egotistical teenager and his relationship with the eponymous girlfriend in the year before going to university; It has been described as &quot;autobiographical&quot; and was made into an unsuccessful 1989 film.

&quot;Dead Babies&quot; (1975), more flippant in tone, chronicles a few days in the lives of some friends who convene in a country house to take drugs. A number of Amis&#x27;s writerly characteristics show up here for the first time: mordant black humour, obsession with the zeitgeist, authorial intervention, a character subjected to sadistically humorous misfortunes and humiliations, and a defiant casualness (&quot;my attitude has been, I don&#x27;t know much about science, but I know what I like&quot;). A film adaptation was made in 2000, which &quot;Guardian&quot; film critic Peter Bradshaw described as &quot;boring, embarrassing, nasty and stupid – and not in a good way&quot;.

&quot;Success&quot; (1977) told the story of two foster-brothers, Gregory Riding and Terry Service, and their rising and falling fortunes. This was the first example of Amis&#x27;s fondness for symbolically &quot;pairing&quot; characters in his novels, which has been a recurrent feature in his fiction since (Martin Amis and Martina Twain in &quot;Money&quot;, Richard Tull and Gwyn Barry in &quot;The Information&quot;, and Jennifer Rockwell and Mike Hoolihan in &quot;Night Train&quot;). During this period, because producer Stanley Donen detected an affinity between his story and the &quot;debauched and nihilistic nature&quot; of &quot;Dead Babies&quot;, Amis was invited to work on the screenplay for the science-fiction film &quot;Saturn 3&quot; (1980). The film was far from a critical success, but Amis was able to draw on the experience for his fifth novel, &quot;Money&quot;, published in 1984.

&quot;Other People: A Mystery Story&quot; (1981) – the title is a reference to Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Huis Clos&quot; – is about a young woman coming out of a coma. It was a transitional novel in that it was the first of Amis&#x27;s to show authorial intervention in the narrative voice, and highly artificed language in the heroine&#x27;s descriptions of everyday objects, which was said to be influenced by his contemporary Craig Raine&#x27;s &quot;Martian&quot; school of poetry. It was also the first novel Amis published after committing to being a full-time writer in 1980.

==Main career==

===1980s and 1990s===
Amis&#x27;s best-known novels are &quot;Money&quot;, &quot;London Fields&quot; and &quot;The Information&quot;, commonly referred to as his &quot;London Trilogy&quot;. Although the books share little in terms of plot and narrative, they all examine the lives of middle-aged men, exploring the sordid, debauched, and post-apocalyptic undercurrents of life in late 20th-century Britain. Amis&#x27;s London protagonists are anti-heroes: they engage in questionable behaviour, are passionate iconoclasts, and strive to escape the apparent banality and futility of their lives. Amis wrote, &quot;The world is like a human being. And there&#x27;s a scientific name for it, which is entropy – everything tends towards disorder. From an ordered state to a disordered state.&quot;

&quot;Money&quot; (1984, subtitled &quot;A Suicide Note&quot;) is a first-person narrative by John Self, advertising man and would-be film director, who is &quot;addicted to the twentieth century&quot;. &quot;[A] satire of Thatcherite amorality and greed&quot;, the novel relates a series of black comedic episodes as Self flies back and forth across the Atlantic, in crass and seemingly chaotic pursuit of personal and professional success. &quot;Time&quot; included the novel in its list of the 100 best English-language novels of 1923 to 2005. On 11 November 2009, &quot;The Guardian&quot; reported that the BBC had adapted &quot;Money&quot; for television as part of its early 2010 schedule for BBC 2. Nick Frost played John Self, and the adaptation also featured Vincent Kartheiser, Emma Pierson and Jerry Hall. The adaptation was a &quot;two-part drama&quot; and was written by Tom Butterworth and Chris Hurford. After the transmission of the first of the two parts, Amis was quick to praise the adaptation, stating: &quot;All the performances [were] without weak spots. I thought Nick Frost was absolutely extraordinary as John Self. He fills the character. It&#x27;s a very unusual performance in that he&#x27;s very funny, he&#x27;s physically comic, but he&#x27;s also strangely graceful, a pleasure to watch ... It looked very expensive even though it wasn&#x27;t and that&#x27;s a feat ... The earlier script I saw was disappointing [but] they took it back and worked on it and it&#x27;s hugely improved. My advice was to use more of the language of the novel, the dialogue, rather than making it up.&quot;

&quot;London Fields&quot; (1989), Amis&#x27;s longest and &quot;most London&quot; novel, describes the encounters between three main characters in London in 1999, as a climate disaster approaches. The characters have typically Amisian names and broad caricatured qualities: Keith Talent, the lower-class crook with a passion for darts; Nicola Six, a femme fatale who is determined to be murdered; and upper-middle-class Guy Clinch, &quot;the fool, the foil, the poor foal&quot; who is destined to come between the other two.

The book was controversially omitted from the Booker Prize shortlist in 1989, because two panel members, Maggie Gee and Helen McNeil, disliked Amis&#x27;s treatment of his female characters. &quot;It was an incredible row,&quot; Martyn Goff, the Booker&#x27;s director, told &quot;The Independent&quot;. &quot;Maggie and Helen felt that Amis treated women appallingly in the book. That is not to say they thought books which treated women badly couldn&#x27;t be good, they simply felt that the author should make it clear he didn&#x27;t favour or bless that sort of treatment. Really, there were only two of them and they should have been outnumbered as the other three were in agreement, but such was the sheer force of their argument and passion that they won. David [Lodge] has told me he regrets it to this day, he feels he failed somehow by not saying, &#x27;It&#x27;s two against three, Martin&#x27;s on the list&#x27;.&quot; A 2018 film of &quot;London Fields&quot;, on which Amis worked as a scriptwriter, suffered from a problematic production process and was critically and commercially unsuccessful.

Amis&#x27;s 1991 novel, the short &quot;Time&#x27;s Arrow&quot;, was shortlisted for the Booker Prize. Notable for its backwards narrative, including dialogue in reverse, the novel is the autobiography of a Nazi concentration camp doctor. The reversal of the arrow of time in the novel, a technique borrowed from Kurt Vonnegut&#x27;s &quot;Slaughterhouse 5&quot; (1969) and Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;Counter-Clock World&quot; (1967), is a narrative style that itself functions in Amis&#x27;s hands as commentary on the Nazis&#x27; rationalisation of death and destruction as forces of creation with the resurrection of Nordic mythology in the service of German nation-building.

&quot;The Information&quot; (1995) was notable not so much for its critical success, but for the scandals surrounding its publication. The enormous advance of £500,000 (almost US$800,000) demanded and subsequently obtained by Amis for the novel attracted what the author described as &quot;an Eisteddfod of hostility&quot; from writers and critics after he abandoned his long-serving agent, Pat Kavanagh, to be represented by the Harvard-educated Andrew Wylie. The split was by no means amicable; it created a rift between Amis and his long-time friend, Julian Barnes, who was married to Kavanagh. According to Amis&#x27;s autobiographical collection &quot;Experience&quot; (2000), he and Barnes had not resolved their differences. &quot;The Information&quot; itself deals with the relationship between a pair of British writers of fiction: one, a spectacularly successful purveyor of &quot;airport novels&quot;, is envied by his friend, an equally unsuccessful writer of philosophical and generally abstruse prose.

Amis&#x27;s 1997 short novel &quot;Night Train&quot; is narrated by Mike Hoolihan, a tough woman detective with a man&#x27;s name. The story revolves around the suicide of her boss&#x27;s young, beautiful, and seemingly happy daughter. &quot;Night Train&quot; is written in the language of American &#x27;noir&#x27; crime fiction, but subverts expectations of an exciting investigation and neat, satisfying ending. Many reviewers subjected it to negative criticism, e.g., John Updike &quot;hated&quot; it, but others such as Jason Crowley writing in &quot;Prospect&quot; have applauded his attempt to write in an American idiom and Beata Piątek wanted &quot;to discuss &quot;Night Train&quot; as more than a clumsy spoof detective story and argue that it is an intellectual and intertextual joke that Amis plays on the critics who compare him with the American writers and criticise him for his sexist portrayal of women.&quot; The novel found other defenders too, notably in Janis Bellow, wife of Amis&#x27;s mentor and friend Saul Bellow. It was adapted for the cinema in 2018 as &quot;Out of Blue&quot;.

===2000s===
The 2000s were Amis&#x27;s least productive decade in terms of full-length fiction since starting in the 1970s (two novels in ten years), while his non-fiction work saw a dramatic increase in volume (three published works including a memoir, a hybrid of semi-memoir and amateur political history, and another journalism collection). In 2000, Amis published the memoir &quot;Experience&quot;, largely concerned with the relationship between the author and his father, the novelist Kingsley Amis. Amis describes his reunion with his daughter, Delilah Seale, resulting from an affair in the 1970s, whom he did not see until she was 19. Amis also discusses, at length, the murder of his cousin Lucy Partington by Fred West when she was 21. The book was awarded the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for biography.

In 2002, Amis published &quot;Koba the Dread&quot;, a devastating history of the crimes of Stalin and the denial that they received from many writers and academics in the West. The book precipitated a literary controversy for its approach to the material and for its attack on Amis&#x27;s long-time friend Christopher Hitchens. Amis accused Hitchens – who was once a committed leftist – of sympathy for Stalin and communism. Although Hitchens wrote a vituperative response to the book in &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, his friendship with Amis emerged unchanged: in response to a reporter&#x27;s question, Amis responded, &quot;We never needed to make up. We had an adult exchange of views, mostly in print, and that was that (or, more exactly, that goes on being that). My friendship with the Hitch has always been perfectly cloudless. It is a love whose month is ever May.&quot;

In 2003, Amis published &quot;Yellow Dog&quot;, his first novel in six years. The book received mixed reviews, with some critics proclaiming the novel a return to form, but its reception was mostly negative. The novelist Tibor Fischer denounced it: &quot;&quot;Yellow Dog&quot; isn&#x27;t bad as in not very good or slightly disappointing. It&#x27;s not-knowing-where-to-look bad. I was reading my copy on the Tube and I was terrified someone would look over my shoulder ... It&#x27;s like your favourite uncle being caught in a school playground, masturbating.&quot; Amis was unrepentant about the novel and its reaction, calling &quot;Yellow Dog&quot; &quot;among my best three&quot;. He gave his own explanation for the novel&#x27;s critical failure: &quot;No one wants to read a difficult literary novel or deal with a prose style which reminds them how thick they are. There&#x27;s a push towards egalitarianism, making writing more chummy and interactive, instead of a higher voice, and that&#x27;s what I go to literature for.&quot; &quot;Yellow Dog&quot; &quot;controversially made the 13-book longlist for the 2003 Booker Prize, despite some scathing reviews&quot;, but failed to win the award. Following the harsh reviews afforded to &quot;Yellow Dog&quot;, Amis relocated from London to the beach resort of José Ignacio, Uruguay, with his family for two years, during which time he worked on his next novel away from the glare and pressures of the London literary scene.

In September 2006, upon his return from Uruguay, Amis published his eleventh novel. &quot;House of Meetings&quot;, a short work, continued the author&#x27;s crusade against the crimes of Stalinism and also focused some consideration on the state of contemporary post-Soviet Russia. The novel centres on the relationship between two brothers incarcerated in a prototypical Siberian gulag who, prior to their deportation, had loved the same woman. &quot;House of Meetings&quot; saw some better critical notices than &quot;Yellow Dog&quot; had received three years before, but there were still some reviewers who felt that Amis&#x27;s fiction work had considerably declined in quality. Despite the praise for &quot;House of Meetings&quot;, once again Amis was overlooked for the Booker Prize longlist. According to a piece in &quot;The Independent&quot;, the novel &quot;was originally to have been collected alongside two short stories – one, a disturbing account of the life of a body-double in the court of Saddam Hussein; the other, the imagined final moments of Muhammad Atta, the leader of the 11 September attacks – but late in the process, Amis decided to jettison both from the book.&quot; The same article asserts that Amis had recently abandoned a novella, &quot;The Unknown Known&quot; (inspired by a phase used by Donald Rumsfeld), in which Muslim terrorists unleash a horde of compulsive rapists on Greeley, Colorado. Instead he continued to work on a follow-up full novel that he had started working on in 2003:

The new novel took some considerable time to write: in 2008, Amis made the &quot;terrible decision&quot; to abandon his first version and a much-different &quot;Pregnant Widow&quot; was not published until 2010. Instead, Amis&#x27;s last published work of the 2000s was the 2008 journalism collection &quot;The Second Plane&quot;, a collection which compiled Amis&#x27;s many writings on the events of 9/11 and the subsequent major events and cultural issues resulting from the War on Terror. The reception to &quot;The Second Plane&quot; was decidedly mixed, with some reviewers finding its tone intelligent and well reasoned, while others believed it to be overly stylised and lacking in authoritative knowledge of key areas under consideration. The most common consensus was that the two short stories included were the weakest point of the collection. The collection sold relatively well but was not well received, particularly in the United States.

===2010s and 2020s===
In 2010, after a period of writing, rewriting, editing, and revision dating back to 2003, &quot;by far the longest writing-time of all [his] books&quot;, Amis published &quot;The Pregnant Widow&quot;, a long novel concerned with the sexual revolution. Its title is based on a quote from Alexander Herzen: &quot;The death of the contemporary forms of social order ought to gladden rather than trouble the soul. Yet what is frightening is that what the departing world leaves behind it is not an heir but a pregnant widow. Between the death of the one and the birth of the other, much water will flow by, a long night of chaos and desolation will pass.&quot;

The first public reading of the then just completed version of &quot;The Pregnant Widow&quot; occurred on 11 May 2009 as part of the Norwich and Norfolk festival. At this reading, according to the coverage of the event for the Writers&#x27; Centre Norwich by Katy Carr, &quot;the writing shows a return to comic form, as the narrator muses on the indignities of facing the mirror as an ageing man, in a prelude to a story set in Italy in 1970, looking at the effect of the sexual revolution on personal relationships. The sexual revolution was the moment, as Amis sees it, that love became divorced from sex. He said he started to write the novel autobiographically, but then concluded that real life was too different from fiction and difficult to drum into novel shape, so he had to rethink the form.&quot;

The story is set in a castle owned by a cheese tycoon in Campania, Italy, where Keith Nearing, a 20-year-old English literature student; his girlfriend, Lily; and her friend, Scheherazade, are on holiday during the hot summer of 1970, the year that Amis says &quot;something was changing in the world of men and women&quot;. The narrator is Keith&#x27;s superego, or conscience, in 2009. Keith&#x27;s sister, Violet, is based on Amis&#x27;s own sister, Sally, described by Amis as one of the revolution&#x27;s most spectacular victims.

Published in a whirl of publicity the likes of which Amis had not received for a novel since the publication of &quot;The Information&quot; in 1995, &quot;The Pregnant Widow&quot; was met by searing criticism, accusations of sexism, and guessing the real-world identity of its characters. Despite a vast amount of coverage, some positive reviews, and a general expectation that Amis&#x27;s time for recognition had come, the novel was overlooked for the 2010 Man Booker Prize longlist. In 2010, Martin Amis was named &quot;GQ&quot; writer of the year.

In 2012 Amis published &quot;Lionel Asbo: State of England&quot;. The novel is centred on the lives of Desmond Pepperdine and his uncle Lionel Asbo, a voracious lout and persistent convict; for the benefit of his US readers, Amis explained the origin of the latter&#x27;s surname in an interview with NPR. It is set against the fictional borough of Diston Town, a grotesque version of modern-day Britain under the reign of celebrity culture, and follows the dramatic events in the lives of both characters: Desmond&#x27;s gradual erudition and maturing; and Lionel&#x27;s fantastic lottery win of almost £140 million. Much to the interest of the press, Amis announced that the character of Lionel Asbo&#x27;s eventual girlfriend, the ambitious glamour model and poet &quot;Threnody&quot; (quotation marks included), had been created to honour the British celebrity Jordan, whom he had a few years earlier summed up as &quot;two bags of silicone&quot;. In an interview with &quot;Newsnight&quot;″s Jeremy Paxman, Amis said the novel was &quot;not a frowning examination of England&quot; but a comedy based on a &quot;fairytale world&quot;, adding that &quot;Lionel Asbo: State of England&quot; was not an attack on the country, insisting he was &quot;proud of being English&quot; and viewed the nation with affection. Reviews, once again, were mixed.

Amis&#x27;s 2014 novel &quot;The Zone of Interest&quot; concerns the Holocaust, his second work of fiction to tackle the subject after &quot;Time&#x27;s Arrow&quot;. In it, Amis endeavoured to imagine the social and domestic lives of the Nazi officers who ran the death camps, and the effect their indifference to human suffering had on their general psychology. It was shortlisted for the 2015 Walter Scott Prize for historical fiction and a 2023 film, &quot;loosely based&quot; on the novel, premiered to acclaim at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival, winning the Grand Prix.

In December 2016, Amis announced two new projects. The first, a collection of journalism, titled &quot;The Rub of Time: Bellow, Nabokov, Hitchens, Travolta, Trump. Essays and Reportage, 1986–2016&quot;, was published in October 2017. The second project, a new untitled novel which Amis was working on, was an autobiographical novel about three key literary figures in his life: the poet Philip Larkin, American novelist Saul Bellow, and noted public intellectual Christopher Hitchens. In an interview with livemint.com, Amis said of the novel-in-progress, &quot;I&#x27;m writing an autobiographical novel that I&#x27;ve been trying to write for 15 years. It&#x27;s not so much about me, it&#x27;s about three other writers – a poet, a novelist and an essayist ... and since I started trying to write it, Larkin died in 1985, Bellow died in 2005, and Hitch died in 2011, and that gives me a theme, death, and it gives me a bit more freedom, and fiction is freedom. It&#x27;s hard going but the one benefit is that I have the freedom to invent things. I don&#x27;t have them looking over my shoulder anymore.&quot; The finished product, &quot;Inside Story&quot; – his first novel in six years – was published in September 2020.

===Other work===
Amis released two collections of short stories (&quot;Einstein&#x27;s Monsters&quot; and &quot;Heavy Water&quot;) and five volumes of collected journalism and criticism (&quot;The Moronic Inferno&quot;, &quot;Visiting Mrs Nabokov&quot;, &quot;The War Against Cliché&quot;, &quot;The Second Plane&quot; and &quot;The Rub of Time&quot;). While he was writing &quot;Money&quot;, he wrote a guide to arcade video games of the 1970s and 1980s, &quot;Invasion of the Space Invaders&quot;.

Amis regularly appeared on television and radio discussion and debate programmes and contributed book reviews and articles to newspapers. His wife Isabel Fonseca released her debut novel &quot;Attachment&quot; in 2009 and two of Amis&#x27;s children, his son Louis and his daughter Fernanda, have also been published in &quot;Standpoint&quot; magazine and &quot;The Guardian&quot;, respectively.

====University of Manchester====
In February 2007, Amis was appointed as a professor of creative writing at the Manchester Centre for New Writing at the University of Manchester, where he started in September 2007. He ran postgraduate seminars, and participated in four public events each year, including a two-week summer school.

Of his position, Amis said: &quot;I may be acerbic in how I write but ... I would find it very difficult to say cruel things to [students] in such a vulnerable position. I imagine I&#x27;ll be surprisingly sweet and gentle with them.&quot; He predicted that the experience might inspire him to write a new book, while adding sardonically: &quot;A campus novel written by an elderly novelist, that&#x27;s what the world wants.&quot; It was revealed that the salary paid to Amis by the university was £80,000 a year in return for 28 contracted hours. The &quot;Manchester Evening News&quot; broke the story saying that according to his contract Amis was paid £3,000 an hour for 28 contracted hours a year teaching. The claim was echoed in headlines in several national papers.

In January 2011, it was announced that Amis would be stepping down from his university position at the end of the current academic year. Of his time teaching creative writing at the University of Manchester, Amis was quoted as saying, &quot;teaching creative writing at Manchester has been a joy&quot; and that he had &quot;become very fond of my colleagues, especially John McAuliffe and Ian McGuire&quot;. He added that he &quot;loved doing all the reading and the talking; and I very much took to the Mancunians. They are a witty and tolerant contingent&quot;. Amis was succeeded in this position by the Irish writer Colm Tóibín in September 2011.

From October 2007 to July 2011, at the University of Manchester&#x27;s Whitworth Hall and Cosmo Rodewald Concert Hall, Amis regularly engaged in public discussions with other experts on literature and various topics (21st-century literature, terrorism, religion, Philip Larkin, science, Britishness, suicide, sex, ageing, his 2010 novel &quot;The Pregnant Widow&quot;, violence, film, the short story, and America).

==Personal life==
Amis married the American academic Antonia Phillips in 1984 and they had two sons together. Towards the end of that marriage, he met the writer Isabel Fonseca, whom he married in 1996; together they had two daughters. He became a grandfather in 2008; he later described his new status as &quot;like getting a telegram from the mortuary&quot;.

From 2004 to 2006, he lived with his second family in Uruguay, where Fonseca&#x27;s father had been born. Upon returning, he said, &quot;Some strange things have happened, it seems to me, in my absence. I didn&#x27;t feel like I was getting more rightwing when I was in Uruguay, but when I got back I felt that I had moved quite a distance to the right while staying in the same place.&quot; He reported that he was disquieted by what he saw as increasingly undisguised hostility towards Israel and the United States.

In late 2010, Amis bought a brownstone residence in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, US, although it was uncertain how much time he would be spending there. In 2012, Amis wrote in &quot;The New Republic&quot; that he was &quot;moving house&quot; from Camden Town in London to Cobble Hill. He also had a residence in Lake Worth Beach, Florida, United States.

===Death===
Amis died from oesophageal cancer at his home in Florida on 19 May 2023. Like his father, he died at age 73. Amis was a life-long smoker.

Amis was knighted in the 2023 King&#x27;s Birthday Honours for services to literature, with the knighthood being backdated to the day before his death.

==Views==
===Writing===
On writing, Amis said in 2014: &quot;I think of writing as more mysterious as I get older, not less mysterious. The whole process is very weird ... It is very spooky.&quot;

Interviewed by Sebastian Faulks on BBC television in 2011, he said that unless he sustained a brain injury, it was unlikely he would write a children&#x27;s book: &quot;The idea of being conscious of who you&#x27;re directing the story to is anathema to me, because, in my view, fiction is freedom and any restraints on that are intolerable ... I would never write about someone that forced me to write at a lower register than what I can write.&quot; The &quot;brain injury&quot; remark caused opprobrium among various children&#x27;s authors, although the poet Roger McGough wagered that &quot;if I gave him £100 to write a children&#x27;s book I bet he&#x27;d do a good one&quot;.

===Nuclear proliferation===
Through the 1980s and 1990s, Amis was a strong critic of nuclear proliferation. His collection of five stories on this theme, &quot;Einstein&#x27;s Monsters&quot;, began with a long essay entitled &quot;Thinkability&quot; in which he set out his views on the issue, writing: &quot;Nuclear weapons repel all thought, perhaps because they can end all thought.&quot;

===Geopolitics===
In comments on the BBC in October 2006, Amis expressed his view that North Korea was the more dangerous of the two remaining members of the Axis of Evil, but that Iran was Britain&#x27;s &quot;natural enemy&quot;, suggesting that Britain should not feel bad about having &quot;helped Iraq scrape a draw with Iran&quot; in the Iran–Iraq War because a &quot;revolutionary and rampant Iran would have been a much more destabilising presence&quot;.

===Electoral politics===
In June 2008, Amis endorsed the candidacy of Barack Obama for president of the United States, stating: &quot;The reason I hope for Obama is that he alone has the chance to reposition America&#x27;s image in the world.&quot; When briefly interviewed by the BBC during its coverage of the 2012 United States presidential election, Amis displayed a change in tone, stating that he was &quot;depressed and frightened&quot; by the US election, rather than excited. Blaming a &quot;deep irrationality of the American people&quot; for the apparent narrow gap between the candidates, Amis said the Republican Party had swung so far to the right that former president Ronald Reagan would be considered a &quot;pariah&quot; by the present party – and invited viewers to imagine a Conservative Party in the UK that had moved to the right so much that it disowned Margaret Thatcher. He said: &quot;Tax cuts for the rich, there&#x27;s not a democracy on earth where that would be mentioned!&quot;

In 2015, Amis criticised Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn in an article for &quot;The Sunday Times&quot;, describing him as &quot;humourless&quot; and &quot;under-educated&quot;. In the aftermath of the 2016 referendum, Amis said that United Kingdom&#x27;s decision to leave the European Union was a &quot;self-inflicted wound&quot; that had left him &quot;depressed&quot;.

=== Islam and Islamism ===
On the day after the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot came to light, Amis was interviewed by &quot;The Times Magazine&quot; about community relations in Britain and the alleged threat from Muslims; he was quoted as saying: &quot;What can we do to raise the price of them doing this? There&#x27;s a definite urge – don&#x27;t you have it? – to say, &#x27;The Muslim community will have to suffer until it gets its house in order.&#x27; What sort of suffering? Not letting them travel. Deportation – further down the road. Curtailing of freedoms. Strip-searching people who look like they&#x27;re from the Middle East or from Pakistan ... Discriminatory stuff, until it hurts the whole community and they start getting tough with their children ... It&#x27;s a huge dereliction on their part.&quot;

The interview provoked immediate controversy, much of it played out in the pages of &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper. The Marxist critic Terry Eagleton, in the 2007 introduction to his work &quot;Ideology&quot;, singled out and attacked Amis for this particular quote, saying that this view is &quot;[n]ot the ramblings of a British National Party thug, ... but the reflections of Martin Amis, leading luminary of the English metropolitan literary world&quot;. In a highly critical &quot;Guardian&quot; article, entitled &quot;The absurd world of Martin Amis&quot;, satirist Chris Morris likened Amis to the Muslim cleric Abu Hamza (who was jailed for inciting racial hatred in 2006), suggesting that both men employed &quot;mock erudition, vitriol and decontextualised quotes from the Koran&quot; to incite hatred.

Elsewhere, Amis was especially careful to distinguish between Islam and radical Islamism, stating: &quot;We can begin by saying, not only that we respect Muhammad, but that no serious person could fail to respect Muhammad – a unique and luminous historical being ... Judged by the continuities he was able to set in motion, Muhammad has strong claims to being the most extraordinary man who ever lived... But Islamism? No, we can hardly be asked to respect a creedal wave that calls for our own elimination ... Naturally we respect Islam. But we do not respect Islamism, just as we respect Muhammad and do not respect Muhammad Atta.&quot;

On terrorism, Amis wrote that he suspected &quot;there exists on our planet a kind of human being who will become a Muslim in order to pursue suicide-mass murder&quot;, and added: &quot;I will never forget the look on the gatekeeper&#x27;s face, at the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, when I suggested, perhaps rather airily, that he skip some calendric prohibition and let me in anyway. His expression, previously cordial and cold, became a mask; and the mask was saying that killing me, my wife, and my children was something for which he now had warrant.&quot;

His views on radical Islamism earned him the contentious sobriquet &quot;Blitcon&quot; (British literary neoconservative) from Ziauddin Sardar, who labelled Amis as such in the &quot;New Statesman&quot;.

===Euthanasia===
Amis aroused a new controversy in 2010 with his comments regarding euthanasia during an interview, when he said that he thought Britain faced a &quot;civil war&quot; between the young and the elderly in society within 10 or 15 years, and called for public euthanasia &quot;booths&quot;. Of the geriatric cohort, he declared: &quot;They&#x27;ll be a population of demented very old people, like an invasion of terrible immigrants, stinking out the restaurants and cafes and shops. ... there should be a booth on every corner where you could get a martini and a medal.&quot;

===Agnosticism===
In 2006, Amis said that &quot;agnostic is the only respectable position, simply because our ignorance of the universe is so vast&quot; that atheism is &quot;premature&quot;. He added that &quot;there&#x27;s not going to be any kind of anthropomorphic entity at all&quot;, but the universe is &quot;so incredibly complicated&quot; and &quot;so over our heads&quot; that we cannot exclude the existence of &quot;an intelligence&quot; behind it.

In 2010, Amis said: &quot;I&#x27;m an agnostic, which is the only rational position. It&#x27;s not because I feel a God or think that anything resembling the banal God of religion will turn up. But I think that atheism sounds like a proof of something, and it&#x27;s incredibly evident that we are nowhere near intelligent enough to understand the universe ... Writers are above all individualists, and above all writing is freedom, so they will go off in all sorts of directions. I think it does apply to the debate about religion, in that it&#x27;s a crabbed novelist who pulls the shutters down and says, there&#x27;s no other thing. Don&#x27;t use the word God: but something more intelligent than us ... If we can&#x27;t understand it, then it&#x27;s formidable. And we understand very little.&quot;

==Bibliography==
===Novels===
Amis published a total of 15 novels:
* &quot;The Rachel Papers&quot; (1973: )
* &quot;Dead Babies&quot; (1975: )
* &quot;Success&quot; (1978: )
* &quot;Other People&quot; (1981: )
* &quot;Money&quot; (1984: )
* &quot;London Fields&quot; (1989: )
* &quot;Time&#x27;s Arrow: Or the Nature of the Offence&quot; (1991: )
* &quot;The Information&quot; (1995: )
* &quot;Night Train&quot; (1997: )
* &quot;Yellow Dog&quot; (2003: )
* &quot;House of Meetings&quot; (2006 : )
* &quot;The Pregnant Widow&quot; (2010: )
* &quot;Lionel Asbo: State of England&quot; (2012: )
* &quot;The Zone of Interest&quot; (2014: )
* &quot;Inside Story&quot; (2020: )

=== Short fiction ===
;Collections
* &quot;Einstein&#x27;s Monsters&quot; (1987: )
* &quot;Two Stories&quot; (1994: ; both later collected in &quot;Heavy Water and Other Stories&quot;)
* &quot;God&#x27;s Dice&quot; (1995: ; two stories reprinted from &quot;Einstein&#x27;s Monsters&quot;, part of the Penguin 60s series)
* &quot;Heavy Water and Other Stories&quot; (1998: )
*&quot;Amis Omnibus&quot; (omnibus) (1999)
*&quot;The Fiction of Martin Amis&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Vintage Amis&quot; (2004)
;Stories
===Non-fiction===
;Books
* &quot;Invasion of the Space Invaders&quot; (1982: )
* &quot;The Moronic Inferno: And Other Visits to America&quot; (1986: )
* &quot;Visiting Mrs Nabokov: And Other Excursions&quot; (1993: )
* &quot;Experience&quot; (2000: )
* &quot;The War Against Cliché: Essays and Reviews 1971–2000&quot; (2001: )
* &quot;Koba the Dread: Laughter and the Twenty Million&quot; (2002: )
* &quot;The Second Plane&quot; (2008: )
* &quot;The Rub of Time: Bellow, Nabokov, Hitchens, Travolta, Trump. Essays and Reportage, 1986–2016&quot; (2017: )
;Essays and reporting
===Screenplays===
* &quot;Saturn 3&quot; (1980)
* &quot;London Fields&quot; (2018; with Roberta Hanley)
;Bibliography notes
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* The Martin Amis Web 
* Martin Amis page at &quot;The Guardian&quot;
* Martin Amis, &quot;The New York Times&quot;: Reviews of Martin Amis&#x27;s earlier books; articles about and by Martin Amis
* &quot;The Amis Inheritance&quot; – Profile of Martin and Kingsley Amis from &quot;The New York Times Magazine&quot;, 22 April 2007
* 
* &quot;Martin Amis on Trump, racism and political correctness&quot;, CBC News, 1 April 2018 – brief interview with Wendy Mesley
* Martin Amis Interviews Roman Polanski</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q310176" start="0" end="21" title="Martin Amis" label="Sir Martin Louis Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3860773" start="162" end="167" title="Money (novel)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670367" start="191" end="204" title="London Fields (novel)" label="London Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="235" end="266" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421033" start="288" end="298" title="Experience (book)" label="Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="334" end="346" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804773" start="378" end="395" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow (novel)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051717" start="435" end="445" title="Yellow Dog (novel)" label="Yellow Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747314" start="502" end="556" title="Manchester Centre for New Writing" label="University of Manchester&amp;#x27;s Centre for New Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="594" end="603" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423189" start="723" end="738" title="Late capitalism" label="late-capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="905" end="923" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="992" end="1003" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="1008" end="1024" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="1051" end="1064" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q261054" start="1158" end="1167" title="Will Self" label="Will Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q140052" start="1172" end="1183" title="Zadie Smith" label="Zadie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="1221" end="1239" title="oesophageal cancer" label="oesophageal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1274" end="1281" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1297" end="1315" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="1427" end="1442" title="1973 oil crisis" label="the oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="1455" end="1478" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1495" end="1499" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1641" end="1647" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="1679" end="1692" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="1711" end="1718" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="1750" end="1757" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="1779" end="1799" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018662" start="1805" end="1844" title="Hilary Kilmarnock" label="Hilary (&amp;quot;Hilly&amp;quot;) Ann Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="1868" end="1891" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Ministry of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="1984" end="1997" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8828" start="2207" end="2215" title="Mallorca" label="Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="2259" end="2272" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917566" start="2380" end="2398" title="Bishop Gore School" label="Bishop Gore School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="2402" end="2409" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025662" start="2415" end="2450" title="Cambridgeshire High School for Boys" label="Cambridgeshire High School for Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836777" start="2593" end="2602" title="Lucky Jim" label="Lucky Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="2635" end="2656" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q302433" start="2784" end="2798" title="Richard Hughes (British writer)" label="Richard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q489149" start="2812" end="2834" title="A High Wind in Jamaica (film)" label="A High Wind in Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723404" start="3132" end="3153" title="Elizabeth Jane Howard" label="Elizabeth Jane Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="3173" end="3184" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81173" start="3251" end="3273" title="Exeter College, Oxford" label="Exeter College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="3282" end="3302" title="congratulatory first" label="congratulatory first"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="3360" end="3364" title="thesis committee" label="viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q477508" start="3586" end="3601" title="Northanger Abbey" label="a nod to Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="3625" end="3637" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="3682" end="3711" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="The Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="3798" end="3811" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236480" start="3852" end="3862" title="John Gross" label="John Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="3890" end="3910" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759191" start="4474" end="4491" title="The Rachel Papers (novel)" label="The Rachel Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979035" start="4518" end="4525" title="Lemmons" label="Lemmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q251110" start="4569" end="4591" title="Somerset Maugham Award" label="Somerset Maugham Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347896" start="4825" end="4834" title="The Rachel Papers" label="1989 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400390" start="4843" end="4854" title="Dead Babies (novel)" label="Dead Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q211679" start="5112" end="5121" title="zeitgeist" label="zeitgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245096" start="5347" end="5364" title="Dead Babies (film)" label="A film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376474" start="5422" end="5436" title="Peter Bradshaw" label="Peter Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632552" start="5533" end="5540" title="Success (novel)" label="Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765" start="6055" end="6068" title="Stanley Donen" label="Stanley Donen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6266" end="6274" title="Saturn 3" label="Saturn 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108607" start="6441" end="6470" title="Other People (novel)" label="Other People: A Mystery Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q670637" start="6534" end="6543" title="Huis Clos" label="Huis Clos"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="6703" end="6718" title="Narrative mode" label="narrative voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138630" start="6858" end="6869" title="Craig Raine" label="Craig Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774741" start="6877" end="6913" title="Martian poetry" label="&amp;quot;Martian&amp;quot; school of poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3860773" start="7092" end="7097" title="Money (novel)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670367" start="7111" end="7124" title="London Fields (novel)" label="London Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742008" start="7141" end="7156" title="The Information (novel)" label="The Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="7456" end="7467" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="7728" end="7735" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="8273" end="8277" title="Time Magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8436" end="8439" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899090" start="8444" end="8484" title="Money (British TV series)" label="adapted &amp;quot;Money&amp;quot; for television"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="8524" end="8529" title="BBC 2" label="BBC 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q363400" start="8531" end="8541" title="Nick Frost" label="Nick Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q445116" start="8593" end="8611" title="Vincent Kartheiser" label="Vincent Kartheiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402622" start="8613" end="8625" title="Emma Pierson" label="Emma Pierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q239476" start="8630" end="8640" title="Jerry Hall" label="Jerry Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730236" start="10076" end="10086" title="Maggie Gee (novelist)" label="Maggie Gee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19693215" start="10200" end="10211" title="Martyn Goff" label="Martyn Goff"/>
<link wikidata="Q313001" start="10734" end="10746" title="David Lodge (author)" label="David [Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059355" start="10905" end="10943" title="London Fields (film)" label="2018 film of &amp;quot;London Fields&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804773" start="11123" end="11140" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow (novel)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="11172" end="11184" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="11290" end="11313" title="Nazi concentration camp" label="Nazi concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="11342" end="11355" title="arrow of time" label="arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="11396" end="11409" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q265954" start="11423" end="11439" title="Slaughterhouse 5" label="Slaughterhouse 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="11457" end="11471" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090238" start="11485" end="11504" title="Counter-Clock World" label="Counter-Clock World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="11604" end="11609" title="Nazis" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="11704" end="11720" title="Nordic mythology" label="Nordic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q670265" start="12057" end="12067" title="Eisteddfod" label="Eisteddfod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206890" start="12155" end="12167" title="Pat Kavanagh (agent)" label="Pat Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q508842" start="12211" end="12223" title="Andrew Wylie (literary agent)" label="Andrew Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q295431" start="12318" end="12331" title="Julian Barnes" label="Julian Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421033" start="12421" end="12431" title="Experience (book)" label="Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933638" start="12816" end="12827" title="Night Train (novel)" label="Night Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940294" start="13086" end="13090" title="Noir fiction" label="noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q105756" start="13253" end="13264" title="John Updike" label="John Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570937" start="13337" end="13345" title="Prospect (magazine)" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="13809" end="13820" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q62806985" start="13869" end="13880" title="Out of Blue" label="Out of Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421033" start="14275" end="14285" title="Experience (book)" label="Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698449" start="14591" end="14606" title="Lucy Partington" label="Lucy Partington"/>
<link wikidata="Q577052" start="14610" end="14619" title="Fred West" label="Fred West"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="14662" end="14693" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424251" start="14740" end="14754" title="Koba the Dread" label="Koba the Dread"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="14801" end="14807" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="15016" end="15036" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="15204" end="15216" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051717" start="15617" end="15627" title="Yellow Dog (novel)" label="Yellow Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q367848" start="15808" end="15821" title="Tibor Fischer" label="Tibor Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303777" start="16905" end="16926" title="José Ignacio, Uruguay" label="José Ignacio, Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915151" start="17160" end="17177" title="House of Meetings" label="House of Meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="17257" end="17266" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="17451" end="17456" title="gulag" label="gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="17899" end="17914" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="18077" end="18091" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q110067" start="18134" end="18147" title="Muhammad Atta" label="Muhammad Atta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="18167" end="18187" title="11 September attacks" label="11 September attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="18394" end="18409" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q94274" start="18480" end="18497" title="Greeley, Colorado" label="Greeley, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762950" start="18902" end="18918" title="The Second Plane" label="The Second Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="18997" end="19001" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="19073" end="19086" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758042" start="19747" end="19765" title="The Pregnant Widow" label="The Pregnant Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="19805" end="19822" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q201221" start="19859" end="19875" title="Alexander Herzen" label="Alexander Herzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061561" start="20457" end="20485" title="Writers&amp;#x27; Centre Norwich" label="Writers&amp;#x27; Centre Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="21097" end="21105" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="21394" end="21402" title="superego" label="superego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758042" start="21493" end="21498" title="Sally Amis" label="Sally"/>
<link wikidata="Q71954093" start="22031" end="22052" title="2010 Man Booker Prize" label="2010 Man Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="22100" end="22102" title="GQ" label="GQ"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22159" end="22188" title="Lionel Asbo: State of England" label="Lionel Asbo: State of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043954" start="22374" end="22409" title="Anti-social behaviour order" label="origin of the latter&amp;#x27;s surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="22431" end="22434" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q237602" start="22995" end="23001" title="Jordan (Katie Price)" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25869" start="23109" end="23118" title="Newsnight" label="Newsnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="23127" end="23140" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Jeremy Paxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162860" start="23510" end="23530" title="The Zone of Interest (novel)" label="The Zone of Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="23550" end="23559" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804773" start="23622" end="23639" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow (novel)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q960538" start="23876" end="23894" title="Walter Scott Prize" label="Walter Scott Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q115993222" start="23922" end="23933" title="The Zone of Interest (film)" label="a 2023 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q115484744" start="24003" end="24028" title="2023 Cannes Film Festival" label="2023 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q844804" start="24042" end="24052" title="Grand Prix (Cannes Film Festival)" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q119149957" start="24158" end="24250" title="The Rub of Time" label="The Rub of Time: Bellow, Nabokov, Hitchens, Travolta, Trump. Essays and Reportage, 1986–2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="24442" end="24455" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="24475" end="24486" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="24518" end="24538" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271133" start="24561" end="24573" title="livemint.com" label="livemint.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872449" start="25196" end="25208" title="Inside Story (novel)" label="Inside Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349780" start="25353" end="25377" title="Einstein&amp;#x27;s Monsters" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695210" start="25394" end="25405" title="Heavy Water and Other Stories" label="Heavy Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752312" start="25475" end="25494" title="The Moronic Inferno" label="The Moronic Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936323" start="25508" end="25528" title="Visiting Mrs Nabokov" label="Visiting Mrs Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773461" start="25542" end="25564" title="The War Against Cliché" label="The War Against Cliché"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762950" start="25578" end="25594" title="The Second Plane" label="The Second Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q119149957" start="25611" end="25626" title="The Rub of Time" label="The Rub of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16569883" start="25744" end="25774" title="Invasion of the Space Invaders" label="Invasion of the Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598668" start="26109" end="26119" title="Standpoint (magazine)" label="Standpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="26145" end="26157" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747314" start="26292" end="26325" title="Manchester Centre for New Writing" label="Manchester Centre for New Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="26333" end="26357" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070672" start="27071" end="27094" title="Manchester Evening News" label="Manchester Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q27975640" start="27677" end="27688" title="Ian McGuire" label="Ian McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q470758" start="27908" end="27919" title="Colm Tóibín" label="Colm Tóibín"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072883" start="28011" end="28025" title="Whitworth Hall" label="Whitworth Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580996" start="28157" end="28180" title="21st-century literature" label="21st-century literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="28203" end="28216" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445223" start="28519" end="28533" title="Isabel Fonseca" label="Isabel Fonseca"/>
<link wikidata="Q546868" start="28788" end="28809" title="Gonzalo Fonseca" label="Fonseca&amp;#x27;s father"/>
<link wikidata="Q665231" start="29266" end="29276" title="brownstone" label="brownstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977149" start="29290" end="29311" title="Cobble Hill, Brooklyn" label="Cobble Hill, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="29414" end="29430" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q149836" start="29479" end="29490" title="Camden Town" label="Camden Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q984358" start="29544" end="29569" title="Lake Worth Beach, Florida" label="Lake Worth Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="29614" end="29632" title="oesophageal cancer" label="oesophageal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="29747" end="29755" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q119802813" start="29763" end="29796" title="2023 Birthday Honours" label="2023 King&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q443055" start="30104" end="30120" title="Sebastian Faulks" label="Sebastian Faulks"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="30183" end="30195" title="brain injury" label="brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741508" start="30652" end="30665" title="Roger McGough" label="Roger McGough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364891" start="30859" end="30880" title="nuclear proliferation" label="nuclear proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="31083" end="31098" title="Nuclear weapons" label="Nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q340700" start="31325" end="31337" title="Axis of Evil" label="Axis of Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="31511" end="31524" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="31701" end="31713" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="31943" end="31983" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="32246" end="32262" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="32315" end="32328" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="32426" end="32444" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="32508" end="32525" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="32666" end="32672" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q291169" start="32680" end="32693" title="Jeremy Corbyn" label="Jeremy Corbyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="32718" end="32734" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="32839" end="32854" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="32905" end="32929" title="Brexit" label="leave the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q918162" start="33059" end="33091" title="2006 transatlantic aircraft plot" label="2006 transatlantic aircraft plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="33137" end="33155" title="The Times Magazine" label="The Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="33227" end="33234" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="33926" end="33938" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="33960" end="33967" title="Marxist" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q315349" start="33975" end="33989" title="Terry Eagleton" label="Terry Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161269" start="34163" end="34185" title="British National Party" label="British National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q552780" start="34413" end="34425" title="Chris Morris (satirist)" label="Chris Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q335075" start="34460" end="34469" title="Abu Hamza al-Masri" label="Abu Hamza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315426" start="34490" end="34512" title="inciting racial hatred" label="inciting racial hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="34624" end="34629" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="34735" end="34743" title="Islamism" label="Islamism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="34809" end="34817" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="35548" end="35564" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="35964" end="35979" title="neoconservative" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921138" start="35986" end="36001" title="Ziauddin Sardar" label="Ziauddin Sardar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="36042" end="36055" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="36148" end="36158" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="36444" end="36452" title="demented" label="demented"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="36813" end="36820" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759191" start="37998" end="38015" title="The Rachel Papers (novel)" label="The Rachel Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400390" start="38039" end="38050" title="Dead Babies (novel)" label="Dead Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632552" start="38074" end="38081" title="Success (novel)" label="Success"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108607" start="38105" end="38117" title="Other People (novel)" label="Other People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3860773" start="38141" end="38146" title="Money (novel)" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670367" start="38170" end="38183" title="London Fields (novel)" label="London Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804773" start="38207" end="38254" title="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow (novel)" label="Time&amp;#x27;s Arrow: Or the Nature of the Offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742008" start="38278" end="38293" title="The Information (novel)" label="The Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933638" start="38317" end="38328" title="Night Train (novel)" label="Night Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051717" start="38352" end="38362" title="Yellow Dog (novel)" label="Yellow Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915151" start="38386" end="38403" title="House of Meetings" label="House of Meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758042" start="38428" end="38446" title="The Pregnant Widow" label="The Pregnant Widow"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38470" end="38499" title="Lionel Asbo: State of England" label="Lionel Asbo: State of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18162860" start="38523" end="38543" title="The Zone of Interest (novel)" label="The Zone of Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q108872449" start="38567" end="38579" title="Inside Story (novel)" label="Inside Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349780" start="38639" end="38663" title="Einstein&amp;#x27;s Monsters" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695210" start="38687" end="38698" title="Two Stories" label="Two Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349780" start="38789" end="38804" title="God&amp;#x27;s Dice" label="God&amp;#x27;s Dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162756" start="38897" end="38908" title="Penguin 60s" label="Penguin 60s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695210" start="38925" end="38954" title="Heavy Water and Other Stories" label="Heavy Water and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q16569883" start="39135" end="39165" title="Invasion of the Space Invaders" label="Invasion of the Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39189" end="39237" title="The Moronic Inferno: And Other Visits to America" label="The Moronic Inferno: And Other Visits to America"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39261" end="39303" title="Visiting Mrs Nabokov: And Other Excursions" label="Visiting Mrs Nabokov: And Other Excursions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421033" start="39327" end="39337" title="Experience (book)" label="Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773461" start="39361" end="39413" title="The War Against Cliché" label="The War Against Cliché: Essays and Reviews 1971–2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39437" end="39484" title="Koba the Dread: Laughter and the Twenty Million" label="Koba the Dread: Laughter and the Twenty Million"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762950" start="39508" end="39524" title="The Second Plane" label="The Second Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q119149957" start="39548" end="39640" title="The Rub of Time" label="The Rub of Time: Bellow, Nabokov, Hitchens, Travolta, Trump. Essays and Reportage, 1986–2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q657075" start="39704" end="39712" title="Saturn 3" label="Saturn 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059355" start="39734" end="39747" title="London Fields (film)" label="London Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351506" start="39766" end="39780" title="Roberta Hanley" label="Roberta Hanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="40156" end="40183" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="The New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567254" start="40324" end="40336" title="Wendy Mesley" label="Wendy Mesley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87241" wikidata="Q157169" url="?curid=87241" title="YMCA">
<text>YMCA, sometimes regionally called the Y, is a worldwide youth organization based in Geneva, Switzerland, with more than 64 million beneficiaries in 120 countries. It has nearly 90,000 staff, some 920,000 volunteers and 12,000 branches worldwide. It was founded in London on 6 June 1844 by George Williams as the Young Men&#x27;s Christian Association. The organization&#x27;s stated aim is to put Christian values into practice by developing a healthy body, mind, and spirit.

From its inception, YMCA grew rapidly, ultimately becoming a worldwide movement founded on the principles of muscular Christianity. Local YMCAs deliver projects and services focused on youth development through a wide variety of youth activities, including providing athletic facilities, holding classes for a wide variety of skills, promoting Christianity, and humanitarian work.

YMCA is a non-governmental federation, with each independent local YMCA affiliated with its national organization. The national organizations, in turn, are part of both a geographically regional area alliance and the World Alliance of YMCA. YMCA programs vary between nations and regions, but are all based on the principles espoused in the Paris Basis.

The YMCA is a parachurch organization based on Protestant values. Similar organizations include the YWCA, and the Young Men&#x27;s Hebrew Association (YMHA).

In popular culture, the YMCA is the subject of the 1978 song &quot;Y.M.C.A.&quot; by the Village People.

== History ==
===19th century===


The Young Men&#x27;s Christian Association (YMCA) was founded on 6 June 1844, by George Williams and eleven friends. Williams was a London draper who was typical of the young men drawn to the cities by the Industrial Revolution. They were concerned about the lack of healthy activities for young men in major cities; the options available were usually taverns and brothels. Williams&#x27; idea grew out of meetings he held for prayer and Bible-reading among his fellow workers in a business in the city of London, and on 6 June 1844, he held the first meeting that led to the founding of YMCA with the purpose of &quot;the improving of the spiritual condition of young men engaged in the drapery, embroidery, and other trades.&quot; The first YMCA premises opened on Great Russell Street, London, in 1844. Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury served as YMCA&#x27;s first president from 1851 until his death in 1885.

By 1845, YMCA started a popular series of lectures that from 1848 were held at Exeter Hall, London, and started being published the following year, with the series running until 1865.

YMCA was associated with industrialisation and the movement of young people to cities to work. YMCA &quot;combined preaching in the streets and the distribution of religious tracts with a social ministry. Philanthropists saw them as places for wholesome recreation that would preserve youth from the temptations of alcohol, gambling, and prostitution and that would promote good citizenship.&quot;

The YMCA spread outside the United Kingdom in part thanks to the Great Exhibition of 1851, the first in a series of World&#x27;s Fairs which was held in Hyde Park, London. Later that year there were YMCAs in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United States.

The idea of creating a truly global movement with an international headquarters was led by Henry Dunant, Secretary of YMCA Geneva, who would later go on to found the International Committee of the Red Cross and win the first Nobel Peace Prize. Dunant successfully convinced YMCA Paris to organise the first YMCA World Conference. The Conference took place in August 1855, bringing together 99 young delegates from nine countries, held before the Exposition Universelle (1855). They discussed joining in a federation to enhance cooperation amongst individual YMCA societies. This marked the beginning of the World Alliance of YMCAs. The conference adopted the Paris Basis, a common mission for all present and future national YMCAs. Its motto was taken from the Bible, &quot;That they all may be one&quot; (John 17:21).

Other ecumenical bodies, such as the World YWCA, the World Council of Churches, and the World Student Christian Federation have reflected elements of the Paris Basis in their founding mission statements. In 1865, the fourth World Conference of YMCAs, held in Germany, affirmed the importance of developing the whole individual in spirit, mind, and body. The concept of physical work through sports, a new concept for the time, was also recognized as part of this &quot;muscular Christianity&quot;.

YMCA has cooperated with camping organizations, including Boy Scouts of America, Camp Fire, and Girl Scouts of the USA.

Two themes resonated during the first World Conference: the need to respect the local autonomy of YMCA societies, and the purpose of YMCA: to unite all young, male Christians for the extension and expansion of the Kingdom of God. The former idea is expressed in the preamble:

YMCA was influential during the 1870s and the 1930s, during which times it most successfully promoted &quot;evangelical Christianity in weekday and Sunday services, while promoting good sportsmanship in athletic contests in gyms (where basketball and volleyball were invented) and swimming pools.&quot; Later in this period, and continuing on through the 20th century, YMCA had &quot;become interdenominational and more concerned with promoting morality and good citizenship than a distinctive interpretation of Christianity.&quot; Prior to the beginning of the American Civil War, YMCA provided nursing, shelter, and other support during wartime in the United States.

In 1878, the World YMCA offices were established in Geneva, Switzerland by Dunant. Later, in 1900, North American YMCAs, in collaboration with the World YMCA, set up centres to work with emigrants in European ports, as millions of people were leaving for the US. In 1880, in Norway, YMCA became the first national organization to adopt a strict policy of equal gender representation in committees and national boards.

In 1885, Camp Baldhead (later known as Camp Dudley), the first residential camp in the United States and North America, was established by George A. Sanford and Sumner F. Dudley, both of whom worked for YMCA. The camp, originally located near Orange Lake in New Jersey, moved to Lake Wawayanda in Sussex County, New Jersey, the following year, and then to the shore of Lake Champlain near Westport, New York, in 1891.

===20th century===


YMCA was an early influence on scouting that began in the United Kingdom in 1907. The year after its inception by Robert Baden-Powell, the first scout troops met in the Nottingham and Birkenhead YMCA buildings. The YMCA would also influence the Boy Scouts of America (BSA) and German Scouting. Edgar M. Robinson, a Chicago-area YMCA administrator, worked at YMCA while also becoming the BSA&#x27;s first director.

In 1916, K. T. Paul became the first Indian national general secretary of India. Paul had started rural development programs for self-reliance of marginal farmers, through co-operatives and credit societies. These programmes became very popular. He also coined the term &quot;rural reconstruction&quot;, and many of the principles he developed were later incorporated into the Indian&#x27;s government nationwide community development programs. In 1923, Y. C. James Yen, of YMCA China, devised the &quot;thousand character system&quot;, based on pilot projects in education. The method also became very popular, and in 1923, it led to the founding of the Chinese National Association of the Mass Education Movement. In 1878, YMCA was organized near the Jaffa Gate of the Old City of Jerusalem and the current landmark building was dedicated by General Lord Allenby in 1933 during the British Mandate of Palestine.

Within ten days of the declaration of World War I, YMCA had established 250 recreation centres, also known as huts, in the United Kingdom, and went to build temporary huts across Europe to support both soldiers and civilians alike, run by thousands of volunteers. Some of them, known as field secretaries, also went into war zones to support prisoners-of-war in Europe and Russia. Notable supporters and volunteers included Clementine Churchill (for which she was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1918), Oswald Chambers and Robert and Olave Baden-Powell. Within the first month the YMCA Women&#x27;s Auxiliary was formed, and Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein would go on to become a notable member and chairman of its organising committee.

During World War I, YMCA raised and spent over $155 million on welfare efforts for American soldiers. It deployed over 25,000 staff in military units and bases from Siberia to Egypt to France. They took over the military&#x27;s morale and comfort operations worldwide. Irving Berlin wrote &quot;Yip Yip Yaphank&quot;, a revue that included a song entitled &quot;I Can Always Find a Little Sunshine in the YMCA&quot;. Frances Gulick was a YMCA worker stationed in France during World War I who received a United States Army citation for valour and courage on the field.

During World War II, YMCA was involved in supporting millions of POWs and in supporting Japanese Americans in internment camps. This help included helping young men leave the camps to attend Springfield College and providing youth activities in the camps. In addition, YMCA was one of seven organizations that helped to found the USO.

In Europe, YMCA helped refugees, particularly displaced Jews. Sometimes YMCA participated in escape operations. Mostly, however, its role was limited to providing relief packages to refugees.

It was also involved in war work with displaced persons and refugees. It set up War Prisoners Aid to support prisoners of war by providing sports equipment, musical instruments, art materials, radios, gramophones, eating utensils, and other items. Donald A. Lowrie of the YMCA created and led the Committee of Nîmes, also known as the Camps Committee, a group that gathered leaders from over twenty humanitarian organizations to coordinate advocacy for people in the internment camps, including helping children leave these camps to live in children&#x27;s colonies or eventually escape to freedom.

YMCA Motion Picture Bureau, renamed Association Films in 1946, was one of the United Kingdom&#x27;s largest non-theatrical distribution companies. In 1947 the World YMCA gained special consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council. In 1955 the first black President of the World YMCA, Charles Dunbar Sherman from Liberia, was elected. At 37 years, he was also the youngest president in World YMCA history. In 1959 YMCA of the USA developed the first nationally organized scuba diving course and certified their first skin and scuba diving instructors.

By 1974, YMCA had set up a curriculum to begin teaching cave diving.

In 1973, the Sixth World Council in Kampala, Uganda, became the first World Council in Africa, hosted by Uganda YMCA. It reaffirmed the Paris Basis and adopted a declaration of principles, known as the Kampala Principles. It include the principles of justice, creativity and honesty. It stated what had become obvious: that a global viewpoint was more necessary. It also recognized that YMCA and its national member organizations would have to take political stands, particularly in international challenges and crises.

In 1976, YMCA of the USA appointed Violet King Henry to executive director to its Organizational Development Group, making her the first woman named to a senior management position with the American national YMCA.

In 1985, the World Council of YMCAs passed a resolution against apartheid, and anti-apartheid campaigns were formed under the leadership of Lee Soo-Min (Korea), the first Asian secretary general of the World YMCA.

In 1998, the 14th World Council of YMCAs in Germany adopted &quot;Challenge 21&quot;, intended to place more focus on global challenges, such as gender equality, sustainable development, war and peace, fair distribution, and the challenges of globalization, racism, and HIV/AIDS.

===21st century===
In 2002, the World Council in Oaxtepec, Morelos, Mexico, called for a peaceful solution to the Middle East crisis. On 12 July 2010, YMCA of the USA rebranded its name to the popular nickname &quot;The Y&quot; and revised the iconic red and black logo to create five colored versions. Today, YMCAs are open to all, regardless of ability, age, culture, ethnicity, gender, race, religion, sexual orientation and socioeconomic background.

During the 19th World Council meeting in 2018 in Chiang Mai, Carlos Sanvee from Togo became the first African and current Secretary General of World YMCA. During the same World Council meeting, Patricia Pelton from Canada emerged as the first female President of World YMCA.

YMCA&#x27;s 175th anniversary in 2019 was celebrated with a global gathering of the organisation&#x27;s young leaders at ExCeL London from 4 to 7 August, with 3,200 people from 100 countries. The event celebrated youth leadership, and elevated the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. It was attended by guests including Jayathma Wickramanayake on behalf of Office of the Secretary-General&#x27;s Envoy on Youth, and María Fernanda Espinosa, the President of the United Nations General Assembly.

In December 2024, the Central YMCA, located on London&#x27;s Great Russell Street and recognized as the first YMCA in the world since its founding in 1844, announced its imminent closure. The decision, attributed by the YMCA to high maintenance costs and demographic changes, was met with widespread dismay from members and the broader community. A petition to reverse the closure garnered thousands of signatures on Change.org, reflecting the significant public outcry. The Central YMCA had long been a cornerstone of the community, boasting extensive facilities including a swimming pool, sauna, steam room, exercise studios, and a cycling studio, making it the largest YMCA premises in London.

The closure also sparked criticism toward Criterion Capital, the property company who acquired the site. Campaigners alleged that the company&#x27;s focus on commercial redevelopment conflicted with the YMCA&#x27;s historical mission of providing affordable and inclusive services for the community. The &quot;Save the YMCA&quot; campaign emerged as a grassroots effort to halt the closure, with supporters calling for a six-month pause to explore sustainable solutions for retaining the facilities. The campaign drew media attention, with coverage from BBC News and other outlets, highlighting concerns about the loss of vital community resources in central London.

Critics of the decision have argued that the sale of the premises to Criterion Capital or its affiliates undermines the YMCA&#x27;s legacy, suggesting that the closure represents a broader trend of prioritizing private development over public good. Campaigners have urged Criterion Capital and its leadership, including the Aziz family, to collaborate on preserving the facilities, emphasizing the potential to reimagine the site while maintaining its original purpose of serving the community.

== Global structure ==

A federated model of governance has created a diversity of YMCA programmes and services, with YMCAs in different countries and communities offering vastly different programming in response to local community needs. Financial support for local associations is derived from programme fees, membership dues, community chests, foundation grants, charitable contributions, sustaining memberships, corporate sponsors and other funding models used in the charitable sector.

YMCA globally operates on a federation model with each independent local YMCA affiliated with its national organization, known as a National Council. The national organizations, in turn, are affiliated to both an Area Alliance, including Europe, Asia Pacific, the Middle East, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, Mexico, the United States, and Canada, and the World YMCA. The World YMCA is the highest affiliation body. Each local, national and regional YMCA is independent of each other, but local, regional and international cooperation, partnerships and collaborations are part of the organizations work. Each National Council is led by a National General Secretary, a role that similar to that of a CEO. At each stage of the affiliation process, there are usually membership fees paid by local YMCAs to the central organization.

Ever since the first World Conference in August 1855, in Paris, the World YMCA has convened a World Conference, later renamed the World Council, every three to four years and is YMCA&#x27;s highest decision making forum. Every National Council sends a delegation who hold a number of votes, which are dependent on the financial turnover of that National Council. The World Council is &quot;responsible for setting the policies and direction of the World YMCA, electing its Officers and Executive Committee, evaluating the work of the last four years, and deliberating on priorities for the next quadrennium&quot;.

The most recent World Council took place in 2022 in Aarhus, Denmark, and the 21st World Council is scheduled for July 2026 in Toronto.

==Activities and services==

===Accommodation===

YMCAs around the world offer various types of accommodation. In some places, this takes the form of budget accommodation available to the public such as youth hostels, or hotels, which, in turn, generate income for other charitable activities. In England and Wales, YMCAs offer supported accommodation for vulnerable and homeless young people.

Until the late 1950s, YMCAs in the United States were built with hotel-like rooms called residences or dormitories. These rooms were built with the young men in mind coming from rural America and many foreign-born young men arriving to the new cities. The rooms became a significant part of American culture, known as an inexpensive and safe place for a visitor to stay in an unfamiliar city (as, for example, in the 1978 Village People song &quot;Y.M.C.A.&quot;). In 1940, there were about 100,000 rooms at YMCAs, more than any hotel chain. By 2006, YMCAs with residences had become relatively rare in the US, but many still remain.

===Arts and humanities===
YMCAs offer classes in the visual arts, including ceramics, drawing, painting, and photography, the performing arts, including music, dance, and poetry, and literature, including reading, storytelling, and public readings. These programs are not offered at each YMCA but the ones who have same to offer these programs give a benefit to their communities to give children a safe place to go to enjoy such activities.

===Camping===
YMCA camping began in 1885 when Camp Baldhead (later known as Camp Dudley) was established by G.A. Sanford and Sumner F. Dudley on Orange Lake in New Jersey as the first residential camp in North America. The camp later moved to Lake Champlain near Westport, New York.

Camping also had early origins in YMCA movement in Canada with the establishment in 1889 of Big Cove YMCA Camp in Merigomish, Nova Scotia.

===Children&#x27;s and family programs===
YMCAs offer child care, including supervised space for infants, toddlers, preschoolers, and school-age children to stay and play while parents enjoy a workout. YMCA staff members are trained to ensure the safety and well-being of the children in their care so that parents can confidently pursue their fitness goals or take part in the various YMCA programs.

Family programs include family nights, parent-child classes, and different events put on by the YMCA. YMCA&#x27;s parent/child programs, conducted under YMCA&#x27;s Y-Guides program, provides structured opportunities for fellowship, camping, and community-building activities, including craft-making and community service, for several generations of parents and children from kindergarten through eighth grade.

YMCA after-school programs are geared towards providing students with a variety of recreational, cultural, leadership, academic, and social skills for development.

===Education and academia===
Multiple colleges and universities have historically had connections to YMCA. Springfield College, of Springfield, Massachusetts, was founded in 1885 as an international training school for YMCA Professionals, while one of the two schools that eventually became Concordia University—Sir George Williams College—started from night courses offered at the Montreal YMCA. Northeastern University began out of a YMCA in Boston, and Franklin University began as YMCA School of Commerce. San Francisco&#x27;s Golden Gate University traces its roots to the founding of YMCA Night School on 1 November 1881.

Detroit College of Law, now the Michigan State University College of Law, was founded with a strong connection to the Detroit, Michigan YMCA. It had a 99-year lease on the site, and it was only when it expired that the college moved to East Lansing, Michigan. Youngstown State University traces its roots to the establishment of a law school by the local YMCA in 1908. The Nashville School of Law was YMCA Night Law School until November 1986, having offered law classes since 1911 and the degree of Juris Doctor since January 1927. YMCA pioneered the concept of , providing educational opportunities for people with full-time employment. Many YMCAs offer ESL programs, alternative high school, day care, and summer camp programs.

In India, YMCA University of Science and Technology of Faridabad was founded in 1969. It offers various programs related to science and engineering. During the 1880s, the Cleveland YMCA began to offer day and evening courses to students who did not otherwise have access to higher education. The YMCA program was reorganized in 1906 as the Association Institute, and this in turn was established as Fenn College in 1929. In 1964, Fenn College became a state college named Cleveland State University.

American high school students have a chance to participate in YMCA Youth and Government, wherein clubs of children representing each YMCA community convene annually in their respective state legislatures to &quot;take over the State Capitol for a day.&quot;

American students in Title One public schools are sometimes eligible to join a tutoring program through YMCA called Y Learning. This program is used to help low-income students who are struggling in school complete their homework with help from tutors and receive a snack as well as a safe place to be after school. Y Learning operates under the main mission of bridging achievements gaps and providing essential resources to help underprivileged students thrive in school.

The International Coalition of YMCA Universities brings together universities from all over the world, including Brazil, England, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Mexico, Uruguay, United States, and Venezuela. The universities offer a wide variety of courses on different levels.

===Health and wellbeing===


In 1891, James Naismith, a Canadian American, invented basketball while studying at YMCA International Training School in Springfield, Massachusetts (later to be named Springfield College). Naismith had been asked to invent a new game in an attempt to interest pupils in physical exercise. The game had to be interesting, easy to learn, and easy to play indoors in winter.

In 1895, William G. Morgan from YMCA of Holyoke, Massachusetts, invented the sport of volleyball as a slower-paced alternative sport, in which the older YMCA members could participate.

In 1930, Juan Carlos Ceriani from YMCA of Montevideo, Uruguay, invented the sport of futsal, an indoor version of football, having been created in synthesis with the rules of the three indoor sports of handball, basketball and water polo.

YMCA also organizes fitness, wellness, and help and awareness programs. One of the programs is the Diabetes Prevention Program, in which trained staff members help diabetics to make their lives healthier and more active.

===Publishing===
YMCA founded YMCA Press publishing house in Russia in 1900. It moved to Paris after World War I, where it focused on providing intellectual and educational works to Russian émigrés. YMCA Press published some of Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn&#x27;s books while he was imprisoned by the Russian government.

=== Religion ===
The first YMCA included Bible studies, although the organization has generally moved on to a more secular approach to youth work. Around six years after its birth, an international YMCA conference in Paris decided that the objective of the organization should become &quot;Christian discipleship developed through a program of religious, educational, social and physical activities&quot; (Binfield 1973:265).

===Sports===

Sports offered at YMCAs include baseball, basketball, gymnastics, football, karate, racquetball, soccer, volleyball, wrestling, and others.

====Aquatics====
Aquatics offered at YMCAs range from recreational classes to competitive swimming. Classes are offered for parent-child, preschool, youth, family, teen and adult, arthritics classes, and other water therapies. Certain YMCAs also offer a special Olympic swim class or swim team. CPR and first aid classes are offered to employees and the public. Away from swim classes, individuals can also take water polo lessons, water fitness lessons, or take part in the open swim times where families can swim in a lane to themselves.

====Basketball====

In 1891, basketball was invented at the YMCA in Springfield, Massachusetts, by James Naismith, a clergyman, educator, and physician. Naismith was asked to create an indoor &quot;athletic distraction&quot; to keep rowdy youth busy in the cold New England winter months. Luther Gulick (physician), the head of Springfield YMCA gave Naismith two weeks to come up with a game to occupy a particularly incorrigible group. Naismith decided the game had to be physically active, simple to understand and would have minimal physical roughness.

The first contest was played at the International YMCA Training School in December 1891. During those earliest games the school&#x27;s custodian, &quot;whose antipathy to the students was well known,&quot; retrieved successful shots from the baskets – using a ladder. The original game was played with a soccer ball and two peach baskets nailed to the balcony of Springfield YMCA. The game was an immediate hit, although originally the baskets still had their bottoms, and the ball had to be manually retrieved after each score, considerably slowing play. It was mostly a passing game, and dribbling did not become a major part of the game until much later, when the ball was improved to its present form.

Gulick worked with Naismith to spread the sport, chairing the Basketball Committee of the Amateur Athletic Union (1895–1905) and representing the United States Olympic Committee during the 1908 Olympic Games. Naismith and his wife attended the 1936 Summer Olympics when basketball was included for the first time as an Olympic event. For his efforts to increase the popularity of basketball and of physical fitness in general, Gulick was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame as a contributor in 1959.

====Futsal====

&quot;Futsal&quot; started in 1930 when Juan Carlos Ceriani [fr], a teacher in Montevideo, Uruguay, created a version of indoor football (football is called &quot;soccer&quot; in the United States) for recreation in YMCAs. This new sport was originally developed for playing on basketball courts, and a rule book was published in September 1933. Football was already highly popular in the country and after Uruguay won the 1930 World Cup and gold medals in the 1924 and 1928 Summer Olympics, it attracted even more practitioners. Ceriani&#x27;s goal was to create a team game that could be played indoor or outdoor but that was similar to football.

The YMCA spread the game immediately throughout South America. It was easily played by everyone, everywhere, and in any weather condition, without any difficulty, helping players to stay in shape all year round. These reasons convinced João Lotufo, a Brazilian, to bring this game to his country and adapt it to the needs of physical education.

====Gymnastics====
Gymnastics came to be at the YMCA in 1869. Three YMCAs, those in Boston, San Francisco, and the 23rd Street Branch in New York City, each constructed buildings with gyms inside. These gyms then allowed men to train on the sport of gymnastics. Most of the men who knew gymnastics, however, were circus performers and did not fit the ideas and values of the YMCA. Robert J. Roberts was one of the original circus performers at the Boston YMCA in the 1870s and 1880s, but he was hurt in a fall and could not perform or teach gymnastics. This led him to start the group exercises that exist currently at YMCAs. Even though Robert stopped teaching gymnastics in Boston, the YMCA in Salem, Massachusetts was creating the sport of gymnastics, holding boy/men classes as far back as 1895, where they learned parallel and horizontal bars, German horse, mat exercises, juggling, and weight lifting. They would then train to perform for an audience.

A few years later, gymnastics began to filter out of the YMCA as other group sports, such as basketball and volleyball, became more popular. Gymnastics as we know it today started at the Marblehead/Swampscott YMCA in Massachusetts. Compared to the other YMCAs who were stopping the sport of gymnastics held group classes in their basketball gym. They had to break down their equipment each day until their program was moved to the Salem State College in 1990. Salem State had recently dropped their college team, and the youth director at the YMCA went to see about expanding their program by renting the colleges space. Since then, two of the Marblehead/Swampscott gymnasts have gone on to be named all-American gymnasts and placed in the top five at the National Championships. The team has also placed in the top 10 at several National Championships.

YMCAs around the world now offer gymnastics to boys and girls of a variety of ages. Equipment now ranges from the men&#x27;s events of pommel horses, parallel bars and the men&#x27;s high rail to the uneven bars, balance beams, vault systems and trampolines. These YMCAs now offer camps, lessons and teams in gymnastics and cheerleading and tumbling.

====Racquetball====
Racquetball is another YMCA-invented sport. Joseph Sobek a tennis, handball and squash player who worked in a rubber manufacturing factory, was dissatisfied with the options for indoor sports in Greenwich, Connecticut. He could not find squash players of his caliber and he did not care particularly for handball, so in 1950 he designed a short, stringed racquet, used a children&#x27;s toy rubber ball, and created rules for a new game using the handball courts. He called his new sport &quot;paddle rackets&quot;. The sport really took off in the 1970s and there are an estimated 15 million players worldwide today.

====Volleyball====

Four years after James Naismith invented basketball in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1891, William G. Morgan, an instructor at YMCA in Holyoke, Massachusetts, wanted to create a game for older gentlemen which had less physical contact. He borrowed a tennis net, raised it 6 feet, 6 inches above the floor, and invented the game of &quot;mintonette&quot;, which could be played by a group of any number and involved volleying a large ball over the net. An observer suggested that a better name for the new sport would be &quot;volleyball&quot;. In 1912, J. Howard Crocker introduced volleyball to schools and YMCA locations in China.

==Regions==
===Africa===

YMCAs in Africa are united under the Africa Alliance of YMCAs (AAYMCA). The core focus of the organizational work done by the AAYMCA is youth empowerment. AAYMCA is the oldest non-governmental organization network in Africa, reaching approximately five million programme participants. The first YMCA in Africa was established in Liberia in 1881, and the AAYMCA was founded in 1977 as the umbrella body for all national movements on the continent.

AAYMCA collaborates with national movements to conduct research, develop localized as well as continental programming, monitor and evaluate progress, and communicate impact of youth development work undertaken on the continent. From 2015, the Africa Alliance of YMCAs has aligned much of its programmatic work to some of the goals set out by the African Union&#x27;s Agenda 2063 Development Plan in order to contribute towards the achievement of the ideals envisioned by the African Renaissance.

In 1975, Africa&#x27;s YMCAs tried to revive the ones in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire and Kenya followed by those in Madagascar, Jordan, Suriname, and Angola.

Active YMCA organizations exist in Angola, Cameroon, Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Associate movements exist in Niger, Rwanda, and South Sudan. YMCA organizations are in formation in Malawi and Namibia. 

===Asia===


====China====
In 1911, the YMCA appointed J. Howard Crocker to serve as the foreign work secretary to promote physical education based in Shanghai, the headquarters of all YMCA work in China. When he first arrived in China, the YMCA had facilities in large cities, but lacked a nationally co-ordinated effort. In 1911, he arranged the first school for physical education directors in China. With the support of president Yuan Shikai, Crocker toured China to conduct training courses and establish a school for physical education instructors. Shanghai subsequently became the first training centre for physical education directors in China.

====Hong Kong====

YMCA Hong Kong was established in 1901, being separated into two separate organizations in 1908, split across linguistic lines: &quot;YMCA of Hong Kong&quot; and &quot;Chinese YMCA of Hong Kong&quot;. YMCA Hong Kong headquarters has occupied its current location at 22 Salisbury Road, Tsim Sha Tsui since 1922. YMCA Hong Kong established the College of Continuing Education in 1996 and YMCA of Hong Kong Christian College in 2003.

===Europe===
====Germany====
In Germany, as in Austria and Switzerland, YMCA is called CVJM, which stands for Christlicher Verein junger Menschen (Christian Association of Young People). Up until 1985 the organisation was called &#x27;Christlicher Verein Junger Männer&#x27; (Christian Association of Young Men); the name change reflected its activities being accessible to men and women.

====Sweden====

YWCA-YMCA of Sweden in Sweden was established in 1966 following a merger of YMCA of Sweden and the YWCA of Sweden. In 2011, the organization decided to use the term &quot;KFUM Sverige&quot; during promotion where &quot;M&quot; stands for &quot;människor&quot; (&quot;people&quot;) instead of &quot;män&quot; (men) as it did previously. YWCA-YMCA of Sweden has 40,000 members in 140 local associations. Several Swedish YWCA-YMCA associations have been successful in sports.

====United Kingdom and Ireland====
YMCA in the United Kingdom and Ireland consists of three separate National Councils: England and Wales, Ireland, and Scotland. When YMCAs in Wales joined YMCA England in 2017, the council was renamed YMCA England and Wales.

YMCAs in England and Wales offer supported accommodation for vulnerable and homeless young people, mental health services, youth clubs, sports centres, nursery schools and family support and after school clubs. Across England and Wales, YMCA in 2024 supports more than 18,000 young people with homes each year, at 86 locations making it one of the largest providers of safe supported accommodation for young people. At the great majority of sites those living in accommodation are supported by personal, social and educational services. Many YMCAs in England and Wales offer services and facilities to the wider community, among them foodbanks, gyms and swimming pools, conference facilities, cafes, theatres, counselling, chaplaincy and housing advice.

The archive of YMCA England and Wales is housed in the Special Collections section of the University of Birmingham with material from the initial founding of YMCA in London in 1840s to the recent past. The archive of YMCA Scotland is housed at the National Archives of Scotland.

===Latin America===
====Argentina====
YMCA developed in 1902 in Argentina, where it provided support for physical education teachers. YMCA was most notable in encouraging women&#x27;s sports in South America, and during the early 1900s, YMCA in Argentina highly promoted basketball, swimming, and track and field. There were many victories for the development of sports in Argentina due to YMCA, such as Frederick Dickens, who served as the director of physical education at the Buenos Aires YMCA. Dickens eventually led the Argentine Olympic delegation to Paris in 1924 and Amsterdam in 1928.

====Brazil====
YMCA developed in 1893 in Brazil, and volleyball was deemed appropriate for women from the beginning. Through the encouragement of YMCA, physical educators promoted women&#x27;s volleyball in schools like Escola Wenceslau Braz and Colégio Sylvio Leite in Rio. Sports clubs even began to organize events for women because of YMCA&#x27;s influence.

====Mexico====
Mexico&#x27;s first YMCA branch opened in Mexico City in 1902 for the American community. By 1904, there were two more branches in Mexico City and one branch established in Monterrey. In 1907, another branch in Chihuahua was set up and then one YMCA in Tampico. In Mexico, YMCA organized physical activity, individual development, and national progress. There was advertising for YMCA programs that would help young men gain life skills and YMCA also had some activities for women. For example, an excursion to Xochimilco in 1910 featured races for boys and girls and indoor baseball for everyone. YMCA had very little influence on rural Mexico until after the Mexican Revolution.

====Panama====
In 1904, a letter was written by the chief engineer of the Panama Canal Zone, John Findley Wallace, to Admiral J.G. Walker, chairman of the Isthmian Canal Commission, recommending that YMCA be brought to the Canal Zone. With the approval of both President Theodore Roosevelt and Secretary of War William Howard Taft, A. Bruce Minear, an experienced secretary, was sent to organize the association work in the Canal Zone. Construction was started on YMCA clubhouses in Culebra, Empire, Gorgona, and Cristobal, Panama, as well as in Panama City. These clubhouses were operated by YMCA for several years and were financed by the Canal Zone, they contained billiard rooms, an assembly room, a reading room, bowling alleys, dark rooms for the camera clubs, gymnastic equipment, an ice cream parlor and soda fountain, and a circulating library. By 1920, there were nine buildings in operation in the Canal Zone.

Panama YMCA was founded on 24 May 1966. The 1968 impeachment of President Marco Aurelio Robles and the ensuing riots and political unrest impacted YMCA&#x27;s work and the after-school programs at Panama YMCA were cancelled. Use of the school equipment, such as the pool and gym, greatly helped YMCA&#x27;s ability to continue on with the swimming classes and summer programs. These programs remained popular throughout this time.

In 1983, planning was started for the integration of Panama YMCA and the American Services YMCA (ASYMCA). The integration of the remaining two ASYMCAs, the Balboa Branch and the Cristobal Branch, with the Panama Branch, a merger that was completed in 1990.

YMCA Panama continues its work for the betterment of today&#x27;s society. In 2005, YMCA Panama inaugurated the new YMCA Panama School located on Colinas del Sol, in the Nuevo Chorrillo District of Arraijan.

====Peru====
YMCA Peru has a team of 200 employees and a voluntary body of more than 700 people. The organization describes its mission as &quot;Having a positive impact on the young people so they have the will to transform the Peruvian society&quot;.
YMCA Peru was created on 17 May 1920. It has presence in the departments of Lima, Arequipa, and Trujillo.

===Middle East===
====Israel====

In 1924, Archibald Clinton Harte, General Secretary of the International YMCA, raised the sum of one million dollars towards the construction of the building. The Jerusalem YMCA was dedicated in 1933 with the words “Here is a place whose atmosphere is peace, where political and religious jealousies can be forgotten and international unity be fostered and developed.” Harte&#x27;s home on the shores of Galilee was bequeathed to the Jerusalem International YMCA as an international conference facility. The cornerstone was laid in 1928 by Lord Plumer, the British High Commissioner for Palestine, on a plot of land in the West Nikephoria section of Jerusalem, purchased from the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem. The building was designed by the American architect Arthur Loomis Harmon of Shreve, Lamb and Harmon, who designed the Empire State Building. The Jerusalem YMCA housed the city&#x27;s first heated swimming pool and first gymnasium with a wooden floor. The first concert broadcasts of the Voice of Israel radio station were transmitted from the YMCA auditorium.

In 1947, the YMCA was the venue of the UNSCOP talks leading up to the UN Partition Plan. At the end of April 1948, the building was taken over by the International Red Cross, which used it to shelter around 80 refugees. Two months later, it was used by the United Nations Mediation Committee headed by Count Bernadotte and then was taken over by the U.S. Consulate. In April 1949, the building was returned to YMCA.

====Gaza====

In 1952, the YMCA in Gaza City was started with the support of the Egypt YMCA, and was a branch of the Egypt YMCA until 1967, when the Gaza Strip fell under Israel’s control following the Six-Day War. Since then, Gaza YMCA has not been associated with any national organization. YMCA Gaza has five major departments: sports, arts, welfare, preschool, and youth. The youth department consists of approximately 80 youth leaders between the ages of 15 and 25 years old.

Despite having a strong Christian identity, the YMCA in Gaza is well respected in the Muslim community. The majority of YMCA attendees are Muslim. The staff are both Muslim and Christian, and the elected board is 100% Christian to balance inclusiveness without losing the YMCA’s Christian identity. The YMCA teaches youth about religious tolerance. In 2021, Gaza&#x27;s YMCA served 1,800 youth.

===North America===
====Canada====

The first YMCA in North America opened as a charity in Montreal, Quebec, on 25 November 1851. there were 35 YMCAs and 2 YMCA-YWCAs in Canada, cumulatively serving 2.25 million people annually in over 1,700 locations. Programs include children and youth, health, fitness, and recreation, childcare, day and resident camping, employment training, community outreach and newcomer services, international development and education, and leadership development and recognition.
Its archives are held by Library and Archives Canada. Until 1912, when Canadian YMCAs formed their own national council, YMCAs were jointly administered by the International Committee of the Young Men&#x27;s Christian Associations of North America.

====United States====



In the United States, YMCA is more commonly known as &#x27;The Y&#x27;, with national headquarters in Chicago. It has 800 separate organisational entities affiliated to its national office, based in 2,700 branch locations, working with 21 million people, to &quot;strengthen communities through youth development, healthy living and social responsibility.&quot; It has about 19,000 staff and 600,000 volunteers.

Major programs include after-school activities, day care, youth work and physical fitness. A large number of locations have gyms, weight rooms, swimming pools, and sports courts.

The first YMCA in the United States opened on 29 December 1851, in Boston, Massachusetts. It was founded in 1851 by Captain Thomas Valentine Sullivan (1800–59), an American seaman and missionary. In 1853 the Reverend Anthony Bowen founded the first YMCA for Colored Men in Washington, D.C. The renamed Anthony Bowen YMCA is still serving the U Street area of Washington. It became a part of YMCA of the city of Washington in 1947. Through the middle part of the 20th century it was associated with covert homosexual subculture, with the athletic facilities providing a refuge and cover for closeted individuals.

YMCAs in the USA are one of the largest charitable nonprofits in the US, by public donations received, as listed by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine. YMCA in the USA is one of the many organizations that espouses muscular Christianity.

Its national archives are located at the Kautz Family YMCA, at University of Minnesota Libraries Department of Archives and Special Collections. More digitally accessible archival information can be found at the Texas Christian University (TCU) Digital Repository.

== Nobel Peace Prize laureates ==
* 1901: Henry Dunant, who co-founded the Geneva YMCA in 1852 and was one of the founders of the World YMCA, was awarded the first-ever Nobel Peace Prize for founding the International Committee of the Red Cross in 1863, and inspiring the Geneva Conventions (Conventions de Genève). He shared the prize with Frédéric Passy, founder and president of the first French peace society.
* 1946: John R. Mott, US, president of the World YMCA, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his &quot;long and fruitful labors in drawing together the peoples of many nations, many races and many communions in a common bond of spirituality.&quot; John R. Mott also played an important role in the founding of the World Student Christian Federation in 1895, the 1910 World Missionary Conference and the World Council of Churches in 1948.

== Logo ==

In 1881, 26 years after its foundation, the official emblem of the World Alliance of YMCAs was adopted, at the Ninth International YMCA World Conference, in London. The circular emblem is made up of five segments, one for each continent. The segments are held together by small monograms of YMCA in different languages. As early as 1881, YMCA leaders believed the Movement could be truly international and united across borders. In the center is a larger monogram of X and P, Chi and Rho, Christ&#x27;s name, as used by early Christians. An open Bible sits on top of the monogram, showing John XVII, Verse 21, &quot;that they all may be one&quot;. This was to remind YMCAs that Christ is at the center of the Movement, a source of strength, hope and unity, binding them all together.

In 1891, Luther Gulick, a physical education director at YMCA of the US, introduced a new emblem to represent YMCA, an inverted red triangle. According to Gulick the triangle represented &#x27;the whole man&#x27;, with the three different aspects: mind, body and spirit. This logo became a familiar symbol of YMCA&#x27;s work on the home front and around the world during WW1 and WW2, and remains in use.

In 2010, the YMCA of the USA changed its logo to &quot;The Y&quot; as part of a larger brand transformation.

== YMCA Vision 2030 ==
At the 20th World Council in Aarhus, Denmark, the global YMCA Movement adopted its first collective strategy, YMCA Vision 2030, intended as a roadmap for every YMCA&#x27;s strategic goals, closely aligned to the UN Sustainable Development Goals. As of June 2023, 75 YMCA Movements worldwide were in the process of implementing YMCA Vision 2030.

== See also ==
* Clean living movement
* List of recreational organizations
* List of YMCA buildings
* New York Society for the Suppression of Vice
* Police Citizens Youth Club
* Polish YMCA
* TUXIS
* Young Men&#x27;s Buddhist Association (YMBA)
* YMCA of Greater New York
* YMCA SCUBA Program
* Y.M.C.A. (song)

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
== Sources and further reading ==
* Alleman, Nathan F., and Dorothy E. Finnegan. &quot;&#x27;Believe you have a mission in life and steadily pursue it&#x27;: Campus YMCAs presage student development theory, 1894–1930.&quot; &quot;Higher Education in Review&quot; 6.1 (2009): 33+ online.
* Baker, William J. &quot;To Play or to Pray? The YMCA Question in the United Kingdom and the United States, 1850-1900&quot;. &quot;International Journal of the History of Sport&quot; 1994 11#1: 42-62 
* Copeland, Jeffrey C, and Yan Xu. The YMCA at War : Collaboration and Conflict during the World Wars. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, an imprint of The Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc., 2018.
* Fischer-Tiné, Harald, Stefan Huebner and Ian Tyrrell, eds. &quot;Spreading Protestant Modernity: Global Perspectives on the Social Work of the YMCA and YWCA (c. 1889–1970)&quot; (University of Hawai’i Press, 2020) abstract.
* Garnham, Neal. &quot;&#x27;Both praying and playing:&#x27; Muscular Christianity&quot; and the YMCA in north-east county Durham.&quot; &quot;Journal of Social History&quot; 35.2 (2001): 397-407, in England. online
* Hopkins, Charles Howard. &quot;History of the YMCA in North America&quot; (Association Press, 1951), a standard scholarly history History of the Y.M.C.A. in North America.
* Hosgood, Christopher P. &quot;Negotiating Lower-Middle-Class Masculinity in Britain: The Leicester Young Men&#x27;s Christian Association, 1870-1914.&quot; &quot;Canadian Journal of History&quot; 37.2 (2002): 253–274.
* Lord, Alexandra M. &quot;Models of masculinity: sex education, the United States Public Health Service, and the YMCA, 1919–1924.&quot; &quot;Journal of the history of medicine and allied sciences&quot; 58.2 (2003): 123–152. online
* Macleod, David I. &quot;Building character in the American boy: The Boy Scouts, YMCA, and their forerunners, 1870-1920&quot; (Univ of Wisconsin Press, 2004), a standard scholarly history.
* Putney, Clifford W. &quot;Going Upscale: The YMCA and Postwar America, 1950-1990&quot;. &quot;Journal of Sport History&quot; 20#2 1993, pp. 151–166. online
*Steuer, Kenneth. &quot;Pursuit of an “Unparalleled Opportunity”: The American YMCA and Prisoner-of-War Diplomacy among the Central Power Nations during World War I, 1914-1923&quot;.New York: NY. Columbia University Press. 2009.
*Tlustý, Tomáš. “The YMCA in Central European Countries as One of the Ways of Americanising Central Europe after the First World War (Base of Information and Methodological Approaches Zo Researching the Issue).” Acta Universitatis Carolinae. Kinanthropologica 49, no. 2 (2014): 65–79. https://doi.org/10.14712/23366052.2014.7.
* Vertinsky, Patricia, and Aishwarya Ramachandran. &quot;The &#x27;Y&#x27; Goes to India: Springfield College, Muscular Missionaries, and the Transnational Circulation of Physical Culture Practices&quot;. &quot;Journal of Sport History&quot; 46#3 2019, pp. 363–379. online
* Watson, Nick J., Stuart Weir, and Stephen Friend. &quot;The development of muscular Christianity in Victorian Britain and beyond.&quot; &quot;Journal of religion and society&quot; 7 (2005) pp 7–21.online.
* Wang, Peter Chen-main. “Caring Beyond National Borders: The YMCA and Chinese Laborers in World War I Europe.” Church History 78, no. 2 (2009): 327–49.
* Winter, Thomas. &quot;Personality, Character, and Self-Expression: The YMCA and the Construction of Manhood and Class, 1877-1920.&quot; &quot;Men and Masculinities&quot; 2.3 (2000): 272–285.

===Primary sources===
* Young Men’s Christian Associations. National War Work Council. Summary of World War Work of the American Y.M.C.A.; with the Soldiers and Sailors of America at Home, on the Sea, and Overseas; [New York, 1920.

== External links ==
* Additional archives about the importance of YMCA to Chicago , IL and to the African American History.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="0" end="4" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="34" end="39" title="YMCA" label="the Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q66809493" start="56" end="74" title="youth organization" label="youth organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="84" end="90" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="264" end="270" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q699705" start="289" end="304" title="George Williams (philanthropist)" label="George Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="312" end="350" title="YMCA" label="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Christian Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084103" start="397" end="413" title="Christian values" label="Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859136" start="586" end="607" title="muscular Christianity" label="muscular Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726960" start="869" end="896" title="non-governmental federation" label="non-governmental federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137206" start="1200" end="1211" title="Paris Basis" label="Paris Basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1261" end="1271" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q643370" start="1314" end="1318" title="YWCA" label="YWCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q124646925" start="1328" end="1363" title="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Hebrew Association" label="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Hebrew Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q592696" start="1440" end="1448" title="Y.M.C.A. (song)" label="Y.M.C.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q219874" start="1462" end="1476" title="Village People" label="Village People"/>
<link wikidata="Q699705" start="1595" end="1610" title="George Williams (philanthropist)" label="George Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q593362" start="1653" end="1659" title="draper" label="draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1720" end="1741" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="1866" end="1872" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q131295" start="1878" end="1885" title="brothel" label="brothel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="2012" end="2026" title="city of London" label="city of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="2211" end="2221" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q333294" start="2320" end="2366" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 7th Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420121" start="2520" end="2531" title="Exeter Hall" label="Exeter Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="2651" end="2668" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="3090" end="3106" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="3178" end="3195" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3233" end="3242" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3244" end="3251" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3253" end="3259" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3261" end="3267" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3269" end="3276" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="3278" end="3287" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3293" end="3304" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3306" end="3317" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3327" end="3340" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12091" start="3434" end="3446" title="Henry Dunant" label="Henry Dunant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="3509" end="3549" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="3568" end="3585" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114964" start="3789" end="3818" title="Exposition Universelle (1855)" label="Exposition Universelle (1855)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137206" start="4002" end="4013" title="Paris Basis" label="Paris Basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q870706" start="4117" end="4141" title="That they all may be one" label="That they all may be one"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210871" start="4149" end="4156" title="John 17" label="John 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q643370" start="4206" end="4210" title="YWCA" label="YWCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="4216" end="4241" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q320121" start="4251" end="4285" title="World Student Christian Federation" label="World Student Christian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859136" start="4632" end="4653" title="muscular Christianity" label="muscular Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="4720" end="4741" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935213" start="4743" end="4752" title="Camp Fire (organization)" label="Camp Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576280" start="4758" end="4780" title="Girl Scouts of the USA" label="Girl Scouts of the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="5296" end="5306" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="5311" end="5321" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="5622" end="5640" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="5782" end="5788" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027141" start="6188" end="6199" title="Camp Dudley" label="Camp Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="6407" end="6417" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364105" start="6428" end="6442" title="Wawayanda State Park" label="Lake Wawayanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q495998" start="6446" end="6471" title="Sussex County, New Jersey" label="Sussex County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="6518" end="6532" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501728" start="6538" end="6556" title="Westport, New York" label="Westport, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="6620" end="6628" title="scouting" label="scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6647" end="6661" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="6703" end="6722" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="6834" end="6855" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316309" start="6866" end="6881" title="Verband Christlicher Pfadfinderinnen und Pfadfinder" label="German Scouting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337360" start="6883" end="6900" title="Edgar M. Robinson" label="Edgar M. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324086" start="7013" end="7023" title="K. T. Paul" label="K. T. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045741" start="7458" end="7473" title="Y. C. James Yen" label="Y. C. James Yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312812" start="7757" end="7767" title="Jaffa Gate" label="Jaffa Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="7787" end="7796" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7957" end="7968" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q263454" start="8343" end="8363" title="Clementine Churchill" label="Clementine Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="8395" end="8439" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q705722" start="8456" end="8471" title="Oswald Chambers" label="Oswald Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="8476" end="8482" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q231525" start="8487" end="8505" title="Olave Baden-Powell" label="Olave Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q204864" start="8578" end="8624" title="Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="8976" end="8989" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053805" start="9002" end="9017" title="Yip Yip Yaphank" label="Yip Yip Yaphank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478685" start="9124" end="9138" title="Frances Gulick" label="Frances Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="9211" end="9229" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9284" end="9296" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="9342" end="9346" title="prisoner of war" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="9365" end="9382" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="9387" end="9403" title="Internment of Japanese Americans" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="9468" end="9487" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="9607" end="9610" title="USO" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="9616" end="9622" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="10007" end="10018" title="Phonograph" label="gramophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q109853668" start="10054" end="10070" title="Donald A. Lowrie" label="Donald A. Lowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="10620" end="10662" title="United Nations Economic and Social Council" label="United Nations Economic and Social Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="10903" end="10915" title="scuba diving" label="scuba diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320976" start="10964" end="10981" title="diving instructor" label="diving instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643884" start="11041" end="11052" title="cave diving" label="cave diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="11091" end="11098" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877637" start="11160" end="11171" title="Uganda YMCA" label="Uganda YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28658852" start="11611" end="11628" title="Violet King Henry" label="Violet King Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="11855" end="11864" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="11944" end="11949" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="12151" end="12166" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="12168" end="12191" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="12249" end="12262" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018792" start="12336" end="12344" title="Oaxtepec" label="Oaxtepec"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="12346" end="12353" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q826480" start="13139" end="13151" title="ExCeL London" label="ExCeL London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="13266" end="13280" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="13281" end="13310" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q45410458" start="13348" end="13371" title="Jayathma Wickramanayake" label="Jayathma Wickramanayake"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151941" start="13385" end="13438" title="Office of the Secretary-General&amp;#x27;s Envoy on Youth" label="Office of the Secretary-General&amp;#x27;s Envoy on Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q460904" start="13444" end="13467" title="María Fernanda Espinosa" label="María Fernanda Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161813" start="13473" end="13521" title="President of the United Nations General Assembly" label="President of the United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544344" start="13585" end="13605" title="Great Russell Street" label="Great Russell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="15431" end="15441" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="16774" end="16779" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="17384" end="17390" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="17458" end="17465" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="17765" end="17772" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="17777" end="17782" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="18154" end="18170" title="American culture" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q219874" start="18285" end="18299" title="Village People" label="Village People"/>
<link wikidata="Q592696" start="18311" end="18319" title="Y.M.C.A. (song)" label="Y.M.C.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="18551" end="18562" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q184485" start="18624" end="18639" title="performing arts" label="performing arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="18681" end="18691" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027141" start="19017" end="19028" title="Camp Dudley" label="Camp Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="19101" end="19111" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="19145" end="19158" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501728" start="19204" end="19222" title="Westport, New York" label="Westport, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="19276" end="19282" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905487" start="19317" end="19335" title="Big Cove YMCA Camp" label="Big Cove YMCA Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="19351" end="19362" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="20451" end="20470" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q326342" start="20635" end="20655" title="Concordia University (Montreal)" label="Concordia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277924" start="20656" end="20683" title="Sir George Williams University" label="Sir George Williams College"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="20726" end="20734" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="20741" end="20764" title="Northeastern University (Boston, Massachusetts)" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948209" start="20780" end="20794" title="Boston YMCA" label="YMCA in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570194" start="20800" end="20819" title="Franklin University" label="Franklin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534879" start="20875" end="20897" title="Golden Gate University" label="Golden Gate University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837719" start="20973" end="20995" title="Detroit College of Law" label="Detroit College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837719" start="21005" end="21045" title="Michigan State University College of Law" label="Michigan State University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="21091" end="21098" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q871265" start="21209" end="21231" title="East Lansing, Michigan" label="East Lansing, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783191" start="21233" end="21260" title="Youngstown State University" label="Youngstown State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966999" start="21346" end="21369" title="Nashville School of Law" label="Nashville School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="21473" end="21485" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="21629" end="21632" title="English as a second language" label="ESL"/>
<link wikidata="Q359674" start="21643" end="21666" title="alternative high school" label="alternative high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="21668" end="21676" title="day care" label="day care"/>
<link wikidata="Q876852" start="21682" end="21693" title="summer camp" label="summer camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21708" end="21713" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045956" start="21715" end="21756" title="YMCA University of Science and Technology" label="YMCA University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200663" start="21760" end="21769" title="Faridabad" label="Faridabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053937" start="22268" end="22293" title="YMCA Youth and Government" label="YMCA Youth and Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="22391" end="22409" title="State legislature (United States)" label="state legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358895" start="22486" end="22495" title="Title One" label="Title One"/>
<link wikidata="Q188962" start="23253" end="23267" title="James Naismith" label="James Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="23299" end="23309" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="23366" end="23392" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809940" start="23412" end="23431" title="Springfield College" label="Springfield College"/>
<link wikidata="Q313949" start="23627" end="23644" title="William G. Morgan" label="William G. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="23658" end="23680" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="23704" end="23714" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="23846" end="23856" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="23889" end="23895" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="23918" end="23926" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866478" start="24006" end="24014" title="American handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="24031" end="24041" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="24307" end="24323" title="publishing house" label="publishing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24367" end="24378" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="24456" end="24462" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="24494" end="24516" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="24623" end="24628" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="24697" end="24704" title="secular" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q11241519" start="24872" end="24894" title="Disciple (Christianity)" label="Christian discipleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="25055" end="25063" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="25065" end="25075" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="25077" end="25087" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="25089" end="25097" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="25099" end="25105" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="25107" end="25118" title="racquetball" label="racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="25120" end="25126" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="25128" end="25138" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432080" start="25140" end="25149" title="Scholastic wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="25242" end="25262" title="competitive swimming" label="competitive swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="25459" end="25462" title="CPR" label="CPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="25576" end="25586" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="25734" end="25744" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="25773" end="25799" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q188962" start="25804" end="25818" title="James Naismith" label="James Naismith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="25967" end="25978" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840918" start="25994" end="26019" title="Luther Gulick (physician)" label="Luther Gulick (physician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="27059" end="27081" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="27115" end="27146" title="United States Olympic Committee" label="United States Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8111" start="27158" end="27176" title="1908 Olympic Games" label="1908 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="27213" end="27233" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309252" start="27367" end="27383" title="physical fitness" label="physical fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="27425" end="27448" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="27571" end="27581" title="Montevideo" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="28507" end="28517" title="Gymnastics" label="Gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="28572" end="28578" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="28580" end="28593" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="28625" end="28638" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q102039563" start="28869" end="28886" title="Robert J. Roberts" label="Robert J. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="29184" end="29204" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q692104" start="29307" end="29315" title="Parallel bars" label="parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q840330" start="29337" end="29349" title="Pommel horse" label="German horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q194326" start="29366" end="29374" title="juggling" label="juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12834857" start="29380" end="29394" title="Weight training" label="weight lifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="29540" end="29550" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="29555" end="29565" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="29664" end="29677" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695750" start="29878" end="29897" title="Salem State College" label="Salem State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q89670998" start="30502" end="30513" title="uneven bars" label="uneven bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q655301" start="30515" end="30527" title="balance beam" label="balance beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q598168" start="30530" end="30543" title="vault (gymnastics)" label="vault systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q327911" start="30548" end="30558" title="trampoline" label="trampoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="30626" end="30638" title="cheerleading" label="cheerleading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218163" start="30643" end="30651" title="tumbling (gymnastics)" label="tumbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q754586" start="30674" end="30685" title="Racquetball" label="Racquetball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287084" start="30718" end="30730" title="Joseph Sobek" label="Joseph Sobek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="30869" end="30891" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49158" start="31368" end="31394" title="Springfield, Massachusetts" label="Springfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313949" start="31405" end="31422" title="William G. Morgan" label="William G. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637790" start="31449" end="31471" title="Holyoke, Massachusetts" label="Holyoke, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q118785122" start="31867" end="31884" title="J. Howard Crocker" label="J. Howard Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="31983" end="31989" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q868575" start="32116" end="32127" title="empowerment" label="empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="32303" end="32310" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="32768" end="32781" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q386503" start="32897" end="32916" title="African Renaissance" label="African Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="32976" end="32994" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="32999" end="33004" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="33026" end="33036" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="33038" end="33044" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="33046" end="33054" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="33060" end="33066" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="33104" end="33110" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="33112" end="33120" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="33122" end="33140" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="33142" end="33147" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="33149" end="33157" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="33159" end="33165" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="33167" end="33172" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="33174" end="33179" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="33181" end="33188" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="33190" end="33200" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="33202" end="33209" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="33211" end="33218" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="33220" end="33232" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="33234" end="33246" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="33248" end="33256" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="33258" end="33262" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="33264" end="33270" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="33272" end="33278" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="33284" end="33292" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="33323" end="33328" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="33330" end="33336" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="33342" end="33353" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="33394" end="33400" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="33405" end="33412" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118785122" start="33471" end="33488" title="J. Howard Crocker" label="J. Howard Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="33567" end="33575" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="33850" end="33861" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914606" start="34223" end="34240" title="YMCA of Hong Kong" label="YMCA of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14501818" start="34257" end="34282" title="Chinese YMCA of Hong Kong" label="Chinese YMCA of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045962" start="34475" end="34510" title="YMCA of Hong Kong Christian College" label="YMCA of Hong Kong Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="34553" end="34560" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="34568" end="34575" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="34580" end="34591" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10542224" start="34927" end="34946" title="YWCA-YMCA of Sweden" label="YWCA-YMCA of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="34950" end="34956" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="35448" end="35462" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="35467" end="35474" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="35553" end="35561" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="35577" end="35582" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="36506" end="36530" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860549" start="36664" end="36693" title="National Archives of Scotland" label="National Archives of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="36760" end="36769" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="37332" end="37338" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="37561" end="37564" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="37669" end="37675" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="37711" end="37722" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="38330" end="38348" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q498979" start="38425" end="38442" title="Panama Canal Zone" label="Panama Canal Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181497" start="38444" end="38464" title="John Findley Wallace" label="John Findley Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848965" start="38506" end="38531" title="Isthmian Canal Commission" label="Isthmian Canal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="38622" end="38640" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="38645" end="38661" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="38662" end="38681" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="40190" end="40194" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="40970" end="40977" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185163" start="41000" end="41028" title="Jerusalem International YMCA" label="Jerusalem International YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q336040" start="41106" end="41117" title="Herbert Plumer, 1st Viscount Plumer" label="Lord Plumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="41153" end="41162" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="41216" end="41225" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q632602" start="41246" end="41286" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem" label="Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799559" start="41340" end="41360" title="Arthur Loomis Harmon" label="Arthur Loomis Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q617190" start="41364" end="41387" title="Shreve, Lamb and Harmon" label="Shreve, Lamb and Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9188" start="41406" end="41427" title="Empire State Building" label="Empire State Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001518" start="41575" end="41590" title="Voice of Israel" label="Voice of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325131" start="41688" end="41694" title="UNSCOP" label="UNSCOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q846795" start="41719" end="41736" title="UN Partition Plan" label="UN Partition Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="41799" end="41822" title="International Red Cross" label="International Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q212163" start="41951" end="41967" title="Folke Bernadotte" label="Count Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492" start="42101" end="42110" title="Gaza City" label="Gaza City"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="42147" end="42152" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="42215" end="42225" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="42237" end="42243" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="42268" end="42279" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="42876" end="42895" title="religious tolerance" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="42998" end="43011" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="43035" end="43043" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q913250" start="43477" end="43504" title="Library and Archives Canada" label="Library and Archives Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="43734" end="43747" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="43829" end="43836" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q494330" start="44163" end="44186" title="After-school activity" label="after-school activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711247" start="44198" end="44208" title="youth work" label="youth work"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="44387" end="44393" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772143" start="44537" end="44550" title="Anthony Bowen" label="Anthony Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="44593" end="44609" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="45055" end="45061" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859136" start="45141" end="45162" title="muscular Christianity" label="muscular Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378977" start="45206" end="45223" title="Kautz Family YMCA Archives" label="Kautz Family YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="45228" end="45251" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12091" start="45473" end="45485" title="Henry Dunant" label="Henry Dunant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="45600" end="45617" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="45635" end="45675" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="45703" end="45721" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180409" start="45772" end="45786" title="Frédéric Passy" label="Frédéric Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240447" start="45823" end="45843" title="Société d&amp;#x27;arbitrage entre les Nations" label="French peace society"/>
<link wikidata="Q159726" start="45853" end="45865" title="John Mott" label="John R. Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="45916" end="45933" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q320121" start="46159" end="46193" title="World Student Christian Federation" label="World Student Christian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655650" start="46207" end="46239" title="1910 World Missionary Conference" label="1910 World Missionary Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="46248" end="46273" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="46453" end="46459" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q151970" start="46772" end="46783" title="Chi Rho" label="Chi and Rho"/>
<link wikidata="Q870706" start="46885" end="46942" title="That they all may be one" label="John XVII, Verse 21, &amp;quot;that they all may be one&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840918" start="47090" end="47103" title="Luther Gulick (physician)" label="Luther Gulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="47649" end="47655" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="47832" end="47864" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="UN Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130542" start="47983" end="48004" title="Clean living movement" label="Clean living movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636173" start="48007" end="48041" title="List of recreational organizations" label="List of recreational organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604517" start="48044" end="48066" title="List of YMCA buildings" label="List of YMCA buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339062" start="48069" end="48113" title="New York Society for the Suppression of Vice" label="New York Society for the Suppression of Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209429" start="48116" end="48142" title="Police Citizens Youth Club" label="Police Citizens Youth Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210008" start="48145" end="48156" title="Polish YMCA" label="Polish YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672055" start="48159" end="48164" title="TUXIS" label="TUXIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12902675" start="48167" end="48204" title="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Buddhist Association" label="Young Men&amp;#x27;s Buddhist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045961" start="48214" end="48238" title="YMCA of Greater New York" label="YMCA of Greater New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045957" start="48241" end="48259" title="YMCA SCUBA Program" label="YMCA SCUBA Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q592696" start="48262" end="48277" title="Y.M.C.A. (song)" label="Y.M.C.A. (song)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87243" wikidata="Q3243308" url="?curid=87243" title="List of Rastafarians">
<text>This is a list of notable [[Rastafari movement|Rastafari]].

==Early teachers==
*Leonard Howell
*Joseph Hibbert
*Archibald Dunkley
*Sam Brown
*Vernon Carrington
*Charles Edwards
*Mortimer Planner

==Musicians==
*Bob Marley (1945–1981), musician and singer
*Peter Tosh (1944–1987) musician and singer
*Bunny Wailer (1947–2021), reggae singer
*Max Romeo (1947–), reggae singer
* Junior Delgado (1958-2005), reggae singer 
* Beres Hammond (1955-), reggae singer
* Dennis Brown (1957-1999), reggae singer
*Winston Rodney (Burning Spear) (1945–), musician and singer
*Alpha Blondy, Ivorian reggae musician 
*Alborosie, (1977-), Italian-Jamaican musician and singer
*Ziggy Marley (1968–), musician and singer
*Lucky Dube, South African reggae musician (1964–2007)
*Evison Matafale, Malawian reggae musician (1969–2001)
*Prince Far I (1945–1983), deejay
*Buju Banton (1973–), dancehall and ragga musician and singer
*Damian Marley (1978–), musician and singer
*Ky-Mani Marley(1976–), musician and singer 
*Stephen Marley (1972–), musician and singer
*Julian Marley (1975–), musician and singer
*Rita Marley (1946–), musician and singer
*Rohan Marley (1972–), played college football
*Milton Nascimento (1942–), Brazilian singer
*Jah Shaka, sound system operator
*Joseph Hill (1949–2006) musician and singer
*Lincoln Thompson, (1949–1999), musician and composer
*Cedric Myton, composer and musician
*Ras Michael, musician and singer
*Sizzla, musician and singer
*Bad Brains, American hardcore punk band
*Pablo Moses, reggae singer
*Wadada Leo Smith, jazz musician and composer
*Jah Cure, Reggae singer
*Anthony B, reggae singer and deejay
*Richie Spice, reggae singer
*Mutabaruka, poet and reggae musician
*Augustus Pablo, (1954–1999) reggae musician and producer
*Hans Söllner, German musician
*Che Fu, Hip Hop, R&amp;B and reggae Singer
*Tigilau Ness, reggae singer
*I Wayne, reggae artist/songwriter
*Capleton, reggae artist
*Soldiers of Jah Army, reggae band
*Bushman, musician and singer
*Junior Kelly, singer
*Gregory Isaacs (1951–2010), reggae singer
*Junior Reid, reggae singer
*Barrington Levy, reggae singer
*Yellowman, reggae dancehall singer
*Gentleman, reggae singer
*Don Carlos, reggae singer
*Michael Prophet (1957–2017), roots reggae singer
*Larry Marshall (1941–2017), roots reggae singer
*Jacob Miller (1952–1980), musician and reggae singer
*Nicodemus, reggae singer
*Ini Kamoze (Cecil Campbell), reggae singer
*Michael Rose, reggae singer
*Junior Murvin, reggae singer
*Sugar Minott (1956–2010), reggae singer
*Capleton, reggae singer
*Queen Ifrica, reggae singer
*U Roy, Jamaican musician
*Tribal Seeds, reggae band
*Cocoa Tea, reggae singer
*Chezidek, reggae singer
*Dezarie, reggae singer
*Junior Byles, reggae singer
*Protoje, reggae singer
*Turbulence, reggae singer
*Lutan Fyah, reggae singer
*Chronixx, reggae singer

==Politicians==
*Ed &quot;NJWeedman&quot; Forchion, American cannabis rights activist
*Nándor Tánczos, New Zealand politician
*Sams&#x27;K Le Jah, Burkina Faso protest leader

==Artists==
*Ras Daniel Heartman, Jamaican artist
*Benjamin Zephaniah, poet

==Sportspeople==
*Ricardo Gardner, Jamaican footballer
*Thabo Mngomeni, South African footballer
*Tafari Moore, English footballer

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3243308" start="10" end="58" title="List of Rastafarians" label="list of notable [[Rastafari movement|Rastafari]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q372368" start="81" end="95" title="Leonard Howell" label="Leonard Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283984" start="97" end="111" title="Joseph Hibbert" label="Joseph Hibbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786301" start="113" end="130" title="Archibald Dunkley" label="Archibald Dunkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407264" start="132" end="141" title="Sam Brown (Rastafari)" label="Sam Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q376128" start="143" end="160" title="Vernon Carrington" label="Vernon Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959004" start="162" end="177" title="Charles Edwards (Rastafari)" label="Charles Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294966" start="179" end="195" title="Mortimer Planner" label="Mortimer Planner"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="212" end="222" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q273049" start="257" end="267" title="Peter Tosh" label="Peter Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q441203" start="301" end="313" title="Bunny Wailer" label="Bunny Wailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q452162" start="342" end="351" title="Max Romeo" label="Max Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q301066" start="377" end="391" title="Junior Delgado" label="Junior Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q733788" start="422" end="435" title="Beres Hammond" label="Beres Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q711294" start="461" end="473" title="Dennis Brown" label="Dennis Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q361646" start="502" end="532" title="Burning Spear" label="Winston Rodney (Burning Spear)"/>
<link wikidata="Q323213" start="563" end="575" title="Alpha Blondy" label="Alpha Blondy"/>
<link wikidata="Q559343" start="603" end="612" title="Alborosie" label="Alborosie"/>
<link wikidata="Q199418" start="661" end="673" title="Ziggy Marley" label="Ziggy Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q380147" start="704" end="714" title="Lucky Dube" label="Lucky Dube"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015206" start="759" end="774" title="Evison Matafale" label="Evison Matafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110365" start="814" end="826" title="Prince Far I" label="Prince Far I"/>
<link wikidata="Q560642" start="848" end="859" title="Buju Banton" label="Buju Banton"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="869" end="878" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="883" end="888" title="ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q310796" start="910" end="923" title="Damian Marley" label="Damian Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q741513" start="954" end="968" title="Ky-Mani Marley" label="Ky-Mani Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q468677" start="999" end="1013" title="Stephen Marley (musician)" label="Stephen Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q718404" start="1044" end="1057" title="Julian Marley" label="Julian Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q450423" start="1088" end="1099" title="Rita Marley" label="Rita Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939373" start="1130" end="1142" title="Rohan Marley" label="Rohan Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q542847" start="1177" end="1194" title="Milton Nascimento" label="Milton Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q726991" start="1222" end="1231" title="Jah Shaka" label="Jah Shaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q264100" start="1256" end="1267" title="Joseph Hill (musician)" label="Joseph Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572518" start="1301" end="1317" title="Lincoln Thompson" label="Lincoln Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="1345" end="1353" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943800" start="1355" end="1367" title="Cedric Myton" label="Cedric Myton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3419777" start="1392" end="1403" title="Ras Michael" label="Ras Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q369738" start="1426" end="1432" title="Sizzla" label="Sizzla"/>
<link wikidata="Q798671" start="1455" end="1465" title="Bad Brains" label="Bad Brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q974306" start="1496" end="1507" title="Pablo Moses" label="Pablo Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538661" start="1524" end="1540" title="Wadada Leo Smith" label="Wadada Leo Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="1542" end="1546" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274712" start="1570" end="1578" title="Jah Cure" label="Jah Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q572836" start="1595" end="1604" title="Anthony B" label="Anthony B"/>
<link wikidata="Q535792" start="1632" end="1644" title="Richie Spice" label="Richie Spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q706252" start="1661" end="1671" title="Mutabaruka" label="Mutabaruka"/>
<link wikidata="Q467250" start="1699" end="1713" title="Augustus Pablo" label="Augustus Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43949" start="1757" end="1769" title="Hans Söllner" label="Hans Söllner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088754" start="1788" end="1794" title="Che Fu" label="Che Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801665" start="1832" end="1844" title="Tigilau Ness" label="Tigilau Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449331" start="1861" end="1868" title="I Wayne" label="I Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q536588" start="1896" end="1904" title="Capleton" label="Capleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298729" start="1921" end="1941" title="Soldiers of Jah Army" label="Soldiers of Jah Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066600" start="1956" end="1963" title="Bushman (reggae singer)" label="Bushman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398986" start="1986" end="1998" title="Junior Kelly" label="Junior Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q440898" start="2008" end="2022" title="Gregory Isaacs" label="Gregory Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q555694" start="2051" end="2062" title="Junior Reid" label="Junior Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q790763" start="2079" end="2094" title="Barrington Levy" label="Barrington Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q711228" start="2111" end="2120" title="Yellowman" label="Yellowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q452250" start="2147" end="2156" title="Gentleman (musician)" label="Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q636103" start="2173" end="2183" title="Don Carlos (musician)" label="Don Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308468" start="2200" end="2215" title="Michael Prophet" label="Michael Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490754" start="2250" end="2264" title="Larry Marshall (singer)" label="Larry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q655163" start="2299" end="2311" title="Jacob Miller (musician)" label="Jacob Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028913" start="2353" end="2362" title="Nicodemus (musician)" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q711224" start="2379" end="2389" title="Ini Kamoze" label="Ini Kamoze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356968" start="2423" end="2435" title="Michael Rose (singer)" label="Michael Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q667881" start="2452" end="2465" title="Junior Murvin" label="Junior Murvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q787391" start="2482" end="2494" title="Sugar Minott" label="Sugar Minott"/>
<link wikidata="Q536588" start="2523" end="2531" title="Capleton" label="Capleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122566" start="2548" end="2560" title="Queen Ifrica" label="Queen Ifrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356920" start="2577" end="2582" title="U Roy" label="U Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840317" start="2603" end="2615" title="Tribal Seeds" label="Tribal Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105421" start="2630" end="2639" title="Cocoa Tea" label="Cocoa Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963197" start="2656" end="2664" title="Chezidek" label="Chezidek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609373" start="2681" end="2688" title="Dezarie" label="Dezarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q721270" start="2705" end="2717" title="Junior Byles" label="Junior Byles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113673" start="2734" end="2741" title="Protoje" label="Protoje"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527980" start="2758" end="2768" title="Turbulence (musician)" label="Turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q745330" start="2785" end="2795" title="Lutan Fyah" label="Lutan Fyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841911" start="2812" end="2820" title="Chronixx" label="Chronixx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342953" start="2854" end="2887" title="Ed Forchion" label="Ed &amp;quot;NJWeedman&amp;quot; Forchion"/>
<link wikidata="Q727542" start="2924" end="2938" title="Nándor Tánczos" label="Nándor Tánczos"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="2940" end="2951" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q18687970" start="2964" end="2982" title="Sams&amp;#x27;K Le Jah" label="Sams&amp;#x27;K Le Jah"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="2984" end="2996" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664520" start="3026" end="3045" title="Ras Daniel Heartman" label="Ras Daniel Heartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q561142" start="3064" end="3082" title="Benjamin Zephaniah" label="Benjamin Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q317754" start="3108" end="3123" title="Ricardo Gardner" label="Ricardo Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626398" start="3146" end="3160" title="Thabo Mngomeni" label="Thabo Mngomeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580295" start="3188" end="3200" title="Tafari Moore" label="Tafari Moore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87249" wikidata="Q912522" url="?curid=87249" title="Kola nut">
<text>The kola nut (Yoruba: &quot;obi&quot;, Dagbani: &quot;guli&quot;, Hausa: goro, Igbo: &quot;ọjị&quot;, Sängö: &quot;gôro,&quot; Swahili: &quot;mukezu&quot;) is the seed of certain species of plant of the genus &quot;Cola&quot;, placed formerly in the cocoa family Sterculiaceae and now usually subsumed in the mallow family Malvaceae (as subfamily Sterculioideae). These cola species are trees native to the tropical rainforests of Africa. Their caffeine-containing seeds are used as flavoring ingredients in various carbonated soft drinks, from which the name &quot;cola&quot; originates.

==Description==

About across, the kola nut is a nut of evergreen trees of the genus &quot;Cola&quot;, primarily of the species &quot;Cola acuminata&quot; and &quot;Cola nitida&quot;. &quot;Cola acuminata&quot;, an evergreen tree about 20 meters in height, has long, ovoid leaves pointed at both the ends with a leathery texture. The trees have cream-white flowers with purplish-brown striations, and star-shaped fruit consisting of usually 5 follicles. Inside each follicle, about a dozen prismatic seeds develop in a white seed-shell. The nut has a reddish or white color flesh on the inside, and has a sweet and rose-like aroma. 

Kola nuts contain about 2–4% caffeine and theobromine, as well as tannins, alkaloids, saponins, and flavonoids.

=== Chemistry ===
Preliminary studies of phytochemicals in kola nut indicate the presence of various constituents: caffeine (2–3.5%), theobromine (1.0–2.5%), theophylline, methylliberine, polyphenols, catechins, and phlobaphens (&quot;kola red&quot;), among others.

== Cultivation ==
Originally a tree of the tropical rainforest, it needs a hot humid climate, but can withstand a dry season on sites with a high ground water level. It may be cultivated in drier areas where groundwater is available. &quot;C. nitida&quot; is a shade bearer, but develops a better spreading crown which yields more fruits in open places. Though it is a lowland forest tree, it has been found at altitudes over 300 m on deep, rich soils under heavy and evenly distributed rainfall.

Regular weeding is necessary, which can be performed manually or through the use of herbicides. Some irrigation can be provided to the plants, but it is important to remove the water through an effective drainage system, as excess water may prove to be detrimental for the growth of the plant. When not grown in adequate shade, the kola nut plant responds well to fertilizers. Usually, the plants need to be provided with windbreaks to protect them from strong gales.

Kola nuts can be harvested mechanically or by hand, by plucking them at the tree branch. Nigeria produces 52.4% of worldwide production followed by the Ivory Coast and Cameroon. When kept in a cool, dry place, kola nuts can be stored for a long time.

The crop&#x27;s value makes it one of the most important indigenous cash crops in West Africa and is used as a means of social mobility.

===Pests and diseases===
The nuts are subject to attack by the kola weevil &quot;Balanogastris kolae&quot;. The larvae of the moth &quot;Characoma strictigrapta&quot; that also attacks cacao bore into the nuts. Traders sometimes apply an extract of the bark of &quot;Rauvolfia vomitoria&quot; or the pulverised fruits of &quot;Xylopia&quot; and &quot;Capsicum&quot; to counteract the attack on nursery plants. The cacao pests &quot;Sahlbergella&quot; spp. have been found also on &quot;C. nitida&quot; as an alternative host plant. While seeds are liable to worm attack, the wood is subject to borer attack.

=== Production ===
In 2022, world production of kola nuts was , led by Nigeria with 55% of the total (table).

==Uses==
The kola nut has a bitter flavor and contains caffeine. The nut is a nervous system stimulant and is chewed in many West African countries, in both private and social settings. It is often used ceremonially, presented to chiefs or guests. Throughout history, kola nuts have been planted on graves as part of various rituals. Laborers in many countries also grow kola nuts in efforts to fight fatigue and hunger, while Brazilians and people of the West Indies use the nut as a remedy for hangovers, intoxication, and diarrhea. 

In folk medicine, kola nuts are considered useful for aiding digestion when ground and mixed with honey, and are used as a remedy for coughs. 

Kola nuts are perhaps best known to Western culture as a flavoring ingredient and one of the sources of caffeine in cola and other similarly flavored beverages, although kola nut extract is no longer claimed on the labels of major commercial cola drinks such as Coca-Cola.

==History==
Human use of the kola nut, like the coffee berry and tea leaf, appears to have ancient origins. The spread of the kola nut across North Africa seems to be connected to the spread of Islam across West Africa during the 17th century, as trading across the Mediterranean became established. The kola nut was particularly useful on slave ships to improve the taste of water, as enslaved Africans were often given poor quality water to drink. A French voyager named Chevalier Des Marchais, who traveled to West Africa in the late 1720s, noted that the nut made the, &quot;bitterest, our sourest Things taste Sweet after it.&quot; These sweet alterations are attributed to the chemical substances that the nut adds to one&#x27;s palate or the sheer amount of caffeine.

Kola nuts were used as an ingredient within Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola in 1886 and 1888 respectively. Kola nuts are an important part of the traditional spiritual practice, culture, and religion in West Africa, particularly Ghana, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Democratic Republic of Congo and Liberia.

===Cola recipe===
In the 1880s, a pharmacist in Georgia, John Pemberton, took caffeine extracted from kola nuts and cocaine-containing extracts from coca leaves and mixed them with sugar, other flavorings, and carbonated water to invent Coca-Cola, the first widely popular cola soft drink. Although the exact details of its cola recipe remain confidential, as of 2016, the Coca-Cola formula no longer contained actual kola nut extract, and an independent test conducted to identify it failed to detect its signature proteins.

==In culture==

Used in cultural traditions of the Igbo people, the presentation of kola nuts to guests or in a traditional gathering shows good will. It is implemented in Yoruba religion both as an offering to orishas and as an instrument of divination.

A kola nut ceremony is briefly described in Chinua Achebe&#x27;s 1958 novel &quot;Things Fall Apart&quot;. The eating of kola nuts is referred to at least ten times in the novel, showing the kola nut&#x27;s significance in pre-colonial 1890s Igbo culture in Nigeria. One of these sayings on kola nut in &quot;Things Fall Apart&quot; is &quot;He who brings kola brings life.&quot; It is also featured prominently in Chris Abani&#x27;s 2004 novel &quot;GraceLand&quot;. The kola nut is also mentioned in &quot;The Color Purple&quot; by Alice Walker, although it is spelled &quot;cola&quot;.

The kola nut is mentioned in Bloc Party&#x27;s song &quot;Where is Home?&quot; on the album &quot;A Weekend in the City&quot;. The lyric, setting a post-funeral scene for the murder of a black boy in London, reads, &quot;After the funeral, breaking kola nuts, we sit and reminisce about the past.&quot; The kola nut is mentioned in the At the Drive-In song &quot;Enfilade&quot; on the album &quot;Relationship of Command&quot;. The kola nut is repeatedly mentioned in Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie&#x27;s novel &quot;Half of a Yellow Sun&quot;, which also features the phrase: &quot;He who brings the Kola nut brings life.&quot;

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Cola acuminata&quot; - (P.Beauv.) Schott &amp; Endl., Plants For A Future, 2012
* The Rise and Fall of Cocaine Cola</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="4" end="12" title="Kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="14" end="20" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="39" end="46" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="66" end="71" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="79" end="83" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33954" start="102" end="107" title="Sango language" label="Sängö"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="127" end="134" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q114264" start="209" end="225" title="Cola (plant)" label="&amp;quot;Cola&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42385" start="250" end="255" title="Theobroma cacao" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071125" start="263" end="276" title="Sterculiaceae" label="Sterculiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156551" start="323" end="332" title="Malvaceae" label="Malvaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q159031" start="347" end="361" title="Sterculioideae" label="Sterculioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q114264" start="370" end="374" title="Cola (plant)" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="387" end="391" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="416" end="426" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="431" end="437" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="445" end="453" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="516" end="538" title="soft drink" label="carbonated soft drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q114264" start="681" end="685" title="Cola (plant)" label="Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q522881" start="724" end="738" title="Cola acuminata" label="Cola acuminata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185081" start="755" end="766" title="Cola nitida" label="Cola nitida"/>
<link wikidata="Q147807" start="1033" end="1042" title="follicle (fruit)" label="follicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="1253" end="1261" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206844" start="1266" end="1277" title="theobromine" label="theobromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="1290" end="1296" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="1299" end="1307" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="1310" end="1317" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="1324" end="1333" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="1378" end="1391" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="1452" end="1460" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206844" start="1471" end="1482" title="theobromine" label="theobromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407308" start="1495" end="1507" title="theophylline" label="theophylline"/>
<link wikidata="Q15425830" start="1509" end="1523" title="methylliberine" label="methylliberine"/>
<link wikidata="Q290439" start="1525" end="1535" title="polyphenol" label="polyphenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415007" start="1538" end="1546" title="catechin" label="catechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727375" start="1553" end="1563" title="phlobaphen" label="phlobaphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="1647" end="1666" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="2186" end="2195" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q97062821" start="3042" end="3061" title="Balanogastris kolae" label="Balanogastris kolae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3098" end="3121" title="Characoma strictigrapta" label="Characoma strictigrapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225969" start="3228" end="3247" title="Rauvolfia vomitoria" label="Rauvolfia vomitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234889" start="3288" end="3295" title="Xylopia" label="Xylopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="3312" end="3320" title="Capsicum" label="Capsicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q109530754" start="3393" end="3405" title="Sahlbergella" label="Sahlbergella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="3806" end="3818" title="West African" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="4221" end="4234" title="Traditional medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9649" start="4279" end="4288" title="Human digestive system" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="4352" end="4357" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="4398" end="4413" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="4478" end="4482" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="4624" end="4633" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q156354" start="4684" end="4696" title="Coffea" label="coffee berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q101815" start="4701" end="4709" title="Camellia sinensis" label="tea leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5634" end="5639" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="5641" end="5646" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="5648" end="5655" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="5657" end="5669" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="5671" end="5699" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="5704" end="5711" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215959" start="5771" end="5785" title="John Pemberton" label="John Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="5830" end="5837" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="5863" end="5867" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="5924" end="5940" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="5951" end="5960" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="5987" end="5991" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661372" start="6087" end="6104" title="Coca-Cola formula" label="Coca-Cola formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="6292" end="6303" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="6413" end="6428" title="Yoruba religion" label="Yoruba religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q290460" start="6452" end="6458" title="orisha" label="orisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426922" start="6484" end="6494" title="ifá" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="6541" end="6554" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q622400" start="6579" end="6596" title="Things Fall Apart" label="Things Fall Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076935" start="6912" end="6923" title="Chris Abani" label="Chris Abani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590925" start="6948" end="6957" title="GraceLand" label="GraceLand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897870" start="7005" end="7021" title="The Color Purple" label="The Color Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q215868" start="7031" end="7043" title="Alice Walker" label="Alice Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q205838" start="7116" end="7126" title="Bloc Party" label="Bloc Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q300615" start="7185" end="7206" title="A Weekend in the City" label="A Weekend in the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q690904" start="7423" end="7438" title="At the Drive-In" label="At the Drive-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386645" start="7484" end="7507" title="Relationship of Command" label="Relationship of Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q230141" start="7555" end="7579" title="Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie" label="Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235393" start="7599" end="7619" title="Half of a Yellow Sun" label="Half of a Yellow Sun"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87253" wikidata="Q443528" url="?curid=87253" title="J. B. Priestley">
<text>John Boynton Priestley (; 13 September 1894 – 14 August 1984) was an English novelist, playwright, screenwriter, broadcaster and social commentator.

His Yorkshire background is reflected in much of his fiction, notably in &quot;The Good Companions&quot; (1929), which first brought him to wide public notice. Many of his plays are structured around a time slip, and he went on to develop a new theory of time, with different dimensions that link past, present and future.

In 1940, he broadcast a series of short propaganda radio talks, which were credited with strengthening civilian morale during the Battle of Britain. In the following years his left-wing beliefs brought him into conflict with the government and influenced the development of the welfare state.

== Early life ==
Priestley was born on 13 September 1894 at 34 Mannheim Road, Manningham, which he described as an &quot;extremely respectable&quot; suburb of Bradford. His father, Jonathan Priestley (1868–1924), was a headmaster. His mother, Emma (&quot;née&quot; Holt; 1865–1896), was a mill girl. She died when Priestley was just two years old and his father remarried four years later. Priestley was educated at Belle Vue Grammar School, which he left at 16 to work as a junior clerk at Helm &amp; Co. in the Swan Arcade.

During his years at Helm &amp; Co. (1910–1914) he started writing at night and had articles published in local and London newspapers. He was to draw on memories of Bradford in many of the works he wrote after he had moved south, including &quot;Bright Day&quot; and &quot;When We Are Married&quot;. As an old man he deplored the destruction by developers of Victorian buildings in Bradford such as the Swan Arcade, where he had his first job.

Priestley served in the British Army during the First World War, volunteering for the Duke of Wellington&#x27;s Regiment on 7 September 1914 and being posted to the 10th Battalion in France as a Lance-Corporal on 26 August 1915.

He was badly wounded in June 1916 when he was buried alive by a trench mortar. He spent many months in military hospitals and convalescent establishments. On 26 January 1918 he was commissioned as an officer in the Devonshire Regiment and posted back to France in the late summer. As he describes in his literary reminiscences, &quot;Margin Released&quot;, he suffered from the effects of poison gas and then supervised German prisoners of war before being demobilised in early 1919.

After his military service Priestley received a university education at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was among the first cohort of students to study the newly founded English Tripos; transferring to History for Part II, he was awarded an upper-second class degree in 1921. By the age of 30 he had established a reputation as an essayist and critic. His novel &quot;Benighted&quot; (1927) was adapted into the James Whale film &quot;The Old Dark House&quot; (1932); the novel was published under the film&#x27;s name in the United States.

== Career ==
Priestley&#x27;s first major success came with a novel, &quot;The Good Companions&quot; (1929), which earned him the James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction and made him a national figure. His next novel, &quot;Angel Pavement&quot; (1930), further established him as a successful novelist. However some critics were less than complimentary about his work and Priestley threatened legal action against Graham Greene for what he took to be a defamatory portrait of him in the novel &quot;Stamboul Train&quot; (1932).

In 1934, he published the travelogue &quot;English Journey&quot;, an account of what he saw and heard while travelling through the country in the depths of the Great Depression.

Priestley is today seen as having a prejudice against the Irish, as is shown in &quot;English Journey&quot;: &quot;A great many speeches have been made and books written on the subject of what England has done to Ireland... I should be interested to hear a speech and read a book or two on the subject of what Ireland has done to England... if we do have an Irish Republic as our neighbour, and it is found possible to return her exiled citizens, what a grand clearance there will be in all the western ports, from the Clyde to Cardiff, what a fine exit of ignorance and dirt and drunkenness and disease.&quot;

He moved into a new genre and became equally well known as a dramatist. &quot;Dangerous Corner&quot; (1932) was the first of many plays that would enthral West End theatre audiences. His best-known play is &quot;An Inspector Calls&quot; (1945). His plays are more varied in tone than the novels, several being influenced by J. W. Dunne&#x27;s theory of time, which plays a part in the plots of &quot;Dangerous Corner&quot; (1932) and &quot;Time and the Conways&quot;.

In 1940, Priestley wrote an essay for &quot;Horizon&quot; magazine in which he criticised George Bernard Shaw for his support of Stalin: &quot;Shaw presumes that his friend Stalin has everything under control. Well, Stalin may have made special arrangements to see that Shaw comes to no harm, but the rest of us in Western Europe do not feel quite so sure of our fate, especially those of us who do not share Shaw&#x27;s curious admiration for dictators.&quot;

During the Second World War he was a regular broadcaster on the BBC. The &quot;Postscript&quot;, broadcast on Sunday night in 1940 and again in 1941, drew peak audiences of 16 million; only Churchill was more popular with listeners. Graham Greene wrote that Priestley &quot;became in the months after Dunkirk a leader second only in importance to Mr Churchill. And he gave us what our other leaders have always failed to give us—an ideology.&quot; But his talks were cancelled. It was thought that this was the effect of complaints from Churchill that they were too left-wing; however in 2015 Priestley&#x27;s son said in a talk on the latest book being published about his father&#x27;s life that it was in fact Churchill&#x27;s Cabinet that brought about the cancellation by supplying negative reports on the broadcasts to Churchill.

Priestley chaired the 1941 Committee and in 1942 he was a cofounder of the socialist Common Wealth Party. The political content of his broadcasts and his hopes of a new and different Britain after the war influenced the politics of the period and helped the Labour Party gain its landslide victory in the 1945 general election. Priestley himself, however, was distrustful of the state and dogma, though he did stand for the Cambridge University constituency in 1945.

Priestley&#x27;s name was on Orwell&#x27;s list, a list of people that George Orwell prepared in March 1949 for the Information Research Department (IRD), a propaganda unit set up at the Foreign Office by the Labour government. Orwell considered or suspected these people to have pro-communist leanings and therefore to be unsuitable to write for the IRD.

Priestley was a founding member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament in 1958.

In 1960, Priestley published &quot;Literature and Western Man&quot;, a 500-page survey of Western literature in all its genres from the second half of the 15th century to the middle of the 20th century. (The last author discussed was Thomas Wolfe.)

In 1964 Priestly joined the &quot;Who Killed Kennedy Committee?&quot; set up by Bertrand Russell.

His interest in the problem of time led him to publish an extended essay in 1964 under the title of &quot;Man and Time&quot;. (Aldus published this as a companion to Carl Jung&#x27;s &quot;Man and His Symbols&quot;.) In the book he explored in depth various theories and beliefs about time as well as his own research and unique conclusions, including an analysis of the phenomenon of precognitive dreaming, based in part on a broad sampling of experiences gathered from the British public, who responded enthusiastically to a televised appeal he made while being interviewed in 1963 on the BBC programme &quot;Monitor&quot;.
The University of Bradford awarded Priestley the title of honorary Doctor of Letters in 1970 and he was awarded the Freedom of the City of Bradford in 1973. His connections with the city were also marked by the naming of the J. B. Priestley Library at the University of Bradford, which he officially opened in 1975, and by the larger-than-life statue of him, commissioned by the Bradford City Council after his death and which now stands in front of the National Science and Media Museum.

== Personal life ==
Priestley had a deep love for classical music, especially chamber music. This love is reflected in a number of Priestley&#x27;s works, notably his own favourite novel, &quot;Bright Day&quot; (Heinemann, 1946). His book &quot;Trumpets Over the Sea&quot; is subtitled &quot;a rambling and egotistical account of the London Symphony Orchestra&#x27;s engagement at Daytona Beach, Florida, in July–August 1967&quot;.

In 1941, he played an important part in organising and supporting a fund-raising campaign on behalf of the London Philharmonic Orchestra, which was struggling to establish itself as a self-governing body after the withdrawal of Sir Thomas Beecham. In 1949 the opera &quot;The Olympians&quot; by Arthur Bliss, to a libretto by Priestley, was premiered.

Priestley snubbed the chance to become a life peer in 1965 and also declined appointment as a Companion of Honour in 1969. But he did become a member of the Order of Merit in 1977. He also served as a British delegate to UNESCO conferences.

=== Marriages ===

Priestley was married three times. He also had a number of affairs, including a serious relationship with the actress Peggy Ashcroft. Writing in 1972, Priestley described himself as &quot;lusty&quot; and as one who has &quot;enjoyed the physical relations with the sexes[...] without the feelings of guilt which seems to disturb some of my distinguished colleagues&quot;.

In 1921, Priestley married Emily &quot;Pat&quot; Tempest, a music-loving Bradford librarian. Two daughters were born: Barbara (later known as the architect Barbara Wykeham) in 1923 and Sylvia (a designer known as Sylvia Goaman following her marriage to Michael Goaman) in 1924. In 1925, his wife died of cancer.

In September 1926, Priestley married Jane Wyndham-Lewis (ex-wife of the one-time &#x27;Beachcomber&#x27; columnist D. B. Wyndham-Lewis, no relation to the artist Wyndham Lewis); they had two daughters (including music therapist Mary Priestley, conceived in 1924 while Jane was still married to D. B. Wyndham-Lewis) and one son, the film editor Tom Priestley. During the Second World War Jane ran several residential nurseries for evacuated mothers and their children, many of whom had come from poor districts. For much of their married life they lived at 3, The Grove in Highgate, formerly the home of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge.

In 1953, Priestley was divorced by his second wife and then married the archaeologist and writer Jacquetta Hawkes, with whom he collaborated on the play &quot;Dragon&#x27;s Mouth&quot;. The couple lived at Alveston, Warwickshire, near Stratford-upon-Avon, later in his life.

=== Death ===
Priestley died of pneumonia on 14 August 1984, a month short of his ninetieth birthday. His ashes were buried in the churchyard of the Church of St Michael and All Angels, Hubberholme at the head of Wharfedale in Yorkshire. The exact location of his ashes has never been made public and is known only to the three people who were present for the burial.

A plaque in the church just states that his ashes are buried &#x27;nearby&#x27;. Three photographs exist showing the ashes being interred, taken by Dr Brian Hoyle Thompson. He and his wife were two of the three people present. The brass plate on the box containing the ashes reads &quot;J. B. Priestley&quot; and can be seen clearly in one of the pictures.

== Archives ==
Priestley began placing his papers at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin in 1960, with additions being made throughout his lifetime. The center has continued to add to the collection through gifts and purchases when possible. The collection comprises 23 boxes , including original manuscripts for many of his works and an extensive series of correspondence.

The University of Bradford Library holds the J. B. Priestley Archive as part of their Special Collections. The collection includes scripts, journal articles, lectures, press cuttings, correspondence, photographs and objects such as Priestley&#x27;s iconic pipe. Most of the material in this collection was donated by the Priestley Estate.

== Bibliography ==

=== Novels ===
* &quot;Adam in Moonshine&quot; (1927)
* &quot;Benighted&quot; (1927) (filmed as &quot;The Old Dark House&quot;)
* &quot;The Good Companions&quot; (1929)
* &quot;Angel Pavement&quot; (1930)
* &quot;Faraway&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Wonder Hero&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Albert Goes Through&quot; (1933)
* &quot;They Walk in the City&quot; (1936)
* &quot;The Doomsday Men&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Let the People Sing&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Blackout in Gretley&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Daylight on Saturday&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Three Men in New Suits&quot; (1945)
* &quot;Bright Day&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Jenny Villiers&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Festival at Farbridge&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Low Notes on a High Level&quot; (1954)
* &quot;The Magicians&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Saturn over the Water&quot; (1961)
* &quot;The Thirty-First of June&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Salt Is Leaving&quot; (1961)
* &quot;The Shapes of Sleep&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Sir Michael and Sir George&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Lost Empires&quot; (1965)
* &quot;It&#x27;s an Old Country&quot; (1967)
* &quot;The Image Men Vol. 1: Out of Town&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Image Men Vol. 2: London End&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Found, Lost, Found&quot; (1976)

=== Other fiction ===
* &quot;Farthing Hall&quot; (1929) (Novel written in collaboration with Hugh Walpole)
* &quot;The Town Major of Miraucourt&quot; (1930) (Short story published in a limited edition of 525 copies)
* &quot;I&#x27;ll Tell You Everything&quot; (1932) (Novel written in collaboration with Gerald Bullett)
* &quot;The Other Place&quot; (1952) (Short Stories)
* &quot;Snoggle&quot; (1971) (Novel for children)
* &quot;The Carfitt Crisis&quot; (1975) (Two novellas and a short story)
; Novelizations by Ruth Mitchell (author of the wartime novel &quot;The Lost Generation&quot; and Priestley&#x27;s sister-in-law by way of his second marriage):
* &quot;Dangerous Corner&quot; (1933), based on the later Broadway draft of the play, with a foreword by Priestley (paperback)
* &quot;Laburnum Grove&quot; (1936), based on the play and subsequent screenplay, published as a hardcover tie-in edition to the film

=== Selected plays ===

* &quot;The Good Companions&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Dangerous Corner&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Laburnum Grove&quot; (1933)
* &quot;Eden End&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Cornelius&quot; (1935)
* &quot;People at Sea&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Bees on the Boat Deck&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Time and the Conways&quot; (1937)
* &quot;I Have Been Here Before&quot; (1937)
* &quot;When We Are Married&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Johnson Over Jordan&quot; (1939)
* &quot;The Long Mirror&quot; (1940)
* &quot;They Came to a City&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Desert Highway&quot; (1944)
* &quot;How Are They at Home?&quot; (1944)
* &quot;An Inspector Calls&quot; (1945)
* &quot;Ever Since Paradise&quot; (1946)
* &quot;The Linden Tree&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Home Is Tomorrow&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Summer Day&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Mother&#x27;s Day&quot; (1950)
* &quot;The White Countess&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Mr. Kettle and Mrs. Moon&quot; (1955)
* &quot;The Glass Cage&quot; (1957)
* &quot;The Thirty-first of June: A Tale of True Love, Enterprise and Progress in the Arthurian and AD-Atomic Ages&quot;
** Novel. December 1961: hardback; / (UK edition); William Heinemann Ltd
** BBC radio dramatisation; one and a half hours
** Novel. 1996: paperback; / (UK edition); Mandarin
** &quot;31 June&quot; (1978) (TV) Soviet film
* &quot;Benighted&quot; (2016, adapted from his 1928 novel by Duncan Gates)
* &quot;The Roundabout&quot; (1931)

=== Films ===
* &quot;Sing As We Go&quot; (1934) (screenplay with Gordon Wellesley)
* &quot;Look Up and Laugh&quot; (1935) (screenplay)
* &quot;We Live in Two Worlds&quot; (1937) (a documentary short subject, written and presented by Priestley) 
* &quot;Jamaica Inn&quot; (1939) (additional dialogue)
* &quot;Britain at Bay&quot; (1940) (a documentary short subject, written and presented by Priestley) 
* &quot;They Came to a City&quot; (1944) (screenplay with Basil Dearden and Sidney Cole, based on his play; Priestly also appears as the story&#x27;s narrator)
* &quot;Last Holiday&quot; (1950) (screenplay and producer)

=== Television work ===
* &quot;You Know What People Are&quot; (1955)
* &quot;Armchair Theatre: Now Let Him Go&quot; (ABC – 15 September 1957)
* &quot;Doomsday for Dyson&quot; (Granada – 10 March 1958)
* &quot;Out of the Unknown: Level Seven&quot; (BBC2 – 27 October 1966, adaptation of a story by Mordecai Roshwald)
* &quot;The Wednesday Play: Anyone for Tennis?&quot; (BBC1 – 25 September 1968)
* &quot;Shadows: The Other Window&quot; (Thames – 15 October 1975, co-written with Jacquetta Hawkes)
* &quot;An Inspector Calls&quot; (several versions including BBC – 2015)

=== Literary criticism ===
* &quot;The English Comic Characters&quot; (1925)
* &quot;The English Novel&quot; (1927)
* &quot;Literature and Western Man&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Charles Dickens and his world&quot; (1969)

=== Social and political works ===
* &quot;English Journey&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Out of the people&quot; (1941)
* &quot;The Secret Dream: an essay on Britain, America and Russia&quot; (1946)
* &quot;The Arts under Socialism&quot; (1947)
* &quot;The Prince of Pleasure and his Regency&quot; (1969)
* &quot;The Edwardians&quot; (1970)
* &quot; Victoria&#x27;s Heyday&quot; (1972)
* &quot;The English&quot; (1973)
* &quot;A Visit to New Zealand&quot; (1974)

=== Autobiography and essays ===
* &quot;Essays of To-day and Yesterday&quot; (1926)
* &quot;Apes and Angels&quot; (1928)
* &quot;The Balconinny&quot; (1931)
* &quot;Midnight on the Desert&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Rain Upon Godshill: A Further Chapter of Autobiography&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Postscripts&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Delight&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Journey Down a Rainbow&quot; (co-authored with Jacquetta Hawkes, 1955
* &quot;Thoughts in the wilderness&quot; (1957) 
* &quot;Margin Released&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Man and Time&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Moments and Other Pieces&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Over the Long High Wall&quot; (1972)
* &quot;The Happy Dream&quot; (Limited edition, 1976)
* &quot;Instead of the Trees&quot; (1977)

== References ==
Other sources
* Brome, Vincent (1988). &quot;J.B. Priestley.&quot; 
* Bright Day: A special collectors&#x27; edition, by J.B. Priestley

== External links ==
;Digital collections
* 

;Physical collections
* J. B. Priestley Papers at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin
* J. B. Priestley Archive at the University of Bradford
* Priestley in the Theatre Collection, University of Bristol

;Biographical information
* J. B. Priestley biography at Spartacus Educational
* 

;Other links
* The Official J. B. Priestley website
* The J. B. Priestley Society
* &quot;John Angerson&#x27;s English Journey&quot; . Photographer Angerson retraces J.B. Priestley&#x27;s footsteps 75 years after publication of Priestley&#x27;s seminal travelog, &quot;English Journey&quot;. Article by Graham Harrison for the Photo Histories web site.
* 1944 film of Priestley at work at British Pathé</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="0" end="22" title="J. B. Priestley" label="John Boynton Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="154" end="163" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737191" start="229" end="248" title="The Good Companions" label="The Good Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805433" start="352" end="361" title="time slip" label="time slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="514" end="524" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="604" end="621" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155290" start="752" end="765" title="Welfare state in the United Kingdom" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750890" start="846" end="856" title="Manningham, Bradford" label="Manningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="927" end="935" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883710" start="1184" end="1208" title="Belle Vue Boys&amp;#x27; School" label="Belle Vue Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653419" start="1281" end="1292" title="Swan Arcade, Bradford" label="Swan Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602785" start="1540" end="1550" title="Bright Day" label="Bright Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956959" start="1567" end="1586" title="When We Are Married" label="When We Are Married"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="1653" end="1662" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="1763" end="1775" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1787" end="1802" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313130" start="1825" end="1859" title="Duke of Wellington&amp;#x27;s Regiment" label="Duke of Wellington&amp;#x27;s Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547067" start="1904" end="1918" title="10th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="10th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463070" start="1934" end="1948" title="Lance corporal" label="Lance-Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11327859" start="2033" end="2046" title="240 mm trench mortar" label="trench mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338604" start="2184" end="2203" title="Devonshire Regiment" label="Devonshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2396" end="2412" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244704" start="2526" end="2549" title="Trinity Hall, Cambridge" label="Trinity Hall, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374550" start="2634" end="2640" title="Tripos" label="Tripos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="2697" end="2722" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="upper-second class degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373403" start="2824" end="2833" title="Benighted (novel)" label="Benighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q381831" start="2868" end="2879" title="James Whale" label="James Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168873" start="2891" end="2909" title="The Old Dark House (1932 film)" label="The Old Dark House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737191" start="3073" end="3092" title="The Good Companions" label="The Good Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="3128" end="3159" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762241" start="3226" end="3240" title="Angel Pavement" label="Angel Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="3416" end="3429" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955781" start="3501" end="3515" title="Stamboul Train" label="Stamboul Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378300" start="3574" end="3589" title="English Journey" label="English Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="3691" end="3707" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140152" start="4068" end="4082" title="Irish Republic" label="Irish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214917" start="4383" end="4392" title="dramatist" label="dramatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216075" start="4400" end="4416" title="Dangerous Corner" label="Dangerous Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q375090" start="4534" end="4552" title="An Inspector Calls" label="An Inspector Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632506" start="4646" end="4657" title="J. W. Dunne" label="J. W. Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217739" start="4762" end="4782" title="Time and the Conways" label="Time and the Conways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786777" start="4835" end="4842" title="Horizon (British magazine)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="4881" end="4900" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="4920" end="4926" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5264" end="5280" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5317" end="5320" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="5443" end="5452" title="Winston Churchill" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="5486" end="5499" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564898" start="6112" end="6126" title="1941 Committee" label="1941 Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153505" start="6175" end="6194" title="Common Wealth Party" label="Common Wealth Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="6348" end="6360" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="6395" end="6416" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025572" start="6514" end="6534" title="Cambridge University (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431728" start="6587" end="6605" title="Orwell&amp;#x27;s list" label="Orwell&amp;#x27;s list"/>
<link wikidata="Q599835" start="6674" end="6705" title="Information Research Department" label="Information Research Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="6745" end="6759" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q178511" start="6954" end="6986" title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament" label="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q116476" start="7087" end="7105" title="Western literature" label="Western literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q314256" start="7231" end="7243" title="Thomas Wolfe" label="Thomas Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="7327" end="7343" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="7512" end="7521" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181843" start="7535" end="7554" title="Man and His Symbols" label="Man and His Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="7731" end="7752" title="precognitive dreams" label="precognitive dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900471" start="7957" end="7964" title="Monitor (BBC TV)" label="Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q954035" start="7976" end="7998" title="University of Bradford" label="University of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="8039" end="8056" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="8088" end="8107" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953331" start="8351" end="8372" title="Bradford City Council" label="Bradford City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054692" start="8426" end="8459" title="National Science and Media Museum" label="National Science and Media Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189201" start="8540" end="8553" title="chamber music" label="chamber music"/>
<link wikidata="Q863397" start="9002" end="9031" title="London Philharmonic Orchestra" label="London Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q313714" start="9127" end="9141" title="Thomas Beecham" label="Thomas Beecham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754972" start="9167" end="9180" title="The Olympians" label="The Olympians"/>
<link wikidata="Q508953" start="9190" end="9202" title="Arthur Bliss" label="Arthur Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="9289" end="9298" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137694" start="9342" end="9361" title="Companion of Honour" label="Companion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="9405" end="9419" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="9469" end="9475" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q230832" start="9627" end="9641" title="Peggy Ashcroft" label="Peggy Ashcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q61330240" start="10095" end="10108" title="Sylvia Goaman" label="Sylvia Goaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q61329217" start="10135" end="10149" title="Michael Goaman" label="Michael Goaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059480" start="10282" end="10293" title="Beachcomber (pen name)" label="Beachcomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203504" start="10310" end="10329" title="D. B. Wyndham-Lewis" label="D. B. Wyndham-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="10357" end="10370" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780551" start="10423" end="10437" title="Mary Priestley" label="Mary Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817282" start="10539" end="10552" title="Tom Priestley" label="Tom Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10565" end="10581" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17548805" start="10751" end="10763" title="3, The Grove, Highgate" label="3, The Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q123947" start="10767" end="10775" title="Highgate" label="Highgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="10807" end="10830" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570201" start="10930" end="10946" title="Jacquetta Hawkes" label="Jacquetta Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376604" start="10992" end="11011" title="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Mouth (play)" label="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738007" start="11039" end="11061" title="Alveston, Warwickshire" label="Alveston, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="11068" end="11087" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="11141" end="11150" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17535045" start="11258" end="11293" title="Church of St Michael and All Angels, Hubberholme" label="Church of St Michael and All Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695936" start="11295" end="11306" title="Hubberholme" label="Hubberholme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129472" start="11322" end="11332" title="Wharfedale" label="Wharfedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="11893" end="11912" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="11920" end="11949" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12240" end="12270" title="University of Bradford#Library" label="University of Bradford Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373403" start="12658" end="12667" title="Benighted (novel)" label="Benighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737191" start="12732" end="12751" title="The Good Companions" label="The Good Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762241" start="12773" end="12787" title="Angel Pavement" label="Angel Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533127" start="12993" end="13012" title="Let the People Sing (novel)" label="Let the People Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984567" start="13034" end="13053" title="Blackout in Gretley" label="Blackout in Gretley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984572" start="13075" end="13095" title="Daylight on Saturday" label="Daylight on Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602785" start="13161" end="13171" title="Bright Day" label="Bright Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179503" start="13193" end="13207" title="Jenny Villiers" label="Jenny Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984579" start="13229" end="13250" title="Festival at Farbridge" label="Festival at Farbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749545" start="13319" end="13332" title="The Magicians (Priestley novel)" label="The Magicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972176" start="13443" end="13458" title="Salt Is Leaving" label="Salt Is Leaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972161" start="13480" end="13499" title="The Shapes of Sleep" label="The Shapes of Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390847" start="13569" end="13581" title="Lost Empires (novel)" label="Lost Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972167" start="13603" end="13627" title="It&amp;#x27;s an Old Country" label="It&amp;#x27;s an Old Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q105972164" start="13758" end="13776" title="Found, Lost, Found" label="Found, Lost, Found"/>
<link wikidata="Q548004" start="13885" end="13897" title="Hugh Walpole" label="Hugh Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548972" start="14096" end="14110" title="Gerald Bullett" label="Gerald Bullett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755511" start="14120" end="14135" title="The Other Place (Priestley)" label="The Other Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216075" start="14457" end="14473" title="Dangerous Corner" label="Dangerous Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467694" start="14584" end="14598" title="Laburnum Grove" label="Laburnum Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807294" start="14743" end="14762" title="The Good Companions (play)" label="The Good Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216075" start="14784" end="14800" title="Dangerous Corner" label="Dangerous Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467695" start="14822" end="14836" title="Laburnum Grove (play)" label="Laburnum Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336841" start="14858" end="14866" title="Eden End" label="Eden End"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373335" start="14954" end="14975" title="Bees on the Boat Deck" label="Bees on the Boat Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217739" start="14997" end="15017" title="Time and the Conways" label="Time and the Conways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977519" start="15039" end="15062" title="I Have Been Here Before" label="I Have Been Here Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956959" start="15084" end="15103" title="When We Are Married" label="When We Are Married"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268387" start="15125" end="15144" title="Johnson Over Jordan" label="Johnson Over Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409755" start="15203" end="15222" title="They Came to a City (play)" label="They Came to a City"/>
<link wikidata="Q130357295" start="15280" end="15301" title="How Are They at Home?" label="How Are They at Home?"/>
<link wikidata="Q375090" start="15323" end="15341" title="An Inspector Calls" label="An Inspector Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377493" start="15363" end="15382" title="Ever Since Paradise" label="Ever Since Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489580" start="15404" end="15419" title="The Linden Tree" label="The Linden Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q130372687" start="15441" end="15457" title="Home Is Tomorrow" label="Home Is Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279172" start="15479" end="15502" title="Summer Day&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Summer Day&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409710" start="15563" end="15581" title="The White Countess (play)" label="The White Countess"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846717" start="15603" end="15627" title="Mr. Kettle and Mrs. Moon" label="Mr. Kettle and Mrs. Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q96408796" start="15649" end="15663" title="The Glass Cage (play)" label="The Glass Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030858" start="15981" end="15988" title="31 June" label="31 June"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522653" start="16154" end="16167" title="Sing As We Go" label="Sing As We Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027133" start="16198" end="16214" title="Gordon Wellesley" label="Gordon Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125820" start="16224" end="16241" title="Look Up and Laugh" label="Look Up and Laugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996704" start="16276" end="16297" title="We Live in Two Worlds" label="We Live in Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q497005" start="16386" end="16397" title="Jamaica Inn (film)" label="Jamaica Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969254" start="16441" end="16455" title="Britain at Bay" label="Britain at Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783680" start="16544" end="16563" title="They Came to a City" label="They Came to a City"/>
<link wikidata="Q810020" start="16594" end="16607" title="Basil Dearden" label="Basil Dearden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494413" start="16704" end="16716" title="Last Holiday (1950 film)" label="Last Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="16789" end="16813" title="You Know What People Are" label="You Know What People Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248609" start="16835" end="16851" title="Armchair Theatre" label="Armchair Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111800" start="16967" end="16985" title="Out of the Unknown" label="Out of the Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529940" start="17055" end="17072" title="Mordecai Roshwald" label="Mordecai Roshwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774096" start="17082" end="17100" title="The Wednesday Play" label="The Wednesday Play"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17102" end="17120" title="The Wednesday Play#Anyone for Tennis?" label="Anyone for Tennis?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460778" start="17162" end="17169" title="Shadows (TV series)" label="Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570201" start="17237" end="17253" title="Jacquetta Hawkes" label="Jacquetta Hawkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q375090" start="17263" end="17281" title="An Inspector Calls" label="An Inspector Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378300" start="17588" end="17603" title="English Journey" label="English Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931685" start="18763" end="18777" title="Vincent Brome" label="Brome, Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="18984" end="19003" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="19011" end="19040" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q954035" start="19074" end="19096" title="University of Bradford" label="University of Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="19136" end="19157" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082702" start="19216" end="19237" title="Spartacus Educational" label="Spartacus Educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="19631" end="19644" title="British Pathé" label="British Pathé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87257" wikidata="Q16228949" url="?curid=87257" title="Henry Woodward (inventor)">
<text>Henry Woodward was a Canadian inventor and a major pioneer in the development of the incandescent lamp. He was born in 1832.

On July 24, 1874, Woodward and his partner, Mathew Evans, a hotel keeper, filed a Canadian patent application on an electric light bulb. It was granted on August 3, 1874, as Canadian patent number 3,738. Woodward was a medical student at the time. Their light bulb comprised a glass tube with a large piece of carbon connected to two wires. They filled the tube with inert nitrogen to get a longer burn life in the filament. Their light bulb was fully effective and sufficiently promising; they sold their to Thomas Edison and due to this Edison is now known for the invention of the light bulb. Thomas Edison obtained an exclusive license to the Canadian patent. Thomas Edison developed his own design of incandescent lamp with a high resistance thin filament of carbon in a high vacuum contained in a tightly sealed glass bulb which had a sufficiently long service life to be commercially practical.

The relationship of the Woodward/Evans work on the incandescent bulb to that of others, including Edison, on electric light is explained in the following passage of an article in a 1900 issue of &quot;Electrical World and Engineer&quot; as follows:

&quot;The first incandescent lamp [developed by Woodward and Evans] was constructed at Morrison&#x27;s brass foundry in Toronto and was a very crude affair. It consisted of a water gauge glass with a piece of carbon, filed by hand and drilled at each end, for the electrodes, and hermetically sealed at both ends, having a petcock at one end with a brass tube to exhaust the air. Woodward made the mistake of filling the tube or globe of this lamp with nitrogen after having exhausted the air. Prof. Elihu Thomson is quoted as having said that had he stopped when he had the tube exhausted he would have had the honor of being the inventor of the incandescent light as used for commercial purposes... the principle of the incandescent lamp dates several decades before the Woodward experiments, and that King, Chanzy, Farmer and others in the twenty years preceding 1860 made and used incandescent lamps much superior to the very imperfect one upon which Woodward&#x27;s claims are based. Moreover, the Edison claims, as sustained in the courts, were not on the discovery of the principles of the incandescent lamp but on a definite combination of parts—all well known—which resulted in the production of a practical form of the incandescent lamp.&quot; Woodward &amp; Evans did not have enough money to develop their invention, so they sold the rights to U.S. Patent 181,613 to Thomas Edison. 

The drawings from Woodward&#x27;s 1876 United States patent are almost identical to those that appeared in Woodward and Evans&#x27; 1874 Canadian patent. The carbon burner, a &quot;most important feature of a practical lamp&quot; differs widely from Edison&#x27;s filament. Several earlier inventors working on the light bulb had progressed as far in their work as Woodward and Evans: Marcellin Jobard in 1838, C. de Changy in 1856, John Wellington Starr in 1845 and Joseph Swan in 1860. Each contributed to the development of the incandescent lamp, but it was Edison who assembled the necessary components to make the first practical electric light bulb.

What is known about Woodward&#x27;s discovery is that it was patented in Canada and the United States prior to a patent being granted to Edison and it is known that the patent for the Canadian discovery was purchased by Edison when he was making his original investigations and before he obtained his patent.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Black, Harry (1997). &quot;Canadian Scientists and Inventors&quot;. Markham, Ontario: Pembroke Publishers.
* Hughes, Susan (2002). &quot;Canada Invents&quot;, Toronto: Owl Books.
* Boulet, Daniel. Woodward and Evan&#x27;s Light - patented July 24, 1874. Reproduction of Woodward and Evans&#x27; patent.

==External links==
Ricketts, Bruce. The First Electric Light Bulb </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16228949" start="0" end="14" title="Henry Woodward (inventor)" label="Henry Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="21" end="29" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="85" end="102" title="incandescent lamp" label="incandescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787012" start="170" end="182" title="Mathew Evans" label="Mathew Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="217" end="223" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="251" end="261" title="light bulb" label="light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="499" end="507" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="635" end="648" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276484" start="3060" end="3076" title="Marcellin Jobard" label="Marcellin Jobard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3086" end="3098" title="C. de Changy" label="C. de Changy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066233" start="3108" end="3129" title="John Wellington Starr" label="John Wellington Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q315422" start="3142" end="3153" title="Joseph Swan" label="Joseph Swan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87258" wikidata="Q158431" url="?curid=87258" title="GSG 9">
<text>, formerly , is the police tactical unit of the German Federal Police (Bundespolizei). The unit is responsible for combatting terrorism and violent crime, including organized crime. In addition to its headquarters location in Sankt Augustin-Hangelar near Bonn, it also has a base in Berlin. Since 1 August 2017, it has been subordinate to the Federal Police Directorate 11. The state police (&quot;Landespolizei&quot;) maintain their own regional tactical units known as the &quot;Spezialeinsatzkommando&quot; (SEK).

GSG 9 is made up of approximately 400 highly trained police officers, whose identities are classified. The specialized unit operates not only within Germany on a federal level, but also safeguards German interests located worldwide, such as embassy property and personnel. Alongside the KSK and KSM military special forces of the German Armed Forces (Bundeswehr), the GSG 9 can also be authorized to rescue citizens abroad in hostage situations.

==Origins==
On 5 September 1972, Palestinian terrorists affiliated with Black September infiltrated the Summer Olympic Games in Munich, West Germany. They kidnapped 11 Israeli athletes, murdering two during the initial assault on the athletes&#x27; rooms in the Olympic Village. The unprecedented incident culminated when the regular Bavarian State Police, who were neither trained nor equipped for counter-terrorism operations and had underestimated the number of militants involved, attempted to rescue the athletes. The Police did not have a specialized tactical sniper team at that time. The German army had snipers, but the German Constitution did not permit the use of the German Armed Forces on German soil during peacetime.

The police rescue attempt failed, resulting in the deaths of one police officer, five of the eight terrorists, and all nine of the remaining hostages.

==History==
As a consequence of the overwhelmed Bavarian State Police&#x27;s mismanagement of the 1972 Olympic tragedy, the West German government established the GSG 9 police tactical unit in September 1972. This unit was formed under the command of Lieutenant Colonel (&quot;Oberstleutnant&quot;) Ulrich Wegener of the Federal Border Protection (&quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;), who proposed the creation of the tactical unit. The Federal Ministry of the Interior, under Federal Interior Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher, to whom Wegener also served as adjutant, sanctioned and directed its formation. The goal was to ensure that future high-risk situations could be handled adequately and professionally.

Many German politicians opposed the formation of GSG 9, fearing it would rekindle memories of the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) and the National Socialists&#x27; misuse of the military as an instrument of domestic power. To address these concerns, the decision was made to form the unit from the Federal Border Protection (&quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;), rather than the German Army. This approach differed from Israel&#x27;s military special operations unit, &quot;Sayeret Matkal&quot;, which was the only known comparable unit with some experience specifically in counter-terrorism and hostage-rescue at the time. Since German federal law also expressly forbid the use of military forces against the civilian population or domestic threats, creating a police tactical unit composed of highly trained and skilled police personnel avoided this issue.

Two weeks after the Munich Olympic massacre, the GSG 9 unit was officially established on 26 September 1972. By April 1973, Wegener reported that the first two sub-units (&quot;Teileinheiten&quot;) were operationally ready. At the time, the GSG 9 was part of the &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot; (BGS; Federal Border Protection), which was renamed &quot;Bundespolizei&quot; (Federal Police) in 2005. The then-BGS had a paramilitary nature, using military ranks until 1976. BGS officers had combatant status, being de facto classified as combatants before 1965, with this status expressly regulated by law from 1965 to 1994. Additionally, conscripts could fulfill their military service obligation by serving in the BGS.

The designation &quot;GSG 9&quot; is derived from the structure of the Federal Border Protection (BGS, &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;), which, at the time of the unit&#x27;s founding, consisted of four border protection commands with a total of eight border protection groups (GSG 1 to 7 and Sea). Since the GSG 9 was not integrated into any of the existing structures, it was designated Border Protection Group 9 (&quot;Grenzschutzgruppe 9&quot;, GSG 9). 

Since its inception, many other countries have developed counter-terrorism units trained by and modeled on the GSG 9. For example, Spain&#x27;s &quot;Unidad Especial de Intervención (UEI)&quot; (Civil Guard) and India&#x27;s National Security Guard (NSG), which was trained and upgraded with the help of GSG 9 after the 2008 Mumbai attacks. Additionally, many other countries have adopted various tactics, training methods, and operational strategies from GSG 9 to enhance their counter-terrorism capabilities.

===Name change===
After renaming the &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot; to &quot;Bundespolizei&quot; in 2005, the abbreviation &quot;GSG 9&quot; was retained due to the unit&#x27;s fame, reflecting the name change rather than any functional obsolescence. The contemporary official designation for the unit is GSG 9 der Bundespolizei (abbreviated GSG 9 BPOL or simply GSG 9).

==Operations==
GSG 9 is deployed for counter-terrorism, hostage rescue, and high-risk law enforcement operations, including responses to kidnapping, extortion, and serious organized crime. An increasing number of arrests by GSG 9 are conducted in the area of cybercrime, which often requires quick action to preserve evidence. The number of deployments in cases of threats to public safety has also increased. The unit is very active in developing and testing methods and tactics for these missions. In total, the GSG 9 completes around 50-60 missions every year.

In contrast to the &quot;Spezialeinsatzkommandos&quot; (SEK) units in each of the regional states of Germany, which are trained and equipped for similar missions, GSG 9, which operates on a federal level, can only conduct operations within a state&#x27;s jurisdiction with the state&#x27;s consent. Operations on a federal level outside the Federal Republic of Germany require the foreign nation&#x27;s consent, such as in a rescue operation of German citizens in a foreign country. Despite the paramilitary nature of the unit, GSG 9 officers are strictly limited to policing and tactical intervention operations and cannot engage in military conflict, as they are considered non-combatants under international law.

Until 2009, GSG 9 was regularly deployed in foreign countries as part of a security detail for German embassies in hazardous regions. Due to the workload from these deployments, the PSA BPOL was created.

From 1972 to 2003, GSG 9 reportedly completed over 1,500 missions, discharging their weapons on only five occasions. At the SWAT World Challenge in 2005, GSG 9 won all eight events, beating 17 other teams. They defended their championship the following year and placed fifth in 2007.

===Assistance and training of other units===
Following the successful rescue operation of Lufthansa Flight 181, GSG 9 received numerous requests from various countries to help train their special operations units. One example is when GSG 9 was consulted, among other units, during the creation of the US Army&#x27;s Delta Force.

Germany offered to assist India in the wake of the November 2008 Mumbai attacks. GSG 9 helped train and upgrade the National Security Guard, the primary Indian counter-terrorism unit. Further assistance was provided to the Mumbai Police to help them establish a police tactical unit.

The suspected involvement of retired GSG 9 operators in training Libyan security forces in 2008 led to harsh criticism in German media coverage. Additionally, GSG 9&#x27;s assistance in training Belarusian security forces from 2008 to 2011 has also been heavily criticized.

In 2015, GSG 9 commenced training the specialized &quot;BFE+&quot; operators of the Arrest units of the German Federal Police.

==Missions==
 Its first mission, &quot;Operation Feuerzauber&quot; (Operation &quot;Magic Fire&quot;), immediately established GSG 9&#x27;s reputation as an elite unit. This mission took place in 1977 when Palestinian militants hijacked the &quot;Landshut&quot;, a Lufthansa plane traveling from Palma de Mallorca to Frankfurt. They demanded the release of imprisoned members of the German Red Army Faction in exchange for the passengers and crew. The aircraft was flown to several destinations throughout the Middle East. During this time, the Lufthansa captain Jürgen Schumann was murdered by the leader of the hijackers in Aden.

However, West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt negotiated an agreement with Somali President Siad Barre, allowing the West German tactical unit GSG 9 to take control of the crisis and storm the plane. Special envoy Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski and GSG 9 commander Ulrich Wegener traveled to Mogadishu with approximately 60 GSG 9 commandos, organized into two units.

Following a four-day odyssey, the hijackers directed the Boeing 737 to Mogadishu, Somalia, where they waited for the arrival of the Red Army Faction members after the German government had (falsely) signaled they would be released. On the night between October 17 and 18, Somali ranger units created a distraction while members of GSG 9 stormed the plane.

The operation lasted seven minutes and was successful, with all hostages rescued. Three hijackers were killed, and the fourth was critically wounded. Only one GSG 9 member and one flight attendant were slightly injured. The international counter-terrorism community applauded GSG 9 for their excellent and professional handling of the situation, as assaults on planes are considered to be one of the most difficult operations a hostage rescue force can attempt. To support the GSG 9 action, two accompanying British SAS advisers provided some newly developed flash bang grenades, but these were ultimately not used due to the fire risk inside the aircraft cabin.

===Publicly known missions===
*13–18 October 1977: Lufthansa Flight 181 was hijacked by four Palestinian militants demanding the release of imprisoned Red Army Faction (RAF) members. After an odyssey through the Middle East, GSG 9 officers stormed the aircraft on the ground in Mogadishu, Somalia, freeing all 87 hostages and four of the five crew members. They killed three hijackers and captured the remaining one, who was critically wounded.
*1982: Arrest of RAF militants Brigitte Mohnhaupt and Adelheid Schulz.
*27 June 1993: Arrest of RAF militants Birgit Hogefeld and Wolfgang Grams in Bad Kleinen. The theory that Wolfgang Grams was executed in revenge for the death of GSG 9 operative Michael Newrzella during the mission (Grams had shot and killed Newrzella when Newrzella tried to tackle him) was discredited by the official investigation which found that Grams committed suicide.
*1993: Ending of the hijacking of a KLM flight from Tunis to Amsterdam, redirected to Düsseldorf, without firing a single shot.
*1994: Ended a hostage situation in the Kassel Penitentiary.
*1994: Involved in the search for the kidnappers Albert and Polak.
*1998: Arrest of a man trying to extort money from the German railway company &quot;Deutsche Bahn&quot;.
*1999: Arrest of Metin Kaplan in Cologne.
*1999: Arrest of two suspected members of the &quot;Revolutionäre Zellen&quot; (Revolutionary Cells) in Berlin.
*1999: Involved in ending the hostage situation in the central bank in Aachen.
*2000: Advised the Philippines in relation to a hostage situation.
*2001: Arrested two spies in Heidelberg.
*2001: Assisted in the liberation of four German tourists in Egypt.
*2002: Arrested a number of suspects related to the September 11, 2001 attacks.
*2003: Protection of the four members of the German &quot;Technisches Hilfswerk&quot; (THW – the civil protection organization of Germany) in Baghdad, Iraq. The THW&#x27;s mission was to repair the water distribution system.
*2004: GSG 9 is responsible for protecting German embassy property and personnel, including the embassy in Baghdad, Iraq. On 7 April 2004, two members were attacked and killed near Fallujah while in a convoy traveling from Amman, Jordan to Baghdad. The men, aged 25 and 38, were traveling in a car at the rear of the convoy and therefore received most of the enemy fire after passing the ambush. The men were shot after their armored Mitsubishi Pajero/Shogun was hit and stopped by RPGs. In a later statement, the attackers apologized for mistaking the German convoy for an American convoy. One of the bodies is still missing.
*2007: Three suspected terrorists were seized on Tuesday, 4 September 2007 for planning huge bomb attacks on targets in Germany. The bombs they were planning to make would have had more explosive power than those used in the Madrid and London terror attacks. They wanted to build a bomb in southern Germany capable of killing as many as possible. Fritz Gelowicz, 29, Adem Yilmaz, 29, and Daniel Schneider, 22, were charged with membership in a terrorist organization, making preparations for a crime involving explosives, and, in Schneider&#x27;s case, attempted murder.
*2009: The GSG 9 were on the verge of boarding a German freighter, the MV &quot;Hansa Stavanger&quot;, which had been hijacked by Somali pirates. The case of the &quot;Hansa Stavanger&quot;, at this time off the Somali coast seemed sufficiently symbolic to justify another potentially successful rescue operation, though on a much larger scale. More than 200 GSG 9, equipped with helicopters, speedboats, and advanced weapons, had been secretly brought, via Kenya, to a location from the German freighter. The United States Navy helicopter carrier was lent to the Germans to act as their flagship, and a screen of German Navy warships flanked the &quot;Boxer&quot;. The ships had been patrolling near the &quot;Hansa Stavanger&quot; for days, waiting at a distance to evade detection on the pirates&#x27; radar screens. But the operation was called off before the rescue effort could begin. US National Security Advisor James L. Jones had called the Chancellery to cancel the operation. The US government, worried that the operation could turn into a suicide mission, was sending the USS &quot;Boxer&quot; back to the Kenyan port of Mombasa, where the German forces were to disembark. Officials at the German Federal Police headquarters in Potsdam, outside Berlin, concerned about the potential for a bloodbath, had also spoken out against the operation.
*2012: GSG 9 was involved in a raid on the Hanover Hells Angels chapter leader Frank Hanebuth&#x27;s house, as part of a crackdown on the group. During the raid, they knocked down the wooden gate and rappelled from a helicopter onto his residence. They are also reported to have shot a dog on the premises belonging to Hanebuth.
*2016: GSG 9 was deployed to assist with the 2016 Munich shooting.
*2021: GSG 9 was participating in the search for Jürgen Conings, Belgium.
*2022: GSG 9 units were involved in raids to arrest members of the Reichsbürger movement suspected of plotting to overthrow the German government.

The majority of GSG 9&#x27;s missions are classified, with limited public information available. Since its inception, GSG 9 has participated in over 1,500 missions, yet reportedly fired shots on only five occasions (official count before the 2003 Iraq War). These occasions include Mogadishu in 1977, Bad Kleinen in 1993, Aachen in 1999, and two more missions where firearms were discharged to neutralize dogs of the persons being arrested.

==Organization==
The unit is part of the German &quot;Bundespolizei&quot; (&quot;Federal Police&quot;, formerly &quot;Bundesgrenzschutz&quot;) and thus has normal police powers, including the power of arrest. The Federal Police of Germany, and therefore GSG 9, is under the control of the Federal Ministry of the Interior. The &quot;Bundespolizei&quot; also provides aerial transportation for GSG 9.

On August 1, 2017, GSG 9 was transferred to the Federal Police Directorate 11, which was established as the supreme command for all special operations units of the German Federal Police.

===Personnel and stations===
After undergoing a reorganization process, GSG 9&#x27;s operational section is divided into four sub-groups called &quot;Einsatzeinheiten&quot; (Operational Units). All groups are capable of conducting regular operations, which may involve responding to terrorism, hostage-taking, serious crimes, defusing bombs, kidnapping, or extortion. The groups may also be used to secure locations, neutralize targets, perform sniping, and track fugitives.

Three of the four units are further specialized in the following fields:

; 1st Operational Unit: Sniping.
; 2nd Operational Unit: Diving and maritime operations, for example, the hijacking of ships or oil platforms.
; 3rd Operational Unit: Airborne operations, including parachuting and helicopter landings.
; 4th Operational Unit: A Berlin-based unit tasked mainly with police operations in Berlin with an emphasis on urban combat to respond to attacks such as the November 2015 Paris attacks. In 2017, the GSG 9 announced that a CT unit would be specialized in handling CBRN situations. In 2018, it was announced that more staff were being recruited to better handle CT situations in the city.

The operational units are supported by various support units which include:

; OEM &quot;Operative Einsatz Medizin&quot;: The &quot;Operative Einsatz Medizin&quot; is a group of specialized combat Medics who deploy to the field for rescue and care for operators, hostages, or civilians. A comparable German unit exists only in the German Air Force, Kampfretter. The motto of the OEM is: &quot;Servare Vitas&quot;. OEM also has combat doctors who can make for example surgeries in the field.
;Central services
: This service group maintains the GSG 9 armory and is involved in testing, repairing, and purchasing weapons, ammunition, and explosives.
; Documentation unit: This unit handles communications, including the testing, repairing, and purchasing of communications and surveillance equipment.
; Operations staff: Handles the administration of GSG 9.
; Technical unit: This unit supports other units in gaining entry to target areas and is responsible for the procurement, testing, and issuance of non-weapon equipment. The members of the technical unit are also explosive ordnance disposal experts and they are cross-trained in direct action operations. They are trained in the rendering safe and disposal of improvised explosive devices
; Training unit: This unit trains existing members, selects recruits, and trains new members.

The GSG 9 is based in Sankt Augustin-Hangelar near Bonn. Since 2018, a second base has been established for one of the four GSG 9 operational units in Berlin to reduce response times for missions in or near Berlin.

===Commanders===
The respective commanders of GSG 9 are the only members who appear publicly with their identities. All commanders have previously served as active operators:

* 1972–1980: Ulrich Wegener (Founder and first commander)
* 1980–1982: Klaus Blätte
* 1982–1991: Uwe Dee
* 1991–1997: Jürgen Bischoff
* 1997–2005: Friedrich Eichele
* 2005–2014: Olaf Lindner
* 2014–2023: Jérôme Fuchs (Since August 10, 2023, Vice President of Federal Police Directorate 11)
* since 2023: Robert Hemmerling

==Recruitment and training==
Members of the &quot;Bundespolizei&quot; and other German police services under the age of 34 with at least two years of service can apply for the GSG 9 selection process. However, members can serve in GSG 9 only until the age of 45.

===Selection===
Candidates for GSG 9 undergo a five-day assessment to be accepted into the training cycle. The tests include medical examinations, psychological assessments, marksmanship training with a pistol and submachine gun, oral interviews, and a physical test which includes:

* Cooper test
* 100 metres sprint
* Standing long jump
* A minimum of ten pull-ups
* Bench press: Minimum of ten repetitions of 75% of the candidate&#x27;s body weight
* Obstacle course
* Agility test
* Resistance test against vertigo

Approximately 10-15% of all candidates pass the selection phase and are accepted into the basic training section.

===Basic training and specialisation===
The subsequent 4.5-month training period includes both basic and specialized training.
During the basic training section, candidates undergo vigorous preparation for their tasks as operators in GSG 9. The training includes marksmanship, tactical courses, close-quarter combat, land navigation, climbing, rappelling, and medical training. The basic training concludes with a final week of rigorous testing, where candidates must demonstrate their skills under enormous stress.

On successful completion of all training stages, the candidate is awarded the GSG 9 badge and assigned to one of the operational units as a &quot;Special Operations Officer&quot;.

Upon successful completion of basic training, candidates undergo various additional qualifications tailored to their specializations for special operational situations. These may include parachuting, maritime operations, advanced marksmanship, advanced medical skills, surveillance (police investigation), operational diving, diving and skydiving in military freefall (training and further education take place at the Airborne and Air Transport School), or EOD (Explosive Ordnance Disposal) techniques.

Individual GSG 9 officers have also participated in training courses conducted by the German Army&#x27;s Special Operations Forces Command (KSK). These courses, held between 2007 and 2012, included specialized training in parachuting and demolition.

Further training often involves cooperation with other allied counter-terrorism units, such as Israel&#x27;s Yamam, France’s Groupe d&#x27;intervention de la Gendarmerie nationale (GIGN) or National Gendarmerie Intervention Group, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation&#x27;s Hostage Rescue Team from the United States.

==Associations==
* GSG 9 is a member of the ATLAS Network.
* In 1975, the health resort municipality of Bischofsgrün in the Fichtel Mountains, Bavaria, became the sponsoring community (&quot;Patenschaft&quot;) responsible for the duty of care of GSG 9.
* Since 1983, GSG 9 has hosted the Combat Team Conference (CTC) every four years. The CTC is a competition for international special forces units.
* The &quot;GSG 9 Kameradschaft e.V.&quot; in Sankt Augustin is an association for former GSG 9 operators.
* Along with the German Armed Forces (including the Special Forces Command and the Marine Special Forces Command) and the Federal Criminal Police Office, GSG 9 regularly cooperates within the framework of the &quot;Expert Group for the Solution of Hostage-Taking and Kidnappings Abroad&quot; (EG GE).

==Annual Warrior Competition==
GSG 9 won the 2012 Annual Warrior Competition, defeating the defending 2011 champion, EKO Cobra.

==See also==
* Zentrale Unterstützungsgruppe Zoll – Special Support Team for Customs
* Diensteinheit IX – East Germany&#x27;s equivalent unit
* GIGN - French equivalent
* EKO Cobra - Austrian Equivalent 
* GEO - Spanish equivalent
* Public Security Section 9 – fictional Japanese variant inspired/based on GSG 9

==References==
==External links==

* Official GSG 9 page of the German Federal Police 
* Site of the GSG 9 companionship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158431" start="0" end="0" title="GSG 9" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7209526" start="20" end="40" title="police tactical unit" label="police tactical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q56026" start="48" end="69" title="Federal Police (Germany)" label="German Federal Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="126" end="135" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="140" end="153" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="165" end="180" title="organized crime" label="organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090" start="226" end="240" title="Sankt Augustin" label="Sankt Augustin"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="255" end="259" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="283" end="289" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94578227" start="343" end="372" title="Bundespolizeidirektion 11" label="Federal Police Directorate 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q651031" start="398" end="411" title="Landespolizei" label="Landespolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q511896" start="481" end="503" title="Special Deployment Commando" label="Spezialeinsatzkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="667" end="674" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q706524" start="805" end="808" title="Kommando Spezialkräfte" label="KSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319637" start="813" end="816" title="Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine" label="KSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="817" end="825" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="826" end="840" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="869" end="879" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342867" start="998" end="1020" title="Palestinian terrorists" label="Palestinian terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q152211" start="1037" end="1052" title="Black September (group)" label="Black September"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="1069" end="1089" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1093" end="1099" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1101" end="1113" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q875556" start="1133" end="1140" title="Israelis" label="Israeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012854" start="1227" end="1242" title="Olympic Village, Munich" label="Olympic Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q471333" start="1299" end="1320" title="Bavarian State Police" label="Bavarian State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="1364" end="1381" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="1561" end="1572" title="German army" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="1577" end="1583" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="1594" end="1613" title="German Constitution" label="German Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="1644" end="1663" title="German Armed Forces" label="German Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="1702" end="1730" title="Munich massacre" label="police rescue attempt failed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304299" start="2127" end="2141" title="Oberstleutnant" label="Oberstleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q109058" start="2149" end="2163" title="Ulrich Wegener" label="Ulrich Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q56027" start="2204" end="2221" title="Bundesgrenzschutz" label="Bundesgrenzschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q502698" start="2282" end="2314" title="Federal Ministry of the Interior (Germany)" label="Federal Ministry of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q106235" start="2348" end="2370" title="Hans-Dietrich Genscher" label="Hans-Dietrich Genscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="2403" end="2411" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="2661" end="2674" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2694" end="2713" title="National Socialists" label="National Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q56027" start="2887" end="2904" title="Bundesgrenzschutz" label="Bundesgrenzschutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11322507" start="2929" end="2940" title="German Army" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="2993" end="3011" title="special operations" label="special operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q927370" start="3024" end="3038" title="Sayeret Matkal" label="Sayeret Matkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="3430" end="3453" title="Munich Olympic massacre" label="Munich Olympic massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56026" start="3761" end="3774" title="Federal Police (Germany)" label="Bundespolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="3826" end="3838" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="3897" end="3906" title="combatant" label="combatant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976497" start="4735" end="4766" title="Unidad Especial de Intervención" label="Unidad Especial de Intervención"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="4780" end="4791" title="Civil Guard (Spain)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520949" start="4810" end="4833" title="National Security Guard" label="National Security Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q76421" start="4905" end="4924" title="2008 Mumbai attacks" label="2008 Mumbai attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="5727" end="5737" title="cybercrime" label="cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q511896" start="6058" end="6080" title="SEK (Germany)" label="Spezialeinsatzkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="6115" end="6141" title="States of Germany" label="regional states of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414937" start="6709" end="6723" title="Combatant" label="non-combatants"/>
<link wikidata="Q629059" start="6932" end="6940" title="PSA BPOL" label="PSA BPOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395155" start="7079" end="7099" title="SWAT World Challenge" label="SWAT World Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="7330" end="7350" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Lufthansa Flight 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="7556" end="7567" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7596" end="7601" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q76421" start="7621" end="7649" title="2008 Mumbai attacks" label="November 2008 Mumbai attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520949" start="7686" end="7709" title="National Security Guard" label="National Security Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935316" start="7793" end="7806" title="Mumbai Police" label="Mumbai Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="8050" end="8057" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8186" end="8190" title="Arrest unit#BFE+" label="BFE+"/>
<link wikidata="Q852623" start="8214" end="8225" title="Arrest unit" label="Arrest unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="8297" end="8318" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Operation Feuerzauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q212884" start="8464" end="8485" title="Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Palestinian militants"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="8486" end="8494" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="8523" end="8532" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="8554" end="8571" title="Palma de Mallorca" label="Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="8575" end="8584" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="8648" end="8664" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8768" end="8779" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q109162" start="8821" end="8836" title="Jürgen Schumann" label="Jürgen Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="8884" end="8888" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="8912" end="8922" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic of Germany)" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516" start="8923" end="8937" title="Helmut Schmidt" label="Helmut Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19364214" start="8967" end="8983" title="President of Somalia" label="Somali President"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="8984" end="8994" title="Siad Barre" label="Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q67517" start="9106" end="9129" title="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski" label="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q109058" start="9150" end="9164" title="Ulrich Wegener" label="Ulrich Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="9310" end="9320" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="9324" end="9333" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="9335" end="9342" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="10126" end="10129" title="Special Air Service" label="SAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q153544" start="10169" end="10188" title="Stun grenade" label="flash bang grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q326241" start="10325" end="10345" title="Lufthansa Flight 181" label="Lufthansa Flight 181"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="10425" end="10441" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="10486" end="10497" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="10552" end="10561" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="10587" end="10594" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q57869" start="10750" end="10768" title="Brigitte Mohnhaupt" label="Brigitte Mohnhaupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q71175" start="10773" end="10788" title="Adelheid Schulz" label="Adelheid Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q71739" start="10829" end="10844" title="Birgit Hogefeld" label="Birgit Hogefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q95744" start="10849" end="10863" title="Wolfgang Grams" label="Wolfgang Grams"/>
<link wikidata="Q552679" start="10867" end="10878" title="Bad Kleinen" label="Bad Kleinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081093" start="10968" end="10985" title="Michael Newrzella" label="Michael Newrzella"/>
<link wikidata="Q898712" start="11187" end="11196" title="Aircraft hijacking" label="hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q181912" start="11202" end="11205" title="KLM" label="KLM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="11218" end="11223" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="11227" end="11236" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="11252" end="11262" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="11334" end="11340" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="11341" end="11353" title="Prison" label="Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="11393" end="11403" title="Kidnapping" label="kidnappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9322" start="11506" end="11519" title="Deutsche Bahn" label="Deutsche Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q561865" start="11544" end="11556" title="Metin Kaplan" label="Metin Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="11560" end="11567" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q701219" start="11649" end="11668" title="Revolutionary Cells (German group)" label="Revolutionary Cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="11673" end="11679" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="11752" end="11758" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11779" end="11790" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="11856" end="11866" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="11929" end="11934" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="11988" end="12014" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q697698" start="12074" end="12095" title="Technisches Hilfswerk" label="Technisches Hilfswerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12146" end="12153" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="12158" end="12165" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12167" end="12171" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551228" start="12214" end="12239" title="water distribution system" label="water distribution system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="12348" end="12355" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="12357" end="12361" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="12422" end="12430" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805" start="12464" end="12469" title="Amman" label="Amman"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12471" end="12477" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q680838" start="12629" end="12635" title="ambush" label="ambush"/>
<link wikidata="Q374755" start="12675" end="12692" title="Mitsubishi Pajero" label="Mitsubishi Pajero"/>
<link wikidata="Q327394" start="12723" end="12726" title="rocket-propelled grenade" label="RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="13093" end="13099" title="2004 Madrid train bombings" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550022" start="13104" end="13110" title="Timeline of the 2005 London bombings" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743757" start="13215" end="13229" title="Fritz Gelowicz" label="Fritz Gelowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583629" start="13510" end="13540" title="MV Hansa Stavanger" label="MV &amp;quot;Hansa Stavanger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="13569" end="13583" title="Piracy in Somalia" label="Somali pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="13897" end="13902" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="13949" end="13967" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q869923" start="13968" end="13986" title="helicopter carrier" label="helicopter carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56015" start="14053" end="14064" title="German Navy" label="German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467451" start="14359" end="14373" title="James L. Jones" label="James L. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q317027" start="14389" end="14400" title="German Chancellery" label="Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q225641" start="14572" end="14579" title="Mombasa" label="Mombasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="14837" end="14844" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q622188" start="14845" end="14857" title="Hells Angels" label="Hells Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443367" start="14873" end="14887" title="Frank Hanebuth" label="Frank Hanebuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25980145" start="15168" end="15188" title="2016 Munich shooting" label="2016 Munich shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q106928672" start="15228" end="15253" title="Manhunt for Jürgen Conings" label="search for Jürgen Conings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618804" start="15331" end="15352" title="Reichsbürger movement" label="Reichsbürger movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q115626700" start="15366" end="15387" title="2022 German coup d&amp;#x27;état plot" label="plotting to overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q846498" start="15454" end="15464" title="Classified information" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="15659" end="15667" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q552679" start="15713" end="15724" title="Bad Kleinen" label="Bad Kleinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="15734" end="15740" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="15895" end="15901" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q56026" start="15908" end="15921" title="Federal Police (Germany)" label="Bundespolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="16017" end="16023" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q94578227" start="16303" end="16332" title="Bundespolizeidirektion 11" label="Federal Police Directorate 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="17017" end="17024" title="Sniping" label="Sniping"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="17099" end="17108" title="Piracy" label="hijacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="17121" end="17133" title="oil platform" label="oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="17191" end="17202" title="parachute" label="parachuting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="17207" end="17217" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479779" start="17386" end="17413" title="November 2015 Paris attacks" label="November 2015 Paris attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="17451" end="17453" title="Counter-terrorism" label="CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q265653" start="17492" end="17496" title="CBRN" label="CBRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175852" start="17966" end="17977" title="Kampfretter" label="Kampfretter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="18167" end="18173" title="armory (military)" label="armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="18228" end="18234" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="18237" end="18247" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="18253" end="18263" title="Explosive material" label="explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="18305" end="18318" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="18392" end="18404" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="18685" end="18712" title="Bomb disposal" label="explosive ordnance disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312801" start="18801" end="18815" title="Render safe procedure" label="rendering safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="18832" end="18859" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090" start="18978" end="19001" title="Sankt Augustin" label="Sankt Augustin-Hangelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="19007" end="19011" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="19107" end="19113" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109058" start="19361" end="19375" title="Ulrich Wegener" label="Ulrich Wegener"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19552" end="19564" title=":de:Jérôme Fuchs" label="Jérôme Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q94578227" start="19607" end="19636" title="Bundespolizeidirektion 11" label="Federal Police Directorate 11"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19652" end="19669" title=":de:Robert Hemmerling" label="Robert Hemmerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q56026" start="19721" end="19734" title="Federal Police (Germany)" label="Bundespolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q909284" start="20221" end="20232" title="Cooper test" label="Cooper test"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="20235" end="20245" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q679291" start="20255" end="20273" title="Standing long jump" label="Standing long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048487" start="20293" end="20301" title="Pull-up (exercise)" label="pull-ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q14093" start="20304" end="20315" title="Bench press" label="Bench press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="21574" end="21592" title="frogman" label="operational diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="21725" end="21758" title="Bomb disposal" label="EOD (Explosive Ordnance Disposal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q706524" start="21877" end="21910" title="Kommando Spezialkräfte" label="Special Operations Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="22118" end="22124" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q63847" start="22132" end="22137" title="Yamam" label="Yamam"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22139" end="22145" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="22148" end="22209" title="GIGN" label="Groupe d&amp;#x27;intervention de la Gendarmerie nationale (GIGN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="22262" end="22293" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630581" start="22301" end="22320" title="Hostage Rescue Team" label="Hostage Rescue Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="22330" end="22343" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q757030" start="22390" end="22403" title="ATLAS Network" label="ATLAS Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q253123" start="22450" end="22462" title="Bischofsgrün" label="Bischofsgrün"/>
<link wikidata="Q157728" start="22470" end="22487" title="Fichtel Mountains" label="Fichtel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="22489" end="22496" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086729" start="22634" end="22656" title="Combat Team Conference" label="Combat Team Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090" start="22792" end="22806" title="Sankt Augustin" label="Sankt Augustin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="22870" end="22889" title="German Armed Forces" label="German Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q706524" start="22905" end="22927" title="Kommando Spezialkräfte" label="Special Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q16319637" start="22936" end="22965" title="Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine" label="Marine Special Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q56030" start="22975" end="23005" title="Federal Criminal Police Office (Germany)" label="Federal Criminal Police Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003806" start="23205" end="23231" title="Annual Warrior Competition" label="Annual Warrior Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q701783" start="23272" end="23281" title="EKO Cobra" label="EKO Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190358" start="23299" end="23333" title="Zentrale Unterstützungsgruppe Zoll" label="Zentrale Unterstützungsgruppe Zoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342842" start="23371" end="23387" title="Diensteinheit IX" label="Diensteinheit IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="23428" end="23432" title="GIGN" label="GIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q701783" start="23455" end="23464" title="EKO Cobra" label="EKO Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550893" start="23490" end="23493" title="Grupo Especial de Operaciones" label="GEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257599" start="23517" end="23542" title="Public Security Section 9" label="Public Security Section 9"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87259" wikidata="Q6787012" url="?curid=87259" title="Mathew Evans">
<text>Matthew Evans is one of two Canadians who developed and patented an incandescent light bulb, on July 24, 1874, five years before Thomas Alva Edison&#x27;s U.S. patent on the device.

Evans, from Toronto, Ontario, and his friend Henry Woodward, made the light bulb by sending electricity through a filament made of carbon. Evans was a hotelier.

==External links==
* The First Electric Light Bulb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6787012" start="0" end="13" title="Mathew Evans" label="Matthew Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="68" end="91" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="129" end="147" title="Thomas Alva Edison" label="Thomas Alva Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="195" end="202" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="204" end="211" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16228949" start="228" end="242" title="Henry Woodward (inventor)" label="Henry Woodward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87260" wikidata="Q131792" url="?curid=87260" title="Orinoco">
<text>The Orinoco () is one of the longest rivers in South America at . Its drainage basin, sometimes known as the Orinoquia, covers ca 1 million km2, with 65% of it in Venezuela and 35% in Colombia. It is the fourth largest river in the world by discharge volume of water (39,000 m3/s at delta) due to the high precipitation throughout its catchment area (ca 2,300 mm/a). The Orinoco River and its tributaries are the major transportation system for eastern and interior Venezuela and the Llanos of Colombia. The environment and wildlife in the Orinoco&#x27;s basin are extremely diverse.

== Etymology ==
The river&#x27;s name is derived from the Warao term for &quot;a place to paddle&quot;, itself derived from the terms &quot;güiri&quot; (paddle) and &quot;noko&quot; (place) i.e. a navigable place.

== History ==
The mouth of the Orinoco River at the Atlantic Ocean was documented by Christopher Columbus on 1 August 1498, during his third voyage. Its source at the Cerro Delgado–Chalbaud, in the Parima range, was not explored until 453 years later, in 1951. The source, near the Venezuelan–Brazilian border, at above sea level (), was explored in 1951 by a joint French-Venezuelan expedition.

The Orinoco, as well as its tributaries in the eastern llanos such as the Apure and Meta, were explored in the 16th century by German expeditions under Ambrosius Ehinger and his successors. In 1531, starting at the principal outlet in the delta, the Boca de Navios, Diego de Ordaz sailed up the river to the Meta. Antonio de Berrio sailed down the Casanare to the Meta, and then down the Orinoco River and back to Coro. In 1595, after capturing de Berrio to obtain information while conducting an expedition to find the fabled city of El Dorado, the Englishman Sir Walter Raleigh sailed down the river, reaching the savanna country.

From April to May 1800, the Prussian-born Alexander von Humboldt and his companion, Aime Bonpland, explored stretches of the Orinoco, supported by indigenous helpers and guided by his interest to prove that South America&#x27;s waterways formed an interconnected system from the Andes to the Amazon. He reported on the pink river dolphins and later published extensively on the river&#x27;s flora and fauna.

The sources of the Orinoco River, located at Cerro Carlos Delgado Chalbaud (2º19’05” N, 63º21’42” W), were discovered in 1951 by the French-Venezuelan expedition that went back and explored the Upper Orinoco course to the Sierra Parima near the border with Brazil, headed by Venezuelan army officer Frank Risquez Iribarren.

The first bridge across the Orinoco River, the Angostura Bridge at Ciudad Bolívar, Venezuela, was completed in 1967.

In 1968, an expedition was set off by The Geographical Journal and Hovercraft from Manaus (Brazil) to Port of Spain (Trinidad). Aboard a SR.N6 hovercraft, the expedition members followed the Negro river upstream to where it is joined by the Casiquiare canal, on the border between Colombia and Venezuela. After following the Casiquiare to the Orinoco River they hovered thru perilous rapids of the rivers Maipures and Atures. The Orinoco was then traversed down to its mouths in the Gulf of Paria and then to Port of Spain. The primary purpose of the expedition was filming for the BBC series &quot;The World About Us&quot; episode &quot;The Last Great Journey on Earth from Amazon to Orinoco by Hovercraft&quot;, which aired in 1970, and demonstrated the abilities of a hovercraft, thereby promoting sales of this British invention.

The first powerline crossing of the Orinoco River was completed in 1981 for an 800kVTL single span of using two towers tall.

In 1992, an overhead power line crossing for two 400kV-circuits was completed just west of Morocure (between the cities of Ciudad Bolívar and Ciudad Guayana), north of the confluence of Routes1 and 19. It had three towers, and the two spans measured and , respectively.

In 2006, a second bridge, known as the Orinoquia Bridge, was completed near Ciudad Guayana, Venezuela.

== Geography ==

The course of the Orinoco forms a wide ellipsoidal arc, surrounding the Guiana Shield; it is divided in four stretches of unequal length that very roughly correspond to the longitudinal zonation of a typical large river: 
* Upper Orinoco – long, from its headwaters to the Raudales de Guaharibos rapids, flows through mountainous landscape in a northwesterly direction
* Middle Orinoco – long, divided into two sectors, the first of which ca. long has a general westward direction down to the confluence with the Atabapo and Guaviare rivers at San Fernando de Atabapo; the second flows northward, for about , along the Venezuelan–Colombian border, flanked on both sides by the westernmost granitic upwellings of the Guiana Shield which impede the development of a flood plain, to the Atures rapids near the confluence with the Meta River at Puerto Carreño
*Lower Orinoco – long with a well-developed alluvial plain, flows in a northeast direction, from Atures rapids down to Piacoa in front of Barrancas
* Delta Amacuro – long that empties into the Gulf of Paría and the Atlantic Ocean, a very large delta, some and at its widest.



At its mouth, the Orinoco River forms a wide delta that branches off into hundreds of rivers and waterways that flow through of swampy forests. In the rainy season, the Orinoco River can swell to a breadth of and a depth of .

Most of the important Venezuelan rivers are tributaries of the Orinoco River, the largest being the Caroní, which joins it at Puerto Ordaz, close to the Llovizna Falls. A peculiarity of the Orinoco river system is the Casiquiare canal, which starts as an arm of the Orinoco, and finds its way to the Rio Negro, a tributary of the Amazon, thus forming a &#x27;natural canal&#x27; between Orinoco and Amazon.

The stream gradient of the entire river is 0.05% (1,047 m over 2,250 km). Downstream of Raudales de Guaharibos the gradient is 0.01% (183/1,964), which is also the gradient from Ciudad Bolivar to the ocean (54/435).

=== Major rivers in the Orinoco Basin ===
* Apure: from Venezuela through the east into the Orinoco
* Arauca: from Colombia to Venezuela east into the Orinoco
* Atabapo: from the Guiana Highlands of Venezuela north into the Orinoco
* Caroní: from the Guiana Highlands of Venezuela north into the Orinoco
* Casiquiare canal: in SE Venezuela, a distributary from the Orinoco flowing west to the Negro River, a major affluent to the Amazon
* Caura: from eastern Venezuela (Guiana Highlands) north into the Orinoco
* Guaviare: from Colombia east into the Orinoco
* Inírida: from Colombia southeast into the Guaviare.
* Meta: from Colombia, border with Venezuela east into the Orinoco
* Ventuari: from eastern Venezuela (the Guiana Highlands) southwest into the Orinoco
* Vichada: from Colombia east into the Orinoco
==Discharge==

Average, minimum and maximum discharge at Ciudad Bolívar and Ciudad Guayana (Lower Orinoco):

Monthly average discharge (m3/s) at Ciudad Bolívar (2018 to 2023):

Monthly average discharge (m3/s) at Ciudad Guayana (1996 to 1998):

Average discharge at Ciudad Bolívar (complete time series from 1926 to 2023):

== Ecology ==
The boto and the giant otter inhabit the Orinoco River system. The Orinoco crocodile is one of the rarest reptiles in the world. Its range in the wild is restricted to the middle and lower Orinoco River Basin.

More than 1000 fish species have been recorded in the river basin and about 15% are endemic. Among the fish in the river are species found in brackish or salt water in the Orinoco estuary, but also many restricted to fresh water. By far the largest orders are Characiformes and Siluriformes, which together account for more than 80% of the fresh water species. Some of the more famous are the black spot piranha and the cardinal tetra. The latter species, which is important in the aquarium industry, is also found in the Rio Negro, revealing the connection between this river and the Orinoco through the Casiquiare canal. Because the Casiquiare includes both blackwater and clear- to whitewater sections, only relatively adaptable species are able to pass through it between the two river systems.

== Economic activity ==
The river is navigable for most of its length, and dredging enables ocean ships to go as far as Ciudad Bolívar, at the confluence of the Caroní River, upstream. River steamers carry cargo as far as Puerto Ayacucho and the Atures Rapids.

=== El Florero iron mine ===
In 1926, a Venezuelan mining inspector found one of the richest iron ore deposits near the Orinoco delta, south of the city of San Felix on a mountain named &quot;El Florero&quot;. Full-scale mining of the ore deposits began after World War II, by a conglomerate of Venezuelan firms and US steel companies. At the start in the early 1950s, about 10,000 tons of ore-bearing soil was mined per day.

=== Tar sands ===
The Orinoco River deposits also contain extensive tar sands in the Orinoco oil belt, which may be a source of future oil production.

== Eastern Venezuelan basin ==

Encompassing the states of Anzoategui-Guarico and Monagas states, the Interior Range forms the northern boundary and the Guayana Shield the southern boundary. Maturin forms the eastern subbasin and Guarico forms the western subbasin. The El Furrial oil field was discovered in 1978, producing from late Oligocene shallow marine sandstones in an overthrusted foreland basin.

== Recreation and sports ==

Since 1973, the Civil Association Nuestros Rios son Navegables organize the Internacional Rally &quot;Nuestros Rios son Navegables&quot;, a motonautical round trip of over 1,200 kilometers through the Orinoco, Meta and Apure Rivers. Starting out from Ciudad Bolívar or San Fernando de Apure, is the longest fluvial rally in the world with the participation of worldwide competitors, more than 30 support boats, logistics teams, thousands of tourists and fans travel. The boats had an average speed of 120 miles per hour.

Since 1988, the local government of Ciudad Guayana has conducted a swim race in the rivers Orinoco and Caroní, with up to 1,000 competitors. Since 1991, the &quot;Paso a Nado Internacional de los Rios Orinoco–Caroní&quot; has been celebrated every year, on a Sunday close to 19 April. Worldwide, this swim-meet has grown in importance, and it has a large number of competitors. The 26th meet was held in 2016.

== In culture ==
The Irish singer and songwriter Enya wrote and sang the song &quot;Orinoco Flow&quot;, which she released in 1988.
Jules Verne&#x27;s novel Superbe Orénoque has the river as its central theme.

== See also ==
* Adaheli, the Sun in the mythology of the Orinoco region
* &quot;Fishes of the Orinoco in the Wild&quot; (2020) book
* &quot;Orinoco Flow&quot; – the song uses the Orinoco and its environs as a theme for its lyrics

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Stark, James H. 1897. &quot;Stark&#x27;s Guide-Book and History of Trinidad including Tobago, Granada, and St. Vincent; also a trip up the Orinoco and a description of the great Venezuelan Pitch Lake&quot;. Boston, James H. Stark, publisher; London, Sampson Low, Marston &amp; Company. (This book has an excellent description of a trip up the Orinoco as far as Ciudad Bolívar and a detailed description of the Venezuelan Pitch Lake situated on the western side of the Gulf of Paria opposite.)
* MacKee, E.D., Nordin, C.F. and D. Perez-Hernandez (1998). &quot;The Waters and Sediments of the Rio Orinoco and its major Tributaries, Venezuela and Colombia.&quot; United States Geological Survey water-supply paper, /A-B. Washington: United States Government Printing Office.
* Rawlins, C.B. (1999). &quot;The Orinoco River&quot;. New York: Franklin Watts.
* Triana, S. Pérez. Down the Orinoco in a Canoe
* Weibezahn, F.H., Haymara, A. and M.W. Lewis (1990). &quot;The Orinoco River as an ecosystem&quot;. Caracas: Universidad Simon Bolivar.

== External links ==
* (Transcription of book from 1902)
*&quot;Rios de Integracion &quot;. Geurgescu, Paul. CAF. 2017</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="4" end="11" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="37" end="42" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="47" end="60" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="70" end="84" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="109" end="118" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="163" end="172" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="184" end="192" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394831" start="204" end="224" title="List of rivers by discharge" label="fourth largest river"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="241" end="250" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433305" start="283" end="288" title="Orinoco Delta" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="484" end="490" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q36946" start="643" end="648" title="Warao language" label="Warao"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="852" end="866" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="885" end="905" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="935" end="947" title="Christopher Columbus#Third voyage and arrest" label="third voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267492" start="998" end="1010" title="Parima Mountains" label="Parima range"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1093" end="1099" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="1252" end="1258" title="llanos" label="llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q853315" start="1271" end="1276" title="Apure River" label="Apure"/>
<link wikidata="Q655251" start="1281" end="1285" title="Meta River" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q62773" start="1349" end="1366" title="Ambrosius Ehinger" label="Ambrosius Ehinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q911242" start="1463" end="1477" title="Diego de Ordaz" label="Diego de Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30007266" start="1511" end="1528" title="Antonio de Berrio" label="Antonio de Berrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458573" start="1545" end="1553" title="Casanare River" label="Casanare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134454" start="1611" end="1615" title="Santa Ana de Coro" label="Coro"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="1732" end="1741" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="1758" end="1776" title="Sir Walter Raleigh" label="Sir Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="1813" end="1828" title="Llanos" label="savanna country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="1873" end="1895" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q405702" start="1915" end="1928" title="Aimé Bonpland" label="Aime Bonpland"/>
<link wikidata="Q935931" start="2150" end="2169" title="Boto" label="pink river dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q888147" start="2291" end="2314" title="Carlos Delgado Chalbaud" label="Carlos Delgado Chalbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267492" start="2462" end="2475" title="Parima Mountains" label="Sierra Parima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089080" start="2612" end="2628" title="Angostura Bridge" label="Angostura Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="2632" end="2646" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100084" start="2721" end="2745" title="The Geographical Journal" label="The Geographical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="2750" end="2760" title="Hovercraft" label="Hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q40236" start="2766" end="2772" title="Manaus" label="Manaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2774" end="2780" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3679469" start="2820" end="2825" title="SR.N6" label="SR.N6"/>
<link wikidata="Q331455" start="2924" end="2940" title="Casiquiare canal" label="Casiquiare canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3265" end="3268" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649964" start="3282" end="3300" title="The World About Us" label="The World About Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="3767" end="3781" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="3786" end="3800" title="Ciudad Guayana" label="Ciudad Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070587" start="3954" end="3970" title="Orinoquia Bridge" label="Orinoquia Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="3991" end="4005" title="Ciudad Guayana" label="Ciudad Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309106" start="4108" end="4121" title="Guiana Shield" label="Guiana Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444760" start="4549" end="4556" title="Atabapo River" label="Atabapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047596" start="4561" end="4569" title="Guaviare River" label="Guaviare"/>
<link wikidata="Q371223" start="4580" end="4603" title="San Fernando de Atabapo" label="San Fernando de Atabapo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4820" end="4833" title="Raudales de Atures" label="Atures rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q655251" start="4863" end="4873" title="Meta River" label="Meta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q130304" start="4877" end="4891" title="Puerto Carreño" label="Puerto Carreño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885485" start="5030" end="5039" title="Barrancas del Orinoco" label="Barrancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q844799" start="5085" end="5098" title="Gulf of Paría" label="Gulf of Paría"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="5136" end="5141" title="river delta" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q590533" start="5497" end="5503" title="Caroni River (Venezuela)" label="Caroní"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="5523" end="5535" title="Puerto Ordaz" label="Puerto Ordaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646538" start="5550" end="5558" title="Llovizna" label="Llovizna"/>
<link wikidata="Q331455" start="5615" end="5631" title="Casiquiare canal" label="Casiquiare canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q118771" start="5697" end="5706" title="Rio Negro (Amazon)" label="Rio Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="5727" end="5733" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034182" start="5809" end="5824" title="stream gradient" label="stream gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q853315" start="6066" end="6071" title="Apure River" label="Apure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059928" start="6124" end="6130" title="Arauca River" label="Arauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444760" start="6183" end="6190" title="Atabapo River" label="Atabapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309106" start="6201" end="6217" title="Guiana Shield" label="Guiana Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q590533" start="6256" end="6262" title="Caroní River" label="Caroní"/>
<link wikidata="Q331455" start="6328" end="6344" title="Casiquiare canal" label="Casiquiare canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="6365" end="6377" title="distributary" label="distributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121956" start="6461" end="6466" title="Caura River (Venezuela)" label="Caura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047596" start="6535" end="6543" title="Guaviare River" label="Guaviare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066318" start="6583" end="6590" title="Inírida River" label="Inírida"/>
<link wikidata="Q655251" start="6637" end="6641" title="Meta River" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349924" start="6704" end="6712" title="Ventuari River" label="Ventuari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458822" start="6789" end="6796" title="Vichada River" label="Vichada"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="6891" end="6905" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="6910" end="6924" title="Ciudad Guayana" label="Ciudad Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="6979" end="6993" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="7047" end="7061" title="Ciudad Guayana" label="Ciudad Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="7100" end="7114" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q935931" start="7176" end="7180" title="boto" label="boto"/>
<link wikidata="Q83774" start="7189" end="7200" title="giant otter" label="giant otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q272395" start="7239" end="7256" title="Orinoco crocodile" label="Orinoco crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="7467" end="7474" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="7525" end="7533" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="7563" end="7570" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q217458" start="7643" end="7656" title="Characiformes" label="Characiformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="7661" end="7673" title="Siluriformes" label="Siluriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q141891" start="7776" end="7794" title="Pygocentrus cariba" label="black spot piranha"/>
<link wikidata="Q590731" start="7803" end="7817" title="cardinal tetra" label="cardinal tetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q118771" start="7905" end="7914" title="Rio Negro (Amazon)" label="Rio Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q331455" start="7988" end="8004" title="Casiquiare canal" label="Casiquiare canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q100649" start="8043" end="8053" title="Blackwater river" label="blackwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460693" start="8058" end="8064" title="Clearwater river (river type)" label="clear-"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557367" start="8068" end="8078" title="Whitewater river (river type)" label="whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q852170" start="8258" end="8266" title="dredging" label="dredging"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="8303" end="8317" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q590533" start="8344" end="8356" title="Caroní River" label="Caroní River"/>
<link wikidata="Q372920" start="8405" end="8420" title="Puerto Ayacucho" label="Puerto Ayacucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="8538" end="8546" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8705" end="8717" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q297322" start="8940" end="8949" title="tar sands" label="tar sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990565" start="8957" end="8973" title="Orinoco Belt" label="Orinoco oil belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190922" start="9083" end="9093" title="Anzoategui" label="Anzoategui"/>
<link wikidata="Q202075" start="9094" end="9101" title="Guarico" label="Guarico"/>
<link wikidata="Q205776" start="9106" end="9113" title="Monagas" label="Monagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309106" start="9177" end="9191" title="Guayana Shield" label="Guayana Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="9359" end="9368" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="9384" end="9393" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="9401" end="9411" title="overthrust" label="overthrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="9414" end="9428" title="foreland basin" label="foreland basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507080" start="10018" end="10032" title="Ciudad Guayana" label="Ciudad Guayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q590533" start="10085" end="10091" title="Caroni River (Venezuela)" label="Caroní"/>
<link wikidata="Q942178" start="10477" end="10489" title="Orinoco Flow" label="Orinoco Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604929" start="10621" end="10628" title="Adaheli" label="Adaheli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="10645" end="10654" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q105759849" start="10685" end="10718" title="Fishes of the Orinoco in the Wild" label="Fishes of the Orinoco in the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q942178" start="10745" end="10757" title="Orinoco Flow" label="Orinoco Flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q26906" start="11228" end="11242" title="Ciudad Bolívar" label="Ciudad Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q717351" start="11288" end="11298" title="Pitch Lake" label="Pitch Lake"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87263" wikidata="Q4722698" url="?curid=87263" title="Alfred Fuller">
<text>Alfred Carl Fuller (January 13, 1885 – December 4, 1973) was a Canadian-born American businessman, entrepreneur, and philanthropist who was the original &quot;Fuller Brush Man&quot;. He created the Fuller Brush Company, a multi-million dollar corporation.

==Biography==
===Early years===
Alfred C. Fuller was born on an Annapolis Valley farm in Welsford, Kings County, Nova Scotia, Canada. He was the eleventh of twelve children of Leander and Phoebe (Collins) Fuller. With the encouragement of his parents to find a career, he moved to Boston, Massachusetts in 1903 at the age of 18 to live with his sister.

===Career Development===
He went to work for the Somerville Brush and Mop Company, and became a successful salesman for them. A self-described country bumpkin, he felt his success was attributed to his farm-boy charm, his ability to make his customer feel comfortable and his full money-back guarantee.

In 1906, with a $75.00 investment, he started the Fuller Brush Company in Hartford, Connecticut, manufacturing brushes in his sister&#x27;s basement and selling these brushes door to door. By 1919, the company had achieved sales of more than $1 million per year.

===Corporate Influence===
Fuller Brush went on to be recognized throughout North America, even inspiring two comedy films, &quot;The Fuller Brush Man&quot; (1948) and &quot;The Fuller Brush Girl&quot; (1950). In 1961, Fuller recorded the secrets to his success on Folkways Records on an album entitled, &quot;Careers in Selling: An Interview with Alfred C. Fuller&quot;. The company remained in the Fuller family&#x27;s hands until 1968, when it was acquired by Sara Lee Corporation.

===Personal life===
In 1908, Fuller married Evelyn Winnifred Ells, a fellow Nova Scotian living in Boston. Evelyn worked alongside Alfred acting as his secretary, accountant and working in sales as well. She is credited with outselling Alfred two to one. The couple had two sons, Alfred Howard born in 1913, and Avard Ells born in 1916. Alfred C. Fuller and Evelyn Ells Fuller were divorced in 1930.

In 1932 Fuller married Mary Primrose (Pelton) from Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, Canada at New York City. Primrose was 19 years younger than Alfred and they remained married until Alfred&#x27;s death. The couple, living at West Hartford, Connecticut, were well-known benefactors and supporters of various community organizations including the Hartt School of Music at the University of Hartford, The Hartford Opera, The Hartford Symphony and the Bushnell Memorial. Both were active board members of Board of Regents for the University of Hartford. Primrose was awarded an honorary doctorate degree at this university in recognition of her contribution and support.

Alfred&#x27;s sons would take over the business in the capacity of president; Howard, led the company from 1943 until his death in an automobile accident in 1959, at which time Avard took over the helm until 1969.

Fuller maintained a lifelong connection with his native Nova Scotia, buying a home in Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, Canada where he and his family spent their summers. The home, known as the Pelton-Fuller House was originally purchased by Primrose&#x27;s maternal grandparents. Primrose&#x27;s mother, Susan (Bown) Pelton, resided in the home until her death in 1965. The Fuller family then used the home as their summer house. In 1996, Primrose donated the house, at 20 Collins Street, to the Yarmouth County Museum where it has been restored and is open to the public.

Fuller was initiated to the York Rite of Freemasonry, till his elevation to the highest degree of Grand Master. He was a major supporter of what is now The Hartt School, University of Hartford. The Alfred C. Fuller Music Center was built in 1963 on the college campus.

===Death===
Fuller died in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1973 at the age of 88 of myeloma. He is buried at Pleasant Valley Cemetery in Somerset, Nova Scotia, approximately 4 kilometres (or 2.5 miles) from his birthplace.

==References==
==External links==
*Fuller Brush Company: About Fuller Brush (some biographical data and a photograph)
*Alfred C. Fuller, The Original Fuller Brush Man ( More on the Fuller Brush Man and his company)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4722698" start="0" end="18" title="Alfred Fuller" label="Alfred Carl Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508242" start="198" end="218" title="Fuller Brush Company" label="Fuller Brush Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q564530" start="321" end="337" title="Annapolis Valley" label="Annapolis Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981823" start="346" end="354" title="Welsford, Kings, Nova Scotia" label="Welsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q671105" start="356" end="381" title="Kings County, Nova Scotia" label="Kings County, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="538" end="544" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49199" start="660" end="670" title="Somerville, Massachusetts" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508242" start="965" end="985" title="Fuller Brush Company" label="Fuller Brush Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="989" end="1010" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735437" start="1308" end="1328" title="The Fuller Brush Man" label="The Fuller Brush Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604163" start="1352" end="1373" title="The Fuller Brush Girl" label="The Fuller Brush Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="1443" end="1459" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q660309" start="1641" end="1661" title="Sara Lee Corporation" label="Sara Lee Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864688" start="2116" end="2124" title="Yarmouth, Nova Scotia" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49140" start="2281" end="2307" title="West Hartford, Connecticut" label="West Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738950" start="2401" end="2452" title="University of Hartford Hartt School" label="Hartt School of Music at the University of Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496118" start="2474" end="2495" title="Hartford Symphony Orchestra" label="The Hartford Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q864688" start="3025" end="3033" title="Yarmouth, Nova Scotia" label="Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049396" start="3426" end="3448" title="Yarmouth County Museum &amp;amp; Archives" label="Yarmouth County Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="3532" end="3541" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738950" start="3656" end="3672" title="The Hartt School" label="The Hartt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q747053" start="3674" end="3696" title="University of Hartford" label="University of Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="3801" end="3822" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559796" start="3905" end="3926" title="Somerset, Kings County, Nova Scotia" label="Somerset, Nova Scotia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87266" wikidata="Q547373" url="?curid=87266" title="Jim O'Rourke (musician)">
<text>Jim O&#x27;Rourke (born January 18, 1969) is an American musician, instrumentalist, composer, singer-songwriter and record producer. He is best known for his numerous solo and collaborative music projects, many of which are instrumental, and has been acclaimed for his music that spans varied genres, including avant-garde styles such as ambient, noise and minimalism, and styles of rock like indie rock and post-rock. He has been associated with the Chicago experimental and improv scene, as well as with New York City when he relocated there in 2000 for his tenure as a member of American indie rock band Sonic Youth. He subsequently moved to Japan and has since been a Japanese resident.

==Biography==

O&#x27;Rourke was born on January 18, 1969, in Chicago, Illinois. He is an alumnus of DePaul University.

O&#x27;Rourke has collaborated with Thurston Moore, Lee Ranaldo, Kim Gordon, Steve Shelley, Derek Bailey, Mats Gustafsson, Mayo Thompson, Brigitte Fontaine, Loren Mazzacane Connors, Merzbow, Nurse with Wound, Phill Niblock, Fennesz, Organum, Phew, Henry Kaiser and Flying Saucer Attack. He has produced and instrumentally contributed to albums by artists such as Sonic Youth, Wilco, Stereolab, Superchunk, Kahimi Karie, Quruli, John Fahey, Smog, Faust, Tony Conrad, The Red Krayola, Bobby Conn, Beth Orton, and U.S. Maple. He mixed Wilco&#x27;s &quot;Yankee Hotel Foxtrot&quot; album and produced their 2004 album, &quot;A Ghost Is Born&quot;, for which he won a Grammy Award for &quot;Best Alternative Album&quot;. During the recording of &quot;Yankee Hotel Foxtrot&quot;, O&#x27;Rourke collaborated with Wilco member Jeff Tweedy and pre-Wilco Glenn Kotche under the name Loose Fur. Their self-titled debut was released in 2003 with a follow-up in 2006 entitled &quot;Born Again in the USA&quot;. He also mixed the unfinished recordings that made up a planned third album by the late American singer-songwriter Judee Sill, recorded in 1974 and mixed by O&#x27;Rourke for a 2005 release. In 2006, O&#x27;Rourke mixed Joanna Newsom&#x27;s album &quot;Ys&quot;, and in 2009, he also mixed several tracks on Newsom&#x27;s follow up &quot;Have One On Me&quot;.

O&#x27;Rourke has previously been a member of Illusion of Safety, Brise-Glace with Darin Gray and Dylan Posa, Gastr Del Sol with David Grubbs and Sonic Youth. Beginning in 1999 he played bass guitar, guitar and synthesizer with Sonic Youth, in addition to recording and mixing duties with the group. He withdrew as a full member in late 2005, but continued to play with them in some of their side projects.

O&#x27;Rourke has also released many albums under his own name on a variety of labels, exploring a range of electronic and avant-garde styles. His most well-known works may be his series of releases on Drag City, which focus on more traditional songcraft: &quot;Bad Timing&quot; (1997), &quot;Eureka&quot; (1999), &quot;Insignificance&quot; (2001), &quot;The Visitor&quot; (2009) and &quot;Simple Songs&quot; (2015). The titles of the first four albums all refer to films by the British director Nicolas Roeg; the first three by direct reference to film titles, the fourth being titled after a fictional album within Roeg&#x27;s film &quot;The Man Who Fell To Earth&quot;.

With music director Takehisa Kosugi, he played for the Merce Cunningham dance company for four years. He was a guitarist for the 1999 premiere of Cunningham&#x27;s ballet &quot;Biped&quot; with Gavin Bryars in Berkeley, California.

O&#x27;Rourke received a 2001 Foundation for Contemporary Arts Grants to Artists Award.

Since 2013, O&#x27;Rourke has used his &quot;Steamroom&quot; Bandcamp page to release reissues of rare and older material, as well as original newer pieces.

O&#x27;Rourke is currently in a relationship with Japanese musician Eiko Ishibashi, with whom he frequently collaborates. The two met when Ishibashi played flute on an album of Burt Bacharach covers that O&#x27;Rourke was producing. They live and work closely together, but &quot;keep a professional distance, sending each other data files to work on rather than jamming.&quot;

In 2024, O&#x27;Rourke contributed to the soundtrack of A.S. Velasca (football club and total work of art created by Wolfgang Natlacen) by composing the Theme.

==Work in films==
* O&#x27;Rourke worked as a music consultant for the 2003 film &quot;School of Rock&quot;, in which he taught the child actors in the movie how to play the songs. He was supposed to have a cameo role in the film as well, but couldn&#x27;t do it as he was on tour with Sonic Youth.
* The song &quot;Happy Days&quot; was featured in the Harmony Korine film &quot;Julien Donkey-Boy&quot;.
* He scored the 2002 film &quot;Love Liza&quot;, directed by Todd Louiso.
* He scored the 2004 video installation &quot;Fireball&quot; and did the sound design on the documentary &quot;Red Orchestra&quot; by Stefan Roloff.
* He has also scored films by Werner Herzog, Olivier Assayas, Shinji Aoyama, Kōji Wakamatsu and others.
* His own short films have been part of the 2004 and 2006 Whitney Biennial and the 2005 Rotterdam Film Festival.
* His first three full-length albums for Drag City are named after three successive films by director Nicolas Roeg: &quot;Bad Timing: A Sensual Obsession&quot;, &quot;Eureka&quot;, and &quot;Insignificance&quot;. His fourth Drag City album, &quot;The Visitor&quot;, is named for an album that appears within Roeg&#x27;s &quot;The Man Who Fell to Earth&quot;, recorded by the film&#x27;s protagonist Thomas Jerome Newton.
* He scored Kōji Wakamatsu&#x27;s film &quot;United Red Army&quot; in 2007.
* He scored Kyle Armstrong&#x27;s 2012 documentary film &quot;Magnetic Reconnection&quot; (narrated by Will Oldham).
* He scored the 2014 British film &quot;The Creeping Garden&quot;.
* He produced and played on the soundtrack for Ryusuke Hamaguchi&#x27;s &quot;Drive My Car&quot;, composed by Eiko Ishibashi.
* He mixed, mastered and played guitar on the soundtrack for Ryusuke Hamaguchi&#x27;s &quot;Evil Does Not Exist&quot;, composed by Eiko Ishibashi.

==Drag City discography==
* &quot;Bad Timing&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Eureka&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Halfway to a Threeway EP&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Insignificance&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Visitor&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Simple Songs&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Hands That Bind (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)&quot; (2023)

==Partial solo discography==
* &quot;Some Kind of Pagan&quot; (Sound of Pig, 1989)
* &quot;It Takes Time To Do Nothing&quot; (Audiofile Tapes, 1990)
* &quot;Secure on the Loose Rim&quot; (Sound of Pig, 1991)
* &quot;The Ground Below Above Our Heads&quot; (Entenpfuhl, 1991)
* &quot;Tamper&quot; (Extreme Records, 1991)
* &quot;Disengage&quot; (Staalplaat, 1992)
* &quot;Scend&quot; (Divided Records, 1992)
* &quot;Remove the Need&quot; (Extreme Records, 1993)
* &quot;Rules of Reduction&quot; (Metamkine, 1993)
* &quot;When in Vanitas...&quot; (Skin Graft, 1994)
* &quot;Terminal Pharmacy&quot; (Tzadik Records, 1995)
* &quot;Happy Days&quot; (Revenant Records, 1997)
* &quot;Bad Timing&quot; (Drag City, 1997)
* &quot;Eureka&quot; (Drag City, 1999)
* &quot;Halfway to a Threeway&quot; EP (Drag City, 1999)
* &quot;Insignificance&quot; (Drag City, 2001)
* &quot;I&#x27;m Happy and I&#x27;m Singing and a 1, 2, 3, 4&quot; (Mego, 2001)
* &quot;Mizu No Nai Umi&quot; (vector7/HEADZ54, 2005)
* &quot;Corona / Tokyo Realization&quot; (Columbia Music Entertainment, 2006) – Japan only release. Dedicated to Tōru Takemitsu
* &quot;The Visitor&quot; (Drag City, 2009) – Dedicated to Derek Bailey.
* &quot;All Kinds of People ~ Love Burt Bacharach&quot; (AWDR, 2010)
* &quot;Old News #5&quot; (Mego, 2011)
* &quot;Old News #6&quot; (Mego, Aug 2011)
* &quot;Old News #7&quot; (Mego, Feb 2012)
* &quot;Old News #8&quot; (Mego, Sep 2012)
* &quot;Old News #9&quot; (Mego, Oct 2012)
* &quot;Simple Songs&quot; (Drag City, 2015)
* &quot;Flying Basket (Family Vineyard, 2015)
* &quot;Sleep Like It&#x27;s Winter&quot; (Newhere Music, 2018)
* &quot;To Magnetize Money and Catch a Roving Eye&quot; (Sonoris, 2019)
* &quot;Shutting Down Here&quot; (Portraits GRM, 2020)
* Too Compliment (DDS, 2021)

==References==
==External links==
* Jim O&#x27;Rourke&#x27;s Bandcamp page for &quot;Steam Room&quot; Music
* Discogs overview
* Complete discography and filmography up to 2008
* 
* Jim O&#x27;Rourke by Jay Sanders &quot;Bomb&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q547373" start="0" end="17" title="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke (musician)" label="Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q488205" start="94" end="111" title="singer-songwriter" label="singer-songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332751" start="311" end="322" title="Avant-garde music" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="338" end="345" title="Ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q726239" start="347" end="352" title="Noise music" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="357" end="367" title="Minimal music" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="383" end="387" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="393" end="403" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q209137" start="408" end="417" title="post-rock" label="post-rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="459" end="471" title="Experimental music" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q592060" start="476" end="482" title="free improvisation" label="improv"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="506" end="519" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="607" end="618" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="645" end="650" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="754" end="771" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179603" start="793" end="810" title="DePaul University" label="DePaul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q505677" start="849" end="863" title="Thurston Moore" label="Thurston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q352087" start="865" end="876" title="Lee Ranaldo" label="Lee Ranaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="878" end="888" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q540095" start="890" end="903" title="Steve Shelley" label="Steve Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q563517" start="905" end="917" title="Derek Bailey (guitarist)" label="Derek Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384168" start="919" end="934" title="Mats Gustafsson" label="Mats Gustafsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401107" start="936" end="949" title="Mayo Thompson" label="Mayo Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q563" start="951" end="968" title="Brigitte Fontaine" label="Brigitte Fontaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394781" start="970" end="993" title="Loren Mazzacane Connors" label="Loren Mazzacane Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q452011" start="995" end="1002" title="Merzbow" label="Merzbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930798" start="1004" end="1020" title="Nurse with Wound" label="Nurse with Wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381062" start="1022" end="1035" title="Phill Niblock" label="Phill Niblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q689598" start="1037" end="1044" title="Fennesz" label="Fennesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174842" start="1046" end="1053" title="David Jackman (musician)" label="Organum"/>
<link wikidata="Q528917" start="1055" end="1059" title="Phew (singer)" label="Phew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523538" start="1061" end="1073" title="Henry Kaiser (musician)" label="Henry Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q797889" start="1078" end="1098" title="Flying Saucer Attack" label="Flying Saucer Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="1176" end="1187" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q637771" start="1189" end="1194" title="Wilco" label="Wilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q334652" start="1196" end="1205" title="Stereolab" label="Stereolab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576798" start="1207" end="1217" title="Superchunk" label="Superchunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567233" start="1219" end="1231" title="Kahimi Karie" label="Kahimi Karie"/>
<link wikidata="Q906339" start="1233" end="1239" title="Quruli" label="Quruli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339380" start="1241" end="1251" title="John Fahey (musician)" label="John Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q862005" start="1253" end="1257" title="Bill Callahan (musician)" label="Smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q679697" start="1259" end="1264" title="Faust (band)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q481477" start="1266" end="1277" title="Tony Conrad" label="Tony Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335788" start="1279" end="1294" title="The Red Krayola" label="The Red Krayola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934876" start="1296" end="1306" title="Bobby Conn" label="Bobby Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q465296" start="1308" end="1318" title="Beth Orton" label="Beth Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547111" start="1324" end="1334" title="U.S. Maple" label="U.S. Maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q637771" start="1345" end="1350" title="Wilco" label="Wilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091995" start="1364" end="1384" title="Yankee Hotel Foxtrot" label="Yankee Hotel Foxtrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426589" start="1434" end="1449" title="A Ghost Is Born" label="A Ghost Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1476" end="1488" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686370" start="1632" end="1643" title="Jeff Tweedy" label="Jeff Tweedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568940" start="1658" end="1670" title="Glenn Kotche" label="Glenn Kotche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675950" start="1686" end="1695" title="Loose Fur" label="Loose Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675952" start="1703" end="1720" title="Loose Fur (album)" label="self-titled debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945788" start="1782" end="1803" title="Born Again in the USA" label="Born Again in the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q271443" start="1925" end="1935" title="Judee Sill" label="Judee Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="2024" end="2029" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q233061" start="2030" end="2043" title="Joanna Newsom" label="Joanna Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q632915" start="2063" end="2065" title="Ys (Joanna Newsom album)" label="Ys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944292" start="2148" end="2162" title="Have One On Me" label="Have One On Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925644" start="2237" end="2248" title="Brise-Glace" label="Brise-Glace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472145" start="2281" end="2294" title="Gastr Del Sol" label="Gastr Del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018002" start="2300" end="2312" title="David Grubbs" label="David Grubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="2317" end="2328" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="2399" end="2410" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="2427" end="2436" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254522" start="2781" end="2790" title="Drag City (record label)" label="Drag City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840448" start="2841" end="2851" title="Bad Timing (album)" label="Bad Timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411136" start="2872" end="2878" title="Eureka (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038134" start="2899" end="2913" title="Insignificance (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Insignificance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358313" start="2934" end="2945" title="The Visitor (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="The Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21775886" start="2969" end="2981" title="Simple Songs (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Simple Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51541" start="3075" end="3087" title="Nicolas Roeg" label="Nicolas Roeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195431" start="3219" end="3244" title="The Man Who Fell to Earth (film)" label="The Man Who Fell To Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677988" start="3273" end="3288" title="Takehisa Kosugi" label="Takehisa Kosugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318364" start="3308" end="3324" title="Merce Cunningham" label="Merce Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q713939" start="3447" end="3459" title="Gavin Bryars" label="Gavin Bryars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474406" start="3516" end="3548" title="Foundation for Contemporary Arts" label="Foundation for Contemporary Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q545966" start="3636" end="3644" title="Bandcamp" label="Bandcamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11586703" start="3801" end="3815" title="Eiko Ishibashi" label="Eiko Ishibashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="3910" end="3924" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q97170483" start="4168" end="4180" title="A.S. Velasca" label="A.S. Velasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q820753" start="4360" end="4374" title="School of Rock" label="School of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q528949" start="4626" end="4640" title="Harmony Korine" label="Harmony Korine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109438" start="4652" end="4669" title="Julien Donkey-Boy" label="Julien Donkey-Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616729" start="4709" end="4718" title="Love Liza" label="Love Liza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438469" start="4738" end="4749" title="Todd Louiso" label="Todd Louiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q96160" start="4885" end="4898" title="Stefan Roloff" label="Stefan Roloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44131" start="4930" end="4943" title="Werner Herzog" label="Werner Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q550717" start="4945" end="4960" title="Olivier Assayas" label="Olivier Assayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q926034" start="4962" end="4975" title="Shinji Aoyama" label="Shinji Aoyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q926946" start="4977" end="4991" title="Kōji Wakamatsu" label="Kōji Wakamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q677294" start="5062" end="5078" title="Whitney Biennial" label="Whitney Biennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254522" start="5158" end="5167" title="Drag City (record label)" label="Drag City"/>
<link wikidata="Q51541" start="5219" end="5231" title="Nicolas Roeg" label="Nicolas Roeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q880665" start="5239" end="5249" title="Bad Timing" label="Bad Timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q373849" start="5284" end="5290" title="Eureka (1984 film)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755023" start="5308" end="5322" title="Insignificance (film)" label="Insignificance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358313" start="5364" end="5375" title="The Visitor (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="The Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195431" start="5443" end="5468" title="The Man Who Fell to Earth (film)" label="The Man Who Fell to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q926946" start="5550" end="5564" title="Kōji Wakamatsu" label="Kōji Wakamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017500" start="5583" end="5598" title="United Red Army (film)" label="United Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q709464" start="5717" end="5728" title="Will Oldham" label="Will Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21034400" start="5771" end="5790" title="The Creeping Garden" label="The Creeping Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17220313" start="5845" end="5862" title="Ryusuke Hamaguchi" label="Ryusuke Hamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q107107865" start="5876" end="5888" title="Drive My Car (film)" label="Drive My Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q11586703" start="5908" end="5922" title="Eiko Ishibashi" label="Eiko Ishibashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q120897557" start="6016" end="6035" title="Evil Does Not Exist" label="Evil Does Not Exist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840448" start="6106" end="6116" title="Bad Timing (album)" label="Bad Timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411136" start="6138" end="6144" title="Eureka (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641972" start="6166" end="6187" title="Halfway to a Threeway" label="Halfway to a Threeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038134" start="6212" end="6226" title="Insignificance (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Insignificance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358313" start="6248" end="6259" title="The Visitor (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="The Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21775886" start="6281" end="6293" title="Simple Songs (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Simple Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564780" start="6570" end="6582" title="Sound of Pig" label="Sound of Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q822984" start="6726" end="6736" title="Staalplaat" label="Staalplaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422371" start="6819" end="6834" title="Extreme Records" label="Extreme Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486287" start="6927" end="6937" title="Skin Graft" label="Skin Graft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297757" start="6978" end="6992" title="Tzadik Records" label="Tzadik Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678481" start="7026" end="7042" title="Revenant Records" label="Revenant Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840448" start="7058" end="7068" title="Bad Timing (album)" label="Bad Timing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254522" start="7076" end="7085" title="Drag City (record label)" label="Drag City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411136" start="7101" end="7107" title="Eureka (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641972" start="7140" end="7161" title="Halfway to a Threeway" label="Halfway to a Threeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038134" start="7197" end="7211" title="Insignificance (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Insignificance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966374" start="7244" end="7296" title="I&amp;#x27;m Happy and I&amp;#x27;m Singing and a 1, 2, 3, 4" label="I&amp;#x27;m Happy and I&amp;#x27;m Singing and a 1, 2, 3, 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917184" start="7304" end="7308" title="Mego Records" label="Mego"/>
<link wikidata="Q773717" start="7412" end="7440" title="Columbia Music Entertainment" label="Columbia Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q155467" start="7483" end="7497" title="Tōru Takemitsu" label="Tōru Takemitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358313" start="7506" end="7517" title="The Visitor (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="The Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q563517" start="7557" end="7569" title="Derek Bailey (guitarist)" label="Derek Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q21775886" start="7859" end="7871" title="Simple Songs (Jim O&amp;#x27;Rourke album)" label="Simple Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678053" start="7904" end="7917" title="Flying Basket" label="Flying Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940402" start="8384" end="8388" title="Bomb (magazine)" label="Bomb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87268" wikidata="Q4705725" url="?curid=87268" title="Alaisiagae">
<text>In Romano-British culture and Germanic polytheism, the Alaisiagae (possibly &quot;dispatching terrors&quot; or &quot;all-victorious&quot;) were a quartet of Celtic and Germanic goddesses deifying victory.

==Centres of worship==
The Alaisiagae were Celtic deities and Germanic deities who were worshipped in Roman Britain, altar-stones raised to them having been recovered in the United Kingdom at Vercovicium (Housesteads Roman Fort) at Hadrian&#x27;s Wall in England.

Another centre of worship was perhaps the town of Bitburg, near the German-Belgian border, which was called “Beda Vicus,” which although Latin derives from the Celtic &quot;Village of Beda.&quot;.

== Votive inscriptions ==
=== First inscription ===
One of the votive inscriptions to these goddesses reads:
: DEO MARTI THINCSO ET DVABVS ALAISAGIS BEDE ET FIMMILENE ET N AVG GERM CIVES TVIHANTI VSLM
: &quot;To the god Mars Thincsus and the two Alaisagae, Beda and Fimmilena, and the divine spirit of the emperor, the German tribesmen from Tuihantis willingly and deservedly fulfill their vow.&quot;

Mars Thincsus is correlated with the Germanic war-god Týr. The latter was associated with oath-taking and the Thing, a local assembly of free men. Political issues were discussed, judicial decisions were made, and religious rites were held there. Scherer suggests that they came from the district of Twenthe (hence, the mention to &quot;cives Tvihantis&quot;) in the province of Overijssel, Netherlands.

=== Second inscription ===
The second inscription reads:

: DEABVS ALAISIAGIS BAVDIHILLIE ET FRIAGABI ET N(umini) AVG(usti) N(umerus) HNAVDIFRIDI V(otum) S(olvit) L(ibens) M(erito)
: &quot;To the goddesses the Alaisiagae, Baudihillia and Friagabis, and to the Divinity of the Emperor the unit of Hnaudifridus gladly and deservedly fulfilled its vow.&quot;

==Syncretism==
The goddesses called the Alaisiagae are named on altar-stones found in shrines along Hadrian&#x27;s Wall: Beda, Baudihille, Fimmilena, and Friagabis. These Celtic goddesses had parallels with similarly named Frisian goddesses who may have arrived on Germanic soil via Gaulic France. These goddesses are not known to be Roman. Beda may have been an abbreviation for Ricagambeda since the two names share similar semantics. The Romanized Celtic soldiers who served along Hadrian’s Wall more than likely introduced the Alaisiagae to their Roman counterparts, thus spreading worship of these goddesses of victory.

==Archeological setting==
The altar stones of the Alaisiagae were recovered in the Temple of Mars at Vercovicium. This roughly circular temple was found on top of Chapel Hill a little to the south of the fort, its walls of undressed stone facing with an earth and rubble infill enclosed an area measuring about 17¼ ft. across. The insubstantial foundations indicate that the superstructure was at least half-timbered.

The temple was built in the early-3rd century upon the ruins of a rectangular workshop in the &quot;vicus&quot; which had been destroyed during the barbarian incursions of AD196. It contained altars dedicated by the commanders and men of all three units known to be stationed at Vercovicium to the god Mars Thincsus, the Romanized aspect of a Teutonic god, a common occurrence among the Roman auxiliary units. Various altars have been found at this site dedicated to Mars and/or to the Celto-Germanic goddesses Alaisiagae; named on one altar as Beda and Fimmilena, on another as Baudihille (Boudihillia) and Friagabis.

==Etymology==
Boudihillia can be derived from the Proto-Celtic &quot;*Bōud-ī-hīlījā &quot; meaning &#x27;victory&#x27;s fullness.&#x27;
Beda is derived from the Proto-Celtic &quot;*Bed-ā&quot; meaning &#x27;burial.&#x27;
 Alaisiagae is derived from the Proto-Celtic &quot;*Ad-lājsījā-agai&quot; meaning (in the ) &#x27;sending fears,&#x27; plausibly a byword for a notion of “dispatching terrors” (q.v. ).

==Sources==
*British Museum, London, England.
*Carlisle Museum, Cumbria, England.
*Lancaster museum, Lancaster, England.
*Newcastle Museum of Antiquities, Newcastle upon Tyne, England.
*Penrith Museum, Penrith, England.
*Vercovicium Roman Museum, Housesteads, Northumberland, England.
*York Castle Museum, York, England.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="3" end="25" title="Romano-British culture" label="Romano-British culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="30" end="38" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="39" end="49" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705725" start="55" end="65" title="Alaisiagae" label="Alaisiagae"/>
<link wikidata="Q258883" start="249" end="263" title="list of Celtic deities" label="Celtic deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q862030" start="268" end="284" title="list of Germanic deities" label="Germanic deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="308" end="321" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="380" end="394" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812832" start="411" end="433" title="Housesteads Roman Fort" label="Housesteads Roman Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="438" end="457" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="461" end="468" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q258974" start="521" end="528" title="Bitburg" label="Bitburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="1125" end="1128" title="Týr" label="Týr"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="1181" end="1186" title="Thing (assembly)" label="Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="2167" end="2172" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148581" start="2213" end="2224" title="Ricagambeda" label="Ricagambeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="2259" end="2268" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179674" start="3221" end="3229" title="Teutons" label="Teutonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="3548" end="3560" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="3918" end="3932" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3934" end="3940" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="3969" end="3976" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q205905" start="4006" end="4015" title="Lancaster, Lancashire" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="4060" end="4079" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q798906" start="4107" end="4114" title="Penrith, Cumbria" label="Penrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812832" start="4126" end="4137" title="Housesteads Roman Fort" label="Vercovicium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="4165" end="4179" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="4211" end="4215" title="York" label="York"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87272" wikidata="Q3700924" url="?curid=87272" title="Daisy">
<text>Daisy, Daisies or DAISY may refer to:

==Plants==
* &quot;Bellis perennis&quot;, the common daisy, lawn daisy or English daisy, a European species

===Other plants known as daisy===
* Asteraceae, daisy family
** &quot;Euryops chrysanthemoides&quot;, African bush daisy
** &quot;Osteospermum&quot;, African daisy
** &quot;Tetraneuris acaulis&quot;, angelita daisy
** &quot;Melampodium leucanthum&quot;, blackfoot daisy
** &quot;Glebionis coronaria&quot;, crown daisy
** &quot;Brachyglottis greyi&quot;, daisy bush
** &quot;Olearia&quot;, daisy bush
** &quot;Argyranthemum&quot;, dill daisy, marguerite daisy
** &quot;Rhodanthemum hosmariense&quot;, Moroccan daisy
** &quot;Leucanthemum vulgare&quot;, oxeye daisy, dog daisy
** &quot;Leucanthemum × superbum&quot;, Shasta daisy
** &quot;Brachyscome&quot;, several species
** &quot;Gerbera jamesonii&quot;, Barberton daisy, Transvaal daisy
** &quot;Ismelia carinata&quot;, tricolor daisy
** &quot;Perityle&quot; spp., rock daisy
* &quot;Scabiosa prolifera&quot;, Carmel daisy
* &quot;Globularia&quot;, globe daisies
* &quot;Cleretum bellidiforme&quot;, Livingstone daisy

==Arts, entertainment and media==
===Film and television===
* Daisy (advertisement), a 1964 controversial political TV advertisement 
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (1923 film), a German silent romantic drama film
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (1988 film), a Malayalam musical love story
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (2006 film), a Korean urban romantic melodrama
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (&quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot;), an episode of the TV series
* &quot;Daisies&quot; (film), a 1966 Czech film 

===Fictional characters===
===Music===
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Big Scary album), 2021
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Brand New album), 2009, and a song from the album
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Dog&#x27;s Eye View album), 1997
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Ashnikko song), a song by Ashnikko from the 2021 mixtape &quot;Demidevil&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Bonnie Pink song), 1999
* &quot;Daisy&quot; a song by Halfway to Hazard from the 2007 album &quot;Halfway to Hazard&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (Pentagon song), a song by Pentagon from the 2020 EP &quot;WE:TH&quot;
* &quot;Daisies&quot; (song), a song by Katy Perry from the 2020 album &quot;Smile&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Fang Island from the 2010 album Fang Island
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Switchfoot from the 2005 album &quot;Nothing Is Sound&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Brotherhood of Man from the 1977 album &quot;Oh Boy!&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Stone Temple Pilots from the 1996 album &quot;Tiny Music&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Hafdís Huld from the 2009 album &quot;Synchronised Swimmers&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Zedd from the 2015 album &quot;True Colors&quot;
* &quot;Daisy&quot;, a song by Pond from the 2019 album &quot;Tasmania&quot;
* &quot;Daisies&quot;, a Hazbin Hotel song by Black Gryph0n and Baasik
* &quot;Daisy Bell&quot;, an 1892 song with chorus &quot;Daisy, Daisy, give me your answer, do...&quot;

==Businesses and organizations==
* Daisy (Girl Scouts), a membership level
* Daisy Outdoor Products, known primarily as Daisy, an American air gun manufacturer
* Daisy Systems (disambiguation), several companies
* The Daisy, a Rodeo Drive nightclub in Beverly Hills, California, U.S.
* Democracy is Freedom – The Daisy, known as The Daisy, an Italian political party
* Fort Wayne Daisies, an American women&#x27;s professional baseball team 1945–1954
* Daisy, a brand of sour cream

==Computing==
* Daisy wheel printing, an impact printing technology
* Digital Accessible Information System (DAISY), a technical standard for digital audiobooks
** List of DAISY software
* Digital Automated Identification System (DAISY), an automated species identification system

==People==
* Daisy (given name), including a list of people and fictional characters with the name
* Daisy (nickname), including a list of people with the nickname

==Places==
===Australia===
* Daisy Hill, Queensland
* Daisy Hill, Victoria

===Canada===
* Daisy Lake (disambiguation), several Canadian lakes

===United States===
* Daisy, Arkansas
* Daisy, Georgia
* Daisy, Kentucky
* Daisy, Maryland
* Daisy, Missouri
* Daisy, Oklahoma
* Daisy, Virginia
* Daisy, West Virginia
* Daisy Geyser, Yellowstone National Park
* Daisy Swamp, South Carolina
* Lake Daisy, Florida

==Other uses==
* Daisy (cocktail), a traditional long drink
* Daisy (doll), a 1970s doll designed by Mary Quant
* &quot;Daisy&quot; (steamboat), a steamboat that ran on Puget Sound, Washington, U.S., 1880–1897
* Operation Daisy, a 1981 military operation in Angola
* Tropical Storm Daisy, tropical cyclones named Daisy
* Daisy (perfume), a fragrance brand by Marc Jacobs
* Namaqualand Daisies, South Africa field hockey club

==See also==
*

* DayZ (disambiguation)
* Princess Daisy (disambiguation)
* Daisy chain (disambiguation)
* Daisy Hill (disambiguation)
* Daisy Dukes, short, tight denim shorts, named after &quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot; character Daisy Duke
* Daisy the Great, American indie pop band
* Daizy, a fictional character in &quot;Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3700924" start="0" end="5" title="Daisy" label="Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700924" start="7" end="14" title="Daisy" label="Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700924" start="18" end="23" title="Daisy" label="DAISY"/>
<link wikidata="Q26158" start="58" end="73" title="Bellis perennis" label="Bellis perennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="184" end="194" title="Asteraceae" label="Asteraceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414066" start="218" end="242" title="Euryops chrysanthemoides" label="Euryops chrysanthemoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q942384" start="278" end="290" title="Osteospermum" label="Osteospermum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706616" start="321" end="340" title="Tetraneuris acaulis" label="Tetraneuris acaulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304872" start="372" end="394" title="Melampodium leucanthum" label="Melampodium leucanthum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585129" start="427" end="446" title="Glebionis coronaria" label="Glebionis coronaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096143" start="475" end="494" title="Brachyglottis greyi" label="Brachyglottis greyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q291873" start="522" end="529" title="Olearia" label="Olearia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133909" start="557" end="570" title="Argyranthemum" label="Argyranthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13948423" start="616" end="640" title="Rhodanthemum hosmariense" label="Rhodanthemum hosmariense"/>
<link wikidata="Q27164" start="672" end="692" title="Leucanthemum vulgare" label="Leucanthemum vulgare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533981" start="732" end="755" title="Leucanthemum × superbum" label="Leucanthemum × superbum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702913" start="785" end="796" title="Brachyscome" label="Brachyscome"/>
<link wikidata="Q746928" start="829" end="846" title="Gerbera jamesonii" label="Gerbera jamesonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10303972" start="896" end="912" title="Ismelia carinata" label="Ismelia carinata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168924" start="944" end="952" title="Perityle" label="Perityle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435707" start="984" end="1002" title="Scabiosa prolifera" label="Scabiosa prolifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q158217" start="1031" end="1041" title="Globularia" label="Globularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17246315" start="1071" end="1092" title="Cleretum bellidiforme" label="Cleretum bellidiforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q253102" start="1181" end="1202" title="Daisy (advertisement)" label="Daisy (advertisement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478886" start="1255" end="1284" title="Daisy (1923 film)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (1923 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209675" start="1324" end="1353" title="Daisy (1988 film)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (1988 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623801" start="1388" end="1417" title="Daisy (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738646" start="1455" end="1508" title="Daisy (How I Met Your Mother)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;How I Met Your Mother&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910705" start="1540" end="1566" title="Daisies (film)" label="&amp;quot;Daisies&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106829808" start="1629" end="1664" title="Daisy (Big Scary album)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Big Scary album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209677" start="1673" end="1708" title="Daisy (Brand New album)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Brand New album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209676" start="1744" end="1789" title="Daisy (Dog&amp;#x27;s Eye View album)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Dog&amp;#x27;s Eye View album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97353597" start="1798" end="1831" title="Daisy (Ashnikko song)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Ashnikko song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209680" start="1898" end="1934" title="Daisy (Bonnie Pink song)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Bonnie Pink song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641967" start="2015" end="2032" title="Halfway to Hazard (album)" label="Halfway to Hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q100304028" start="2041" end="2074" title="Daisy (Pentagon song)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (Pentagon song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q93509228" start="2132" end="2158" title="Daisies (song)" label="&amp;quot;Daisies&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433783" start="2282" end="2293" title="Fang Island (album)" label="Fang Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023864" start="2362" end="2378" title="Nothing Is Sound" label="Nothing Is Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080418" start="2461" end="2468" title="Oh Boy! (album)" label="Oh Boy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q942925" start="2552" end="2562" title="Tiny Music... Songs from the Vatican Gift Shop" label="Tiny Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662115" start="2638" end="2659" title="Synchronised Swimmers" label="Synchronised Swimmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816324" start="2728" end="2739" title="True Colors (Zedd album)" label="True Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q60770952" start="2808" end="2816" title="Tasmania (album)" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q75020770" start="2848" end="2860" title="Hazbin Hotel" label="Hazbin Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268487" start="2902" end="2912" title="Daisy Bell" label="Daisy Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815089" start="3034" end="3053" title="Daisy (Girl Scouts)" label="Daisy (Girl Scouts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209759" start="3076" end="3098" title="Daisy Outdoor Products" label="Daisy Outdoor Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209772" start="3161" end="3191" title="Daisy Systems (disambiguation)" label="Daisy Systems (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156726" start="3226" end="3237" title="Rodeo Drive" label="Rodeo Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141788" start="3285" end="3317" title="Democracy is Freedom – The Daisy" label="Democracy is Freedom – The Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472277" start="3368" end="3386" title="Fort Wayne Daisies" label="Fort Wayne Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="3470" end="3480" title="sour cream" label="sour cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196607" start="3498" end="3518" title="Daisy wheel printing" label="Daisy wheel printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151676" start="3552" end="3589" title="Digital Accessible Information System" label="Digital Accessible Information System"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777498" start="3646" end="3668" title="List of DAISY software" label="List of DAISY software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275790" start="3671" end="3710" title="Digital Automated Identification System" label="Digital Automated Identification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4472145" start="3777" end="3795" title="Daisy (given name)" label="Daisy (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40856974" start="3865" end="3881" title="Daisy (nickname)" label="Daisy (nickname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209724" start="3958" end="3980" title="Daisy Hill, Queensland" label="Daisy Hill, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209723" start="3983" end="4003" title="Daisy Hill, Victoria" label="Daisy Hill, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209733" start="4020" end="4047" title="Daisy Lake (disambiguation)" label="Daisy Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q384246" start="4095" end="4110" title="Daisy, Arkansas" label="Daisy, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883466" start="4113" end="4127" title="Daisy, Georgia" label="Daisy, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209668" start="4130" end="4145" title="Daisy, Kentucky" label="Daisy, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16989019" start="4148" end="4163" title="Daisy, Maryland" label="Daisy, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120317" start="4166" end="4181" title="Daisy, Missouri" label="Daisy, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209670" start="4184" end="4199" title="Daisy, Oklahoma" label="Daisy, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209669" start="4202" end="4217" title="Daisy, Virginia" label="Daisy, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209671" start="4220" end="4240" title="Daisy, West Virginia" label="Daisy, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664688" start="4243" end="4255" title="Daisy Geyser" label="Daisy Geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601573" start="4285" end="4296" title="Daisy Swamp" label="Daisy Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475563" start="4315" end="4325" title="Lake Daisy" label="Lake Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507328" start="4353" end="4369" title="Daisy (cocktail)" label="Daisy (cocktail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209678" start="4398" end="4410" title="Daisy (doll)" label="Daisy (doll)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209682" start="4450" end="4479" title="Daisy (steamboat)" label="&amp;quot;Daisy&amp;quot; (steamboat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096954" start="4548" end="4563" title="Operation Daisy" label="Operation Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16770245" start="4603" end="4623" title="Tropical Storm Daisy" label="Tropical Storm Daisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110263664" start="4657" end="4672" title="Daisy (perfume)" label="Daisy (perfume)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941433" start="4709" end="4728" title="Namaqualand Daisies" label="Namaqualand Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16774854" start="4780" end="4801" title="DayZ (disambiguation)" label="DayZ (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244590" start="4804" end="4835" title="Princess Daisy (disambiguation)" label="Princess Daisy (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700930" start="4838" end="4866" title="Daisy chain (disambiguation)" label="Daisy chain (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157690" start="4869" end="4896" title="Daisy Hill (disambiguation)" label="Daisy Hill (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223269" start="4899" end="4910" title="Daisy Dukes" label="Daisy Dukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q111947886" start="5007" end="5022" title="Daisy the Great" label="Daisy the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813966" start="5088" end="5105" title="Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!" label="Wow! Wow! Wubbzy!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87273" wikidata="Q946661" url="?curid=87273" title="Commodore PET">
<text>The Commodore PET is a line of personal computers produced starting in 1977 by Commodore International. A single all-in-one case combines a MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor, Commodore BASIC in read-only memory, keyboard, monochrome monitor, and, in early models, a cassette deck.

Development of the system began in 1976, and it was demonstrated and sold as the first personal computer for the masses at the January 1977 Consumer Electronics Show. The name &quot;PET&quot; was suggested by Andre Souson after he saw the Pet Rock in Los Gatos, and stated they were going to make the &quot;pet computer&quot;. It was backronymed to Personal Electronic Transactor. In a 1995 retrospective, &quot;Byte&quot; magazine—and subsequently many others—referred to the PET, Apple II and TRS-80 collectively as the &quot;1977 trinity&quot; of pioneering personal computers.
Following the initial PET 2001, the design was updated through a series of models with more memory, better keyboard, larger screen, and other modifications. The systems were a top seller in the Canadian and United States education markets, as well as for business use in Europe.

The PET line was discontinued in 1982 after approximately 219,000 machines were sold.

==History==
===Origins===
In the 1970s, Commodore was one of many electronics companies selling calculators designed around Texas Instruments (TI) chips. TI faced increasing competition from Japanese vertically integrated companies who were using new CMOS-based processors and had a lower total cost of production. These companies began to undercut TI business, so TI responded by entering the calculator market directly in 1975. As a result, TI was selling complete calculators at lower price points than they sold just the chipset to their former customers, and the industry that had built up around it was frozen out of the market.

Commodore initially responded by beginning their own attempt to form a vertically integrated calculator line as well, purchasing a vendor in California that was working on a competitive CMOS calculator chip and an LED production line.

They also went looking for a company with an existing calculator chip line, something to tide them over in the immediate term, and this led them to MOS Technology. MOS had been building calculator chips for some time, but more recently had begun to branch out into new markets with its 6502 microprocessor design, which they were trying to bring to market. Along with the 6502 came Chuck Peddle&#x27;s KIM-1 design (short for &quot;Keyboard Input Monitor&quot;) in January 1976, a small computer kit based on the 6502. At Commodore, Peddle had long dreamed of making computers and convinced Jack Tramiel that calculators were a dead-end and that Commodore should explore the burgeoning microcomputer market instead. At first, they considered purchasing an existing design, and in September 1976 Peddle asked for a demonstration of Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak&#x27;s Apple II prototype. Steve Jobs was offering to sell it to Commodore, but Commodore considered Jobs&#x27; offer too expensive.

===Release===

The Commodore PET was officially announced in 1976 and Jack Tramiel gave Chuck Peddle six months to have the computer ready for the January 1977 Consumer Electronics Show, with his team including John Feagans, Bill Seiler, two Japanese engineers named Fujiyama and Aoji, and Jack&#x27;s son Leonard Tramiel, who helped design the PETSCII graphic characters and acted as quality control.

The result was Commodore&#x27;s first mass-market personal computer, the PET, the first model of which was the PET 2001. Its 6502 processor controlled the screen, keyboard, cassette tape recorders and any peripherals connected to one of the computer&#x27;s several expansion ports.

The PET 2001 included either (2001-4) or (2001-8) of 8-bit RAM, and was essentially a single-board computer with discrete logic driving a small built-in monochrome monitor with character graphics, enclosed in a sheet metal case that reflected Commodore&#x27;s background as a manufacturer of office equipment.

The machine also included a built-in Datasette for data storage located on the front of the case, which left little room for the keyboard. The data transfer rate to cassette tape was 1500 baud, but the data was recorded to tape twice for safety, giving an effective rate of 750 baud.

The computer&#x27;s main board carried four expansion ports: extra memory, a second cassette tape recorder interface, a parallel (&quot;user&quot;) port which could be used for sound output or connection to &quot;user&quot; projects or non-Commodore devices and a parallel IEEE-488 port which allowed for daisy-chaining peripherals such as disk drives and printers.

A working PET 2001 prototype was shown to the public at the Winter CES 1977 in January 1977, and the first hundred units were shipped in October, mostly going to magazines and software developers, while the machine was not generally available to consumers until December. However, the PET was back-ordered for months, so to ease deliveries, early in 1978, Commodore decided to cancel the 4 KB version (also because the user would be left with barely of RAM).

Commodore was the first company to license Microsoft&#x27;s 6502 BASIC, but the agreement nearly drove Microsoft into receivership as Commodore stipulated that they would only pay for it when the PET began shipping.

This was delayed by over six months, during which Microsoft lost money and had their cash reserves further depleted by a lawsuit over ownership of Altair BASIC. At the end of the year, Microsoft was saved by Apple&#x27;s decision to license Microsoft BASIC for the Apple II line.

The BASIC included on the original PET 2001 was known as Commodore BASIC 1.0; Microsoft supplied Commodore with a source listing for their 6502 BASIC, essentially a port of BASIC-80, and Commodore performed the rest of the work themselves, including changing the startup screen and prompts, adding I/O support, the SYS command for invoking machine language programs, and fixing bugs. BASIC 1.0 still had numerous bugs and IEEE-488 support was broken, so that when Commodore later came out with disk drives, they could not be used from BASIC (although the kernel routines supported them), and only supported 256 array elements. The PEEK function would not work on memory locations above 49152 so as to prevent the user from viewing the copyrighted code in the system ROMs.

Aside from the 8K BASIC ROM, the PET also included a 4K character ROM and an 8K kernal ROM. The first half of the kernal contained screen editor functions (the screen editor on 80 column PETs differed from 40-column models) with the second half containing a number of function calls for tasks such as inputting and outputting data to and from different I/O devices, reading the keyboard, and positioning the cursor. In addition, the kernal ROM received system interrupts and scanned the keyboard. The kernel, an idea of John Feagans, was the first personal computer OS ROM to be a distinct entity from BASIC. The character ROM was 4K in size, containing four different 128 character tables, the uppercase/graphics character set and upper/lowercase character set, plus reverse video versions of both. This included a number of graphics characters for creating pseudographics on the screen as well as playing card symbols (reportedly because Jack Tramiel&#x27;s sons wanted to play card games on the computer). On the original PET 2001, the uppercase/graphics character set and upper/lowercase character set were reversed compared to how they would be on later machines; PET owners who upgraded their machines to the BASIC 2.0 ROMs often also swapped out the character ROMs for the newer version.

Although the machine was moderately successful, there were frequent complaints about the tiny calculator-like keyboard, often referred to as a &quot;chiclet keyboard&quot; because the keys resembled the chewing gum it was named after. The key tops also tended to rub off easily. Reliability was fairly poor, although that was common in many early microcomputers. Because of the poor keyboard on the PET, external replacement ones quickly appeared. The PET had somewhat of a competitive advantage over its Apple II and TRS-80 rivals as both were using relatively primitive integer BASICs for their first six months on the market while the PET had a full-featured BASIC with floating-point support, a sophisticated screen editor, and lowercase letters, the last being a feature that the two competing platforms would not have for a few years. On the other hand, Commodore were a year behind Apple and Tandy in making disk drives available for their computers.

In 1979, Commodore replaced the original PET 2001 with an improved model known as the 2001-N (the N was short for &quot;New&quot;). The new machine used a standard green-phosphor monitor in place of the white in the original 2001.

It now had a conventional, full-sized keyboard and no longer sported the built-in cassette recorder. The kernel ROM was upgraded to add support for Commodore&#x27;s newly introduced disk drive line.

It was offered in 8 KB, 16 KB, or 32 KB models as the 2001-N8, 2001-N16, and 2001-N32 (the 8 KB models were dropped soon after introduction). The 2001-N switched to using conventional DRAM instead of the 6550 (1kx4) SRAM in the original model. PET 2001-8Ns had eight 2108 (8kx1) DRAMs and 2001-16Ns used sixteen 2108s. The PET 4016 used eight 4116 (16kx1) chips. All 32K PETs used sixteen 4116 chips. Finally, Commodore added a machine-language monitor to the kernel ROM that could be accessed by jumping to any memory location with a BRK instruction. It did not include a built-in assembler and required the user to enter hexadecimal numbers for coding.

Commodore contacted Microsoft to upgrade BASIC for the new machines; this resulted in the soon-to-be-familiar BASIC 2.0 which removed the 256 element array limitation and had a rearranged zero page.

Most bugs were fixed and IEEE-488 support in BASIC was made to be functional. The PEEK function was unblocked for memory locations above 49152. BASIC 2.0 also included an easter egg that Bill Gates personally coded, which would cause &quot;MICROSOFT!&quot; to appear if the user typed WAIT 6502,x (x being the number of times to display the message); this was reportedly due to a dispute with Commodore over ownership of BASIC (years later, when Microsoft developed BASIC for the Amiga, one of their conditions was that Commodore credit the original authors of BASIC, so BASIC 7.0 on the Commodore 128 displayed a Microsoft copyright notice). This feature was present in all 30xx series PETs. Commodore executives were unhappy when they learned about it and it was removed from BASIC on all subsequent Commodore machines. Microsoft also remained sensitive about their copyrighted code and pressured Commodore to not release any BASIC code listings to the public, although user groups eventually made disassemblies of BASIC.

Sales of the newer machines were strong, and Commodore then introduced the models to Europe. However, Philips owned a competing trademark on the PET name, so these models were renamed. The result was the CBM 3000 series (&#x27;CBM&#x27; standing for Commodore Business Machines), which included the 3008, 3016 and 3032 models. Like the 2001-N-8, the 3008 was quickly dropped. Later PET 3000 series machines switched to the BASIC 4.0 ROMs.

===Education, business, and computer science===


In 1980, the 4000-series PETs were launched. These included the enhanced BASIC 4.0, which added commands for disk functions and significantly improved garbage cleanup. By this point, Commodore discovered that people were buying cheaper and models of the 3000-series and upgrading the RAM rather than paying extra for the model. Because of this, they punched out the memory sockets in the 4008 and 4016 to prevent that practice. The 4032 was a major success in schools, where its tough all-metal construction and all-in-one design made it better able to stand up to the rigors of classroom use. Just as important in this role was the PET&#x27;s otherwise underutilized IEEE-488 port. Used wisely, the port could be used as a simple local area network and allowed printers and disk drives (which were then very expensive) to be shared among all of the machines in the classroom. Unlike later Commodore machines, PETs had no kernel ROM functions for the IEEE-488 port and users had to write their own to use peripherals such as modems.

First year 4000-series PETs retained the same video hardware as the PET 2001/3000, but in 1981 this was replaced by the 12-inch screen and 6845-based hardware.

The PET&#x27;s simple, rugged design and completely enclosed components made it an early favorite in the North American education market. Schools preferred the 40-column models because the 40-column display&#x27;s larger characters vs. the 80xx PETs were easier for young children to read. Commodore manufactured a variation on the PET called &quot;Teacher&#x27;s PET&quot; these were relabeled 2001-series PETs which were donated by Commodore as part of a &quot;buy 2, get 1 free&quot; program offered to schools as part of a promotion/tax write-off scheme.

Two more machines were released in the PET series. The 8000 series included a new display chip which drove an 80×25 character screen, but this resulted in a number of software incompatibilities with programs designed for the 40 column screen, and it appears to have been unpopular as a result. Unlike the 30xx series, the 40xx and 80xx PETs came standard with a 1-channel speaker for sound generation.

2001/3000 and 4000-series PETs used what became known as the &quot;graphics keyboard&quot;. Numbers were exclusively on the numeric keypad and the row above the alphabet keys had only punctuation symbols. The 3032 and 4032 were produced in two special variants known as the B models with the so-called &quot;business keyboard&quot;, which had a conventional layout with mathematical symbols and numbers above the alphabet keys. The keypad contained only numerals. On the other hand, all 8000-series PETs sported the business layout.

Entering graphics symbols on PETs with the business keyboard proved something of a challenge since they could not be directly typed out and usually it was necessary to display them indirectly via a CHR$ function.

The 4000/8000 PETs were more explicitly targeted at professional/business use than the 2001/3000. Business customers were the main target for the features of the enhanced BASIC 4.0, and a good selection of prepackaged business software was available. A large line of 5.25-inch and 8-inch floppy drives were made for the PET family, and even 5 and 7 MB external hard disks. While they became fairly popular for business use in Europe, they failed to make much impact on the US market in part because the 6502-based PETs could not run CP/M, which had become the standard for business software. In addition, the PET&#x27;s of memory was a disadvantage against the Apple II and TRS-80, both of which could accommodate . The 8000-series PETs had a motherboard connector for a daughterboard that added an additional 64K of RAM for 96K total; this was a standard feature on the 8096. A register at is used to set the RAM configuration. The extra RAM is banked in four 16K blocks, the first two blocks are switched into – and the second two in –. Normally, banking in the expansion RAM will swap out the video RAM, I/O registers, and system ROMs, so interrupts must be turned off first, but it is also possible to set the video RAM and I/O registers to &quot;peek&quot; through. Regardless, switching the OS ROMs out will require the user to either have interrupts disabled or supply their own interrupt handler. The expansion RAM cannot be seen by BASIC and machines equipped with the RAM board will still report the standard 31,743 bytes free on power up. A relatively small amount of software could utilize it.

As noted above, 8000-series PETs (and later 4000s) used larger monitors and a different video controller than the 2001/3000 models. This created a notorious compatibility problem known as the killer poke. On 2001/3000 PETs, there was a register which when enabled did not allow reading/writing of the video RAM except during the vertical blanking in order to prevent snow on the screen, caused by the CPU and video controller trying to access the VRAM at the same time. This feature was used because of the extremely slow 6550 SRAMs in the PET 2001, although it ceased to be a problem on 3000-series PETs since they used faster 2114 SRAMs for the video memory instead. Ordinarily, this feature was enabled on power-up. If the user did not mind snow, they could turn it off and get faster text output. BASIC programs and some machine-language software commonly did this for performance reasons. PETs with 12-inch displays (all 8000s and later 4000s) used a video controller based on the Motorola 6845 CRTC chip (unlike the TTL logic circuit in 2001/3000s/early 4000s) that eliminated the snow problem, but also placed a CRT control register in place of where the VBLANK flag had been on the 2001/3000. BASIC programs intended for the 2001/3000 thus had to be modified in order to run safely on 12-inch PETs. Later machines had modified video circuitry to prevent killer poke damage; a TDA 1170 chip was used in place of the original analog circuit so that if no sync went to the monitor, it would merely be shut off rather than send spurious signals.

The PET 2001 and 2001-8N had a register that would disable the video output; this was also used as output for the IEEE-488 interface, so screen flicker would occur during disk drive or printer use. It also became a popular method of producing explosion effects in games, but because the screen flickered while using the IEEE-488 port, the 16K and 32K models had this feature removed.

The last in the series was the SP9000, known as the SuperPET or MicroMainframe. This machine was designed at the University of Waterloo for teaching programming. In addition to the basic CBM 8000 hardware, the 9000 added a second CPU in the form of the Motorola 6809, more RAM and included a number of programming languages including a BASIC in ROM for the 6502 and a separate ANSI Minimal BASIC-compatible BASIC for the 6809, along with APL, COBOL, FORTRAN, Pascal and a 6809 assembler on floppies. It also included microEDITOR, a text editor for use in writing and maintaining programs for any of the 6809 languages. Also included was a terminal program which allowed the machine to be used as a &quot;smart terminal&quot; as well, so this single machine could replace many of the boxes currently in use at the university. Additionally this machine became a remote development environment where the user could later upload their creation to a mainframe after completing development and testing on the SuperPET.

In 1982, Commodore retired the PET line with the intention of replacing it with the B-series machines; however, they were a marketplace flop and also very expensive to manufacture. Because Commodore still had a strong business software market in Europe, the 80xx series PET was revived during 1984 in a new molded plastic case with a swivel monitor. Four models were offered, the 8032SK, 8096SK, and the new 8296 and 8296-D. The 8296 models had 128K of memory (96K on the expansion memory board) and the 8296-D had two internal half-height 8250 drives. In addition, the 8296 came bundled with an office suite on disk and the system ROMs included a menu program to launch each of its four applications. Early units contained leftover 8032/96 PCBs in order to get rid of remaining stock; after these were used up, Commodore equipped the machines with a new PCB that replaced the old triple-voltage 4116 DRAMs with more modern types.

The 8296 had a completely redesigned motherboard and handled expansion RAM in a different fashion than the 8096. While on the 8096, the expansion RAM cannot be accessed at all without switching out the OS ROMs and video RAM, the 8296 has a setup closer to that of the Commodore 64 where writing to the memory locations with the OS ROMs accesses the RAM underneath, but reading from those locations will read back the ROMs instead.

The 8296 also differs from the 8096 in that it has jumpers on the PCB to select the power-on memory configuration for -. The factory default configuration was to have the I/O registers, video RAM, and ROMs occupying –. When operating from BASIC, the machine would be nearly indistinguishable from an 8032. By setting the jumpers, one could swap out any 8K region of upper memory for RAM, and it was even possible to have everything switched out and convert the entire – to RAM, although such a machine would be useless with no I/O or system ROMs accessible. Like with the 8096, the user could also manipulate the register at to control which RAM banks occupied upper memory. The 8296&#x27;s RAM is banked in 16K chunks like the 8096, although since it has 128K, there are six possible banks instead of four, three that can go into – and three that can go into –, and like with the 8096, the video RAM and I/O registers can be set to &quot;peek&quot; through.

The motherboard also sported &quot;user&quot; jumpers which &quot;connected&quot; the RAM banking to the user port, these required soldering to enable. If connected, the user port could be used to adjust the upper memory configuration via software.

The IEEE-488–based PET disk drive line was also updated; the large, heavy metal-cased drives were replaced by smaller units in 1541 cases; they looked almost identical to a 1541 drive except for the back sporting an IEEE-488 connector instead of the two IEC DIN connectors. Of the previously extensive PET disk drive line, the only drives that returned were the 2031-LP and SFD-1001 (basically a 2040 and an 8250 repackaged in a 1541-style case with half-height drive mechanisms). The resurrected PET was sold through 1986 and then finally retired for good, having been superseded by the Commodore 128, 1571, and 1581.

Although not officially a member of the PET series, in 1983 Commodore packaged C64 motherboards in plastic cases similar to the PET 4000-series in order to create the Educator 64. This was an attempt to retake some of the education market they had largely lost by then to the Apple IIe.

===Graphics display===
In the home computer market, the PET line was soon outsold by machines that supported high-resolution color graphics and sound, mainly the Apple II (which shipped in June 1977), Atari 400/800 (1979), and, in particular, Commodore&#x27;s own bestselling VIC-20 (1980/81). Commodore released a &quot;High Resolution Graphic&quot; board for the PET using the Thomson EF936x graphics chip with a resolution of 512×512 pixels. In addition, the Apple II, TRS-80 Model I, and Atari 400 (via 3rd party expansions)/800 could all be expanded to a maximum of 48 KB of RAM while the PET was limited to 32 KB.

Without the &quot;High Resolution Graphic&quot; board, the PET&#x27;s graphics capabilities were limited to a character set hardwired in ROM, similar to the Apple II in text mode. On many of the PET range&#x27;s home computer rivals, the look-up address of the character graphics could be changed and pointed to RAM, where new characters could be defined by a programmer to create custom graphics shapes. From a programming point of view, this was a relatively simple method of producing good-looking graphics, which used negligibly more RAM than a standard character display, and significantly less RAM than bitmap graphics. The PET&#x27;s lack of a remappable character set is a major weakness in the machine&#x27;s design.

Somewhat offsetting this drawback, the PET&#x27;s ROM-restricted character set an ASCII-1963 deviation known as PETSCII was one of the most varied and flexible of the era. It allowed PET games with rudimentary graphics to be created, exemplified by clones of video games such as &quot;Space Invaders&quot; and &quot;Lunar Lander&quot;. The PETSCII character set was even flexible enough to allow for the creation of simple 3D games such as &quot;Labyrinth&quot;. This flexibility was achieved by the use of two switchable character sets, allowing the choice of either mixed-case characters, or uppercase with graphics; either could also be displayed as a reverse field, negative image. For specialized applications, alternative character sets could be programmed into an EPROM inserted in the character set ROM socket. Alternative character set EPROMs with diacritics and mathematical symbols were available in the aftermarket. A 2001-8B model with katakana keyboard and character set was sold in Japan.

In 2012, Commodore enthusiast Steve Gray began a project to convert the Commodore PET to colour. This involves upgrading a 4032 machine or downgrading an 8032 machine. The result is 16 colours for foreground and background, The colour RAM is located at $8800 which is not used in regular PET machines. Colour PET emulation is available in the newer versions of the Vice Emulator software.

Other than a PC speaker-class beeper, PETs did not have sound hardware (except for the 8000 models), but it was possible to rig a circuit (attributed to Hal Chamberlin) up to the 6522 &quot;user&quot; port that could be used to output square wave tones to an external amplifier, and some games supported this feature.

The PET had two empty sockets on the motherboard for adding expansion ROMs, which could be a total of 8K in size. A predecessor to the cartridge slots on later Commodore machines, they allowed various software add-ons such as machine language monitors. In addition, it was common for commercial programs to include a copy protection ROM that had to be installed prior to running the application; something of an inconvenience to users owning multiple applications protected in this way, as the chips would have to be swapped in order to run their respective programs.

==Model summary==
===Peripherals===

:Commodore 2031 single disk drive ( single-sided 5.25-inch format)
:Commodore 2040/3040 dual disk drives The initial dual floppy disk drive units. 2040 (U.S.), 3040 (Europe). ( single-sided 5.25-inch format)
:Commodore 4022 dot matrix printer, tractor feed, with Epson mechanicals.
:Commodore 4023 dot matrix printer, tractor feed, with Epson mechanicals.
:Commodore 4040 dual disk drive replacing the 2040 and 3040 models; used same disk format as the 2031 and could be used as a stand-alone disk copier
:Commodore 8024 132 column printer, friction or traction gear, with Mannesmann Tally mechanicals
:Commodore 8028 daisy wheel printer, 40 chars/s, friction or traction gear, with Robotron mechanicals
:Commodore 8050 dual disk drive ( single-sided 5.25-inch format)
:Commodore 8075 plotter, with Watanabe mechanicals
:Commodore 8060 single 8-inch disk drive (single-sided 800K format, also supports IBM 3740 disks)
:Commodore 8061 dual 8-inch disk drive (single-sided 800K format, also supports IBM 3740 disks)
:Commodore 8062 dual 8-inch disk drive (double-sided 1.6MB format, also supports IBM 3740 disks)
:Commodore 8250 &quot;quad density&quot; dual disk drive ( capacity, same as the 8050, but double-sided)
:Commodore 8280 dual disk drive (8-inch) ( MFM format)
:Commodore 9060 hard drive (5 MB)
:Commodore 9090 hard drive (7.5 MB)
:Commodore SFD-1001 &quot;quad density&quot; single disk drive (basically a single-drive 8250 model)

The original lineup of disk drives for the PET were the single-unit 2031 and dual-unit 2040, 3040. Then followed the 4040, 8050, and 8250. Later (near the end of the PET&#x27;s lifespan), single-unit 2031 and SFD-1001 drives were produced that used the same case as the 1540/1541, but sported the PET&#x27;s parallel interface instead of the VIC-20/C64 IEC serial interface. The 4040/2031 used the same format as the 1541 and is read compatible (although software that performs low-level drive access will not work, and a one byte sector–header size difference makes the formats write-incompatible). 8050 and 8250 drives had an incompatible higher density / format, but were popular well into the 1980s as server/BBS storage devices because of their large capacity.

In addition, Commodore had 8-inch 8060, 8061, 8062, and 8280 drives which used MFM encoding instead of the GCR used on their other disk drives and was mainly intended to allow PET users to read disks written on IBM mainframes/minicomputers. and hard disks were produced as well. They have no sub-directory support and are treated as simply a larger floppy disk.

All PET peripherals will work on VIC-20/C64/Plus-4/C128 machines with an IEEE-488 parallel to IEC serial adapter (reverse IEC serial to IEEE-488 parallel adapters were also made), and as mentioned above, using these adapters, 8050/8250 drives were sometimes used on C64s for BBS service because of their large capacity and faster interface.

An alternative option for adding floppy disk capability to the PET was the Computhink disk system. Although references to this system are hard to find today, it was nevertheless popular at the time, as it was both cheaper and considerably faster than the Commodore system and available from an earlier date. Unlike the Commodore units, it did not use the IEEE-488 interface, but instead required an extra circuit board to be installed inside the PET, connected to the PET&#x27;s expansion connector, which used a Western Digital floppy controller chip to provide a standard Shugart interface. The board also held extra RAM for use as a disk transfer buffer, and ROM containing the disk operating software. This software was not compatible with Commodore standards and was somewhat awkward to use. Before using the disk system, it had to be initialized manually by issuing the command SYS45056. This made available a set of &quot;pseudo-BASIC&quot; commands for performing disk operations, which bore little or no resemblance to the standard Commodore commands for the same operations and in addition had to be prefixed with $, thus breaking the rules of BASIC syntax. It had a severe limitation in that it was only possible to have one file open at a time, which made many common tasks difficult and slow, though the direct interface to the motherboard made data transfer significantly faster than the CBM units using the IEEE-488 bus. The additional code hooked into the BASIC interpreter could slow the execution of BASIC programs by 20–30%, and it would break with programs which used the standard POKE to disable user STOPs. Nevertheless, it was still regarded as a useful system and as a great improvement over cassette storage.

==Reception==
&quot;ETI Canada&quot; wrote that the Commodore PET was revolutionary in helping to bring personal computers to widespread use, noting the company&#x27;s marketing and its targeting of inexperienced computer users with the computer&#x27;s simple design. Dan Fylstra of &quot;Byte&quot; magazine received one of the initial PETs in October 1977, S/N 16, and reported on the computer in the March 1978 issue. Fylstra praised its full-featured BASIC, lowercase letters, and reliable cassette system, while disapproving of the keyboard. His machine had three faulty RAM chips and after some difficulty contacting Commodore, was mailed a set of replacement chips and installation instructions by John Feagans. Fylstra described the PET 2001 as a versatile &quot;appliance&quot; computer most suitable for casual users and computer hobbyists, calling it a &quot;strong contender&quot; in the personal computer market. &quot;Creative Computing&quot; praised its portability, reliability, and ease of use. While it criticized the efficiency of its cassette recorder and the initial lack of adequate documentation, it considered the PET to be the best computer for a classroom.

==See also==
* PETSCII
* PET Transfer Protocol (PTP)
* List of Commodore PET games

==References==
;Notes
;Bibliography
* Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: 


==External links==

*PET index
*PET killer poke discussion
*Commodore&#x27;s version of the history
*Detailed discussion of PET 2001, with photos of exterior and interior
*Universal Videogame List – Commodore PET Game List
*Bo Zimmermann&#x27;s pictures of CBM machines from his collection
*A tribute to Jack Tramiel&#x27;s contribution
*Video Commodore PET 2001-8C Retro Computer museum, Zatec, Czech Republic
*Colour-PET Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="4" end="17" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="31" end="48" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="79" end="102" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore International"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="140" end="159" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="160" end="174" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q337272" start="176" end="191" title="Commodore BASIC" label="Commodore BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="195" end="211" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q510176" start="267" end="280" title="cassette deck" label="cassette deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="423" end="448" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q475456" start="522" end="530" title="Pet Rock" label="Pet Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q747509" start="534" end="543" title="Los Gatos, California" label="Los Gatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="617" end="626" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="632" end="662" title="Commodore PET" label="Personal Electronic Transactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="695" end="699" title="Byte (magazine)" label="Byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017175" start="765" end="773" title="Apple II (1977 computer)" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="778" end="784" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="1355" end="1372" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="1431" end="1452" title="Vertical integration" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="1482" end="1486" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="2081" end="2084" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q852174" start="2251" end="2265" title="MOS Technology" label="MOS Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="2389" end="2393" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089191" start="2485" end="2497" title="Chuck Peddle" label="Chuck Peddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151863" start="2505" end="2510" title="KIM-1" label="KIM-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q380363" start="2694" end="2706" title="Jack Tramiel" label="Jack Tramiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="2789" end="2802" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="2934" end="2944" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="2949" end="2962" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017175" start="2970" end="2978" title="Apple II (1977 computer)" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q646089" start="3257" end="3282" title="Consumer Electronics Show" label="Consumer Electronics Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022979" start="3442" end="3449" title="PETSCII" label="PETSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="3842" end="3845" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="3869" end="3890" title="single-board computer" label="single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133650" start="3936" end="3954" title="monochrome monitor" label="monochrome monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="3994" end="4005" title="sheet metal" label="sheet metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383811" start="4075" end="4091" title="office equipment" label="office equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q767429" start="4131" end="4140" title="Commodore Datasette" label="Datasette"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="4282" end="4286" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135192" start="4652" end="4660" title="IEEE-488" label="IEEE-488"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="4684" end="4698" title="Daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy-chaining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="5249" end="5258" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594302" start="5324" end="5336" title="receivership" label="receivership"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="5818" end="5832" title="source code" label="source listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="5869" end="5873" title="Porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="6002" end="6005" title="Input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037347" start="6019" end="6022" title="SYS (command)" label="SYS"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="6044" end="6060" title="Machine code" label="machine language"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042942" start="6082" end="6086" title="Bug (engineering)" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q121079" start="6315" end="6320" title="Array (data type)" label="array"/>
<link wikidata="Q382691" start="6335" end="6339" title="PEEK and POKE" label="PEEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="6470" end="6474" title="Read-only memory" label="ROMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362489" start="6557" end="6563" title="KERNAL" label="kernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937822" start="7336" end="7350" title="pseudographics" label="pseudographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737082" start="7922" end="7938" title="chiclet keyboard" label="chiclet keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="8291" end="8297" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q588806" start="8345" end="8358" title="integer BASIC" label="integer BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="8446" end="8468" title="floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point support"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="8902" end="8910" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="9076" end="9079" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="9348" end="9352" title="dynamic random access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="9380" end="9384" title="static random-access memory" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="9592" end="9616" title="machine code monitor" label="machine-language monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056666" start="9699" end="9702" title="Interrupts in 65xx processors" label="BRK"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9746" end="9755" title="Assembly language#Assembler" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="9787" end="9798" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191975" start="10008" end="10017" title="zero page" label="zero page"/>
<link wikidata="Q330574" start="10191" end="10201" title="easter egg (media)" label="easter egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="10207" end="10217" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="10500" end="10505" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115919" start="10608" end="10621" title="Commodore 128" label="Commodore 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="11173" end="11182" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521979" start="11686" end="11693" title="Garbage (computer science)" label="garbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="12266" end="12284" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551716" start="13267" end="13280" title="tax write-off" label="tax write-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554305" start="13457" end="13483" title="software incompatibility" label="software incompatibilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q199306" start="13817" end="13831" title="numeric keypad" label="numeric keypad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="14802" end="14811" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="14974" end="14978" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15212" end="15225" title="Expansion card#Daughterboard" label="daughterboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351510" start="15320" end="15328" title="Hardware register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407569" start="16240" end="16251" title="killer poke" label="killer poke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210247" start="16415" end="16419" title="Noise (video)" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541597" start="16495" end="16499" title="video random-access memory" label="VRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708459" start="17034" end="17047" title="Motorola 6845" label="Motorola 6845"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="17070" end="17073" title="Transistor–transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q626978" start="17210" end="17216" title="Vertical blanking interval" label="VBLANK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407569" start="17410" end="17421" title="killer poke" label="killer poke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="18097" end="18119" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="18214" end="18217" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545600" start="18237" end="18250" title="Motorola 6809" label="Motorola 6809"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="18257" end="18260" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="18329" end="18332" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="18422" end="18425" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="18427" end="18432" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="18434" end="18441" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="18443" end="18449" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="18516" end="18527" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071233" start="18623" end="18631" title="Terminal emulator" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="18929" end="18938" title="Mainframe computer" label="mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="19739" end="19743" title="printed circuit board" label="PCBs"/>
<link wikidata="Q872157" start="20413" end="20420" title="Jumper (computing)" label="jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756973" start="21699" end="21703" title="Commodore 1541" label="1541"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="21826" end="21829" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="21830" end="21843" title="DIN connector" label="DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115919" start="22160" end="22173" title="Commodore 128" label="Commodore 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q337265" start="22175" end="22179" title="Commodore 1571" label="1571"/>
<link wikidata="Q337278" start="22185" end="22189" title="Commodore 1581" label="1581"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="22271" end="22274" title="Commodore 64" label="C64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318886" start="22359" end="22370" title="Educator 64" label="Educator 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761667" start="22468" end="22477" title="Apple IIe" label="Apple IIe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="22642" end="22650" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="22681" end="22694" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 400/800"/>
<link wikidata="Q918232" start="22756" end="22762" title="VIC-20" label="VIC-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795866" start="22859" end="22873" title="Thomson EF936x" label="Thomson EF936x"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="22952" end="22966" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80 Model I"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="23211" end="23224" title="character set" label="character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q676838" start="23225" end="23234" title="Hardwired control" label="hardwired"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="23238" end="23241" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="23413" end="23416" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022979" start="23940" end="23947" title="PETSCII" label="PETSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220665" start="24113" end="24127" title="Space Invaders" label="Space Invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590391" start="24144" end="24156" title="Lunar Lander (1979 video game)" label="Lunar Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="24251" end="24253" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="24599" end="24604" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="24685" end="24694" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180159" start="24700" end="24720" title="mathematical symbols" label="mathematical symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365607" start="25236" end="25246" title="PC speaker" label="PC speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q63993618" start="25376" end="25390" title="Hal Chamberlin" label="Hal Chamberlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15738686" start="25859" end="25874" title="copy protection" label="copy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684818" start="26149" end="26163" title="Commodore 2031" label="Commodore 2031"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="26372" end="26390" title="dot matrix printer" label="dot matrix printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340619" start="26392" end="26404" title="tractor feed" label="tractor feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q159614" start="26411" end="26416" title="Epson" label="Epson"/>
<link wikidata="Q477804" start="26505" end="26519" title="Commodore 4040" label="Commodore 4040"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390584" start="26721" end="26737" title="Mannesmann Tally" label="Mannesmann Tally"/>
<link wikidata="Q694537" start="26831" end="26839" title="Kombinat Robotron" label="Robotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684820" start="26853" end="26867" title="Commodore 8050" label="Commodore 8050"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597346" start="26947" end="26955" title="Graphtec Corporation" label="Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865737" start="26969" end="26983" title="Commodore 8060" label="Commodore 8060"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865737" start="27067" end="27081" title="Commodore 8061" label="Commodore 8061"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865737" start="27163" end="27177" title="Commodore 8062" label="Commodore 8062"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684820" start="27260" end="27274" title="Commodore 8250" label="Commodore 8250"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153204" start="27365" end="27379" title="Commodore 8280" label="Commodore 8280"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942166" start="27407" end="27410" title="Modified frequency modulation" label="MFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950541" start="27420" end="27434" title="Commodore D9060" label="Commodore 9060"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950541" start="27454" end="27468" title="Commodore D9060" label="Commodore 9090"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684820" start="27490" end="27508" title="Commodore SFD-1001" label="Commodore SFD-1001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022978" start="27944" end="27954" title="Commodore bus" label="IEC serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756973" start="28008" end="28012" title="Commodore 1541" label="1541"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="28304" end="28307" title="Bulletin board system" label="BBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942166" start="28437" end="28440" title="modified frequency modulation" label="MFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q337290" start="28465" end="28468" title="group coded recording" label="GCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="28584" end="28596" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201456" start="28650" end="28663" title="Directory (computing)" label="sub-directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="28996" end="28999" title="bulletin board system" label="BBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="29576" end="29591" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504672" start="29637" end="29644" title="Shugart bus" label="Shugart"/>
<link wikidata="Q375176" start="29699" end="29719" title="disk buffer" label="disk transfer buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358486" start="30818" end="30828" title="Electronics Today International" label="ETI Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213533" start="31066" end="31077" title="Dan Fylstra" label="Dan Fylstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="31087" end="31091" title="Byte (magazine)" label="Byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="31253" end="31258" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139353" start="31730" end="31748" title="Creative Computing (magazine)" label="Creative Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022979" start="31997" end="32004" title="PETSCII" label="PETSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260587" start="32007" end="32034" title="Punter (protocol)" label="PET Transfer Protocol (PTP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83544145" start="32037" end="32064" title="List of Commodore PET games" label="List of Commodore PET games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87276" wikidata="Q1266971" url="?curid=87276" title="Thoughtcrime">
<text>In the dystopian novel &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, thoughtcrime is the offense of thinking in ways not approved by the ruling Ingsoc party. In the official language of Newspeak, the word crimethink describes the intellectual actions of a person who entertains and holds politically unacceptable thoughts; thus the government of The Party controls the speech, the actions, and the thoughts of the citizens of Oceania.

In contemporary English usage, the word &quot;thoughtcrime&quot; describes the personal beliefs that are contrary to the accepted norms of society; thus thoughtcrime describes the theological practices of disbelief and idolatry, and the rejection of an ideology.

==Thought control==

In the story of &quot;Nineteen Eighty-Four&quot;, the &quot;Thinkpol&quot; (Thought Police) are responsible for the detection and elimination of thoughtcrime, and for the social control of the populations of Oceania, by way of audio-visual surveillance and offender profiling. Such psychological monitoring allows the Thought Police to detect, arrest, and kill thought criminals, citizens whose independence (intellectual, mental, and moral) challenges the political orthodoxy of Ingsoc (English Socialism) and thus the legitimate government authority of the Party. In the detection of thoughtcrime—and to overcome the physical impossibility of simultaneously policing every citizen of Oceania—the Thinkpol spy upon the populace through ubiquitous two-way telescreens, and so can monitor any person&#x27;s body language, reflexive speech, and facial expressions:

The universal, physical presence of the telescreen, in public and in private spaces, exerted psychological pressure upon each citizen of Oceania to presume that they were under constant Thinkpol surveillance, and thus in danger of detection and arrest as a thought criminal; thus, whenever near a telescreen, Winston Smith was always mindful of that possibility: &quot;If you made unexpected movements, they yelled at you from the telescreen.&quot; Such surveillance methods allowed the Thinkpol and the Ministry of Love (Miniluv) to become universally feared by the citizens of Oceania, especially by the members of the Outer Party, which includes Winston Smith.

===Crimestop===

In the Newspeak vocabulary, the word crimestop denotes the citizen&#x27;s instinctive desire to rid himself of unwanted, incorrect thoughts (personal and political), the discovery of which, by the Thinkpol, would lead to detection and arrest, transport to and interrogation at Miniluv (Ministry of Love). The protagonist, Winston Smith, describes crimestop as a conscious process of self-imposed cognitive dissonance:

Moreover, from the perspective of Oceania&#x27;s principal enemy of the state, in the history book &quot;The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism&quot;, Emmanuel Goldstein said that:
==In real life==
Various groups such as human rights organizations, journalists and activists have likened the Iranian regime, along with the IRIB and IRGC, to an Orwellian government. This sentiment is due to reports of the Iranian government distributing death sentences for the crime of &quot;advertising against the holy system&quot;. “Zabane eghelab”, an Iranian phrase that translates to “tongue of revolution”, is used to describe the rhetoric used by the government to maintain ideological dominance over the population and is often compared to newspeak.

== See also ==
* Censorship
* Freedom of thought
* Internal sin
* Mens rea
* Pre-crime
* Secret police
* Thou shalt not covet
* Thought Police
* Victimless crime
* Hate speech

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="29" end="49" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266971" start="57" end="69" title="Thoughtcrime" label="thoughtcrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752002" start="132" end="138" title="Ingsoc" label="Ingsoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q654101" start="174" end="182" title="Newspeak" label="Newspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266971" start="193" end="203" title="Thoughtcrime" label="crimethink"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="643" end="651" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="677" end="685" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752002" start="917" end="924" title="Oceania (Nineteen Eighty-Four)" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="936" end="961" title="Surveillance" label="audio-visual surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191309" start="966" end="984" title="offender profiling" label="offender profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q14752002" start="1197" end="1214" title="Ingsoc" label="English Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="1229" end="1239" title="Legitimacy (political)" label="legitimate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1264" end="1273" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four#The Party" label="the Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264664" start="1465" end="1475" title="telescreen" label="telescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q477298" start="1515" end="1528" title="body language" label="body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q654101" start="2262" end="2270" title="Newspeak" label="Newspeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11428966" start="2577" end="2590" title="Winston Smith (Nineteen Eighty-Four)" label="Winston Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q209722" start="2651" end="2671" title="cognitive dissonance" label="cognitive dissonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274360" start="2779" end="2831" title="The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism" label="The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16052369" start="2980" end="2994" title="Government of Iran" label="Iranian regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674127" start="3011" end="3015" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting" label="IRIB"/>
<link wikidata="Q271110" start="3020" end="3024" title="Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps" label="IRGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="3450" end="3460" title="Censorship" label="Censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="3463" end="3481" title="Freedom of thought" label="Freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005745" start="3484" end="3496" title="Internal sin" label="Internal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048403" start="3499" end="3507" title="Mens rea" label="Mens rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239583" start="3510" end="3519" title="Pre-crime" label="Pre-crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="3522" end="3535" title="Secret police" label="Secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408583" start="3538" end="3558" title="Thou shalt not covet" label="Thou shalt not covet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264653" start="3561" end="3575" title="Thought Police" label="Thought Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026760" start="3578" end="3594" title="Victimless crime" label="Victimless crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="3597" end="3608" title="Hate speech" label="Hate speech"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87277" wikidata="Q3356280" url="?curid=87277" title="Gunnar Hámundarson">
<text>Gunnar Hámundarson () was a 10th-century Icelandic chieftain. He lived in Hlíðarendi in Fljótshlíð and is probably better known as Gunnar of Hlíðarendi (). He features prominently in the first half of Njáls saga, which tells of the chain of events ultimately leading to his death in battle.

He was married to Hallgerðr Höskuldsdóttir of Höskuldsstaðir in Laxárdal in Dalasýsla, who was known as Hallgerðr langbrók (&quot;Hallgerður longpants&quot;). He was her third husband. It was said that she had killed both her former husbands, but she had in fact only killed the first. Their marriage was considered imprudent by Gunnar&#x27;s friend Njáll Þorgeirsson, because it was caused by lust and not practicality.

== Gunnar the hero ==

Gunnar was a god-like warrior — he is described as nearly invincible in combat. According to Njáls saga, he was a powerful, athletic man &quot;capable of jumping his own height in full body armour, both back and front&quot;. He was a skilled archer, and in close combat his weapon of choice was the &quot;atgeir&quot;, which scholars consider to have been a halberd or glaive of some sort. He was said to have taken this famed weapon in battle from a man named Hallgrímur, while on a Viking raid to the island of Eysýsla (Saaremaa in present-day Estonia - see detailed account on that page).

Gunnar was also a skilful stone-thrower, able to hit enemies between the eyes from meters away, and an excellent swimmer. There was supposedly no game at which he had an equal. He was said to enjoy the features of life, being a drinker. His behaviour was always polite, but firm — he gave good advice, and was kind and mild, yet he was not thought of as an intelligent man because of his way of talking. However, Gunnar&#x27;s wise insights and deep understanding strongly suggested that he was as smart as he was handsome. He was loyal to his friends and kept good company. Gunnar has been called &quot;handsome and beautiful of skin and had a straight nose, turned up at its tip. He was blue-eyed and keen-eyed and ruddy-cheeked with thick lustrous hair, blond and well-combed.&quot; He was described as the most beautiful man in the world, and as having no equal.

== Gunnar&#x27;s death ==

Gunnar was a close friend of Njáll Þorgeirsson of Bergþórshvol and came to him often for advice. Njáll told him not to kill two men of the same family — this would lead to his death. Njáll&#x27;s prediction proved right. When Gunnar killed two family members of Gissur the White, the family sought vengeance and the men set out to Hlíðarendi to do murder. Njáll advised Gunnar to leave Iceland and head abroad to escape them. Initially, Gunnar intended to depart, but when he saw his homestead from the distance, he was so moved by the beauty of it that he changed his mind and decided to remain behind. This led to the epic battle in which Gunnar was killed.

When Þorgrim and a few other grudge-bearing men were scouting around Gunnar&#x27;s house, Gunnar woke up and stabbed Þorgrim through a gap with his atgeir. Þorgrim returned calmly to his comrades, who asked if Gunnar was home. “Find that out for yourselves, but I am sure of, that his atgeir is home,” he said, and then fell down dead.

At first, Gunnar managed to fight off his numerous attackers with his masterful archery. When his bowstring broke in close quarters combat, he asked his wife Hallgerður for hair from her head to mend the bow. Gunnar had slapped her previously, when he discovered his wife had stolen food from a nearby farm during a famine, and she vindictively refused. He was thus forced to confront his attackers in hand-to-hand combat and was killed as a result.

==See also==
*Gunther

==References==
== External links ==
* Full text of &quot;Njáls saga&quot; with English translation
* Pictures of Hlíðarendi in Iceland
* Þorleifur Hauksson reads &quot;Gunnarshólmi.&quot; 5:06; 3.3Mb
* Njál&#x27;s saga
* Gunnarr Hámundarson Poetry attributed to Gunnar in &quot;Njáls saga&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3356280" start="0" end="18" title="Gunnar Hámundarson" label="Gunnar Hámundarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="41" end="48" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501813" start="51" end="60" title="Gothi" label="chieftain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480909" start="74" end="84" title="Hlíðarendi" label="Hlíðarendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429016" start="88" end="98" title="Fljótshlíð" label="Fljótshlíð"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356280" start="131" end="151" title="Gunnar Hámundarson" label="Gunnar of Hlíðarendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844119" start="201" end="211" title="Njáls saga" label="Njáls saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516384" start="310" end="334" title="Hallgerðr Höskuldsdóttir" label="Hallgerðr Höskuldsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q921840" start="368" end="377" title="Dalasýsla" label="Dalasýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642621" start="642" end="659" title="Njáll Þorgeirsson" label="Njáll Þorgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="979" end="985" title="Archery" label="archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813150" start="1042" end="1048" title="atgeir" label="atgeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="1095" end="1102" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080039" start="1106" end="1112" title="glaive" label="glaive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1221" end="1227" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="1250" end="1257" title="Eysýsla" label="Eysýsla"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="1259" end="1267" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="1283" end="1290" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642621" start="2254" end="2271" title="Njáll Þorgeirsson" label="Njáll Þorgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891759" start="2275" end="2287" title="Bergþórshvol" label="Bergþórshvol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813150" start="3034" end="3040" title="atgeir" label="atgeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813150" start="3171" end="3177" title="atgeir" label="atgeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="3688" end="3695" title="Gunther" label="Gunther"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87285" wikidata="Q1502974" url="?curid=87285" title="Regin">
<text>In Norse mythology, Reginn (; often anglicized as Regin or Regan) is a son of Hreiðmarr and the foster father of Sigurð. His brothers are Fáfnir and Ótr.

== Attestations ==
===Völsunga saga===
When Loki mistakenly kills Ótr, Hreiðmarr demands to be repaid with the amount of gold it takes to fill Ótr&#x27;s skin and cover the outside. Loki takes this gold from the dwarf Andvari, who curses it and especially the ring Andvaranaut. Fáfnir kills his father for this gold, but eventually becomes a greedy worm or dragon. Reginn gets none of the gold, but he becomes smith to the king and foster father to Sigurð, teaching him many languages as well as sports, chess, and runes.

Reginn had all wisdom and deftness of hand. Of his two brothers, he has the ability to work iron as well as silver and gold and he makes many beautiful and useful things. While Sigurð is living with Reginn, Reginn challenges Sigurð&#x27;s respect in the kingdom. He tells Sigurð to ask for a horse. Sigurð asks the advice of an old man in the forest, and the old man shows him how to get a horse that is descended from Sleipnir, the eight-legged horse of Odin. Reginn continues to goad Sigurð, this time into killing Reginn&#x27;s brother Fáfnir. He offers to make a sword for Sigurð, but Sigurð broke every sword Reginn forged for him by striking at an anvil. Sigurð retrieves the broken pieces of his father Sigmund&#x27;s sword, Gram, and brings them to Reginn. Reginn repairs the sword and gives it back to Sigurð. When Sigurð again tests the blade by striking the anvil, the anvil this time is split down to its base, and when Sigurð places a piece of wool in a stream, the current pushing the wool against the sword was enough to cause the blade to cut it in two. Sigurð is finally very pleased with Reginn&#x27;s repaired weapon.

After using Gram to kill Fáfnir, Sigurð returns to ask Reginn what to do. Reginn instructs him to roast the heart of his brother, and let him eat it. As juice from the dragon&#x27;s heart foams out, Sigurð tests it with his finger to see if it is done cooking. As the blood touches his tongue, Sigurð understands the speech of birds, who warn him that Reginn intends to kill him. Before he lets any of this happen, Sigurð first wields Gram and cuts off Reginn&#x27;s head.

===Þiðreks saga===
The Norwegian &quot;Þiðreks saga&quot; relates a slightly different tale, with Reginn as the dragon and Mimir as his brother and foster father to Sigurð.

== Reginn the dwarf ==
In the 13th century&#x27;s &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; (Völuspá 12), the Dvergatal lists Reginn as a (dwarf).

Among the heroic lays of the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; (&quot;Reginsmál&quot;, aka &quot;Sigurðarkviða Fáfnisbana Önnur&quot;) says:
:Reginn the son of Hreiðmarr .. was the most skillful of men, and a Dvergr of size. He was wise, dark, and versed in magic.
:&quot;Reginn .. var hverjum manni hagari ok dvergr of vöxt. Hann var vitr, grimmr, ok fjölkunnigr.&quot;

The &quot;Prose Edda&quot; (&quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; 46) identifies the father of Reginn as Hreiðmarr, and his brothers Fáfnir and Ótr.

== Modern influence ==

In the operatic cycle &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot; by Richard Wagner, the role of Reginn is played by the Nibelung dwarf Mime, brother of Alberich (the Nibelung who forged the cursed ring out of the Rhinegold). Except for the change in name, probably inspired by the &quot;Þiðrekssaga&quot;, the story of Reginn, Sigurð, and Fáfnir in &quot;Siegfried&quot; follows closely the text of the Eddas. However, in this version Mime is unable to reforge the sword Nothung, since only one who does not know fear—such as Siegfried—can do so.

Reginn also appears as the main protagonist of Book V in Fire Emblem Heroes, albeit as a female dwarf as opposed to being male. She is voiced by Megan Shipman.

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="20" end="26" title="Regin" label="Reginn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="50" end="55" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="59" end="64" title="Regin" label="Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="78" end="87" title="Hreiðmarr" label="Hreiðmarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="113" end="119" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="138" end="144" title="Fáfnir" label="Fáfnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="149" end="152" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="199" end="203" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="221" end="224" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="298" end="301" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="373" end="380" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="420" end="431" title="Andvaranaut" label="Andvaranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="504" end="518" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm or dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="604" end="610" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q208010" start="1097" end="1105" title="Sleipnir" label="Sleipnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1133" end="1137" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="1388" end="1395" title="Sigmund" label="Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="1410" end="1414" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="1828" end="1832" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="2110" end="2116" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="2251" end="2255" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="2329" end="2341" title="Þiðreks saga" label="Þiðreks saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q336496" start="2413" end="2418" title="Mimir" label="Mimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="2520" end="2531" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="2585" end="2590" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138109" start="2654" end="2663" title="Reginsmál" label="Reginsmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="2966" end="2976" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="2990" end="3004" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="3147" end="3170" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="3180" end="3194" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257886" start="3264" end="3272" title="Alberich" label="Alberich"/>
<link wikidata="Q333146" start="3467" end="3476" title="Siegfried (opera)" label="Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q108652" start="3515" end="3519" title="Edda" label="Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382640" start="3717" end="3735" title="Fire Emblem Heroes" label="Fire Emblem Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83028172" start="3805" end="3818" title="Megan Shipman" label="Megan Shipman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87292" wikidata="Q1390232" url="?curid=87292" title="Hreiðmarr">
<text>In Norse mythology, Hreiðmarr (Old Norse: ; anglicized as Hreidmar) is a dwarf. He is featured in the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot; and in Snorri Sturluson&#x27;s &quot;Prose Edda&quot;.

Hreiðmarr was the father of Regin, Fafnir, Ótr, Lyngheiðr and Lofnheiðr. He owned a house of glittering gold and flashing gems built by Regin and guarded by Fafnir. After Otr was accidentally killed by Loki, the Æsir repaid Hreiðmarr with Andvari&#x27;s gold and the ring Andvaranaut, a magical ring that could create gold. However, Andvari had cursed the ring to bring misfortune and destruction to whoever else possessed it. Hreiðmarr ignored Loki&#x27;s warnings about the curse and kept the ring, only to have Fafnir and Regin later kill him for it. Fafnir decided he wanted Andvaranaut for himself, so he turned into a dragon and drove Regin away. Fafnir guarded the treasure until Sigurd, on Regin&#x27;s instigation, arrived and delivered a fatal blow to the dragon. Regin was then also killed by Sigurd while attempting to murder him for the ring, thus leaving all of Hreiðmarr&#x27;s family dead.

==See also==
*Völsung Cycle

== References ==
==Other sources==
*Byock, Jesse L. (1990) &quot;Saga of the Volsungs: The Norse Epic of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer&quot; (University of California Press) 
*Orchard, Andy (1997) &quot;Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend&quot; (Cassell &amp; Co) 

==External links==
*The Saga of the Volsungs, a summary in English</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="20" end="29" title="Hreiðmarr" label="Hreiðmarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="31" end="40" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="58" end="66" title="Hreiðmarr" label="Hreidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="73" end="78" title="Dwarf (Norse)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="108" end="121" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="135" end="151" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="165" end="175" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="212" end="217" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="219" end="225" title="Fafnir" label="Fafnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="227" end="230" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="386" end="390" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="396" end="400" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="423" end="430" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="456" end="467" title="Andvaranaut" label="Andvaranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058816" start="808" end="814" title="western dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="871" end="877" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202175" start="1105" end="1118" title="Völsung Cycle" label="Völsung Cycle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87298" wikidata="Q745315" url="?curid=87298" title="Fáfnir">
<text>In Germanic heroic legend and folklore, Fáfnir is a worm or dragon slain by a member of the Völsung family, typically Sigurð. In Nordic mythology, he is the son of Hreiðmarr, and brother of Regin and Ótr and is attested throughout the Völsung Cycle, where, Fáfnir slays his father out of greed, taking the ring and hoard of the dwarf Andvari and becoming a worm or dragon. Fáfnir&#x27;s brother Regin later assisted Sigurð in obtaining the sword Gram, by which Fáfnir is killed. He has been identified with an unnamed dragon killed by a Völsung in other Germanic works including Beowulf, the Nibelunglied and a number of skaldic poems. Fáfnir and his killing by Sigurð are further represented in numerous medieval carvings from the British Isles and Scandinavia, and a single axe head in a Scandinavian style found in Russia. The story of Fáfnir has continued to have influence in the modern period, such as in the works of J.R.R Tolkien, who drew inspiration from the tale of Fáfnir in his portrayals of Smaug and Gollum.

==Name==

The name &quot;Fáfnir&quot; has been translated from Old Norse as &quot;the embracer&quot;.

==Appearance==

Before taking the form of a dragon, Fáfnir&#x27;s appearance is not explicitly described. It has been noted though that his brother, Regin, is described as being a dwarf in Norna-Gests þáttr and resembling a dwarf (), however, it is neither clear if relatives of dwarfs are also dwarfs, nor how dwarfs were conceived of as appearing. It has been noted that dwarf appearances were presented in the medieval period as highly diverse and they could even change their form, as with Andvari and potentially also Fáfnir.

While in the form of a worm in Fáfnismál, Fáfnir is described as flightless and snake-like while at the same point in the narrative of the later Völsunga saga, he has shoulders, suggesting legs, wings or both. This change is consistent with the wider trend in Germanic portrayals of dragons, and likely results from influence from continental Europe that was facilitated by Christianisation and the increased availability of translated romances.

==Named attestations==
===General narrative===
Fáfnir&#x27;s tale is attested in multiple medieval accounts which refer to a shared story with a general structure as follows:
* Fáfnir kills his father Hreiðmarr and takes his hoard of treasure that was often given as weregild by the gods Odin, Loki, and Hœnir for their unintended killing of Hreiðmarr&#x27;s son Ótr. 
* Fáfnir kills his father and flees with the hoard and dwells in the wilderness, often at a place named Gnitaheath, where he becomes a worm or dragon ( or ). 
* Fáfnir&#x27;s brother Regin forges a sword for Sigurð and convinces him to kill Fáfnir by hiding in a pit and striking him from below as the worm goes past, which Sigurð does. 
* Regin asks him to cook the worm&#x27;s heart for him to eat. As Sigurð does this, he checks to see if it is cooked by touching it, whereupon he burns his finger and sucks it to cool it down. 
* The blood from the heart imparts to him the ability to understand birds, who he overhears talking about how Regin will betray him. Fearing this, Sigurð kills Regin and takes the treasure, loading it up on his horse Grani.

===Poetic Edda===

The Poetic Edda contains two poems that mention Fáfnir. In the prose of the first, Reginsmál, the eponymous figure Regin tells Sigurð that once Odin, Loki, and Hœnir went to the foss of the dwarf Andvari who lived there in the form of a pike. In that water also lived Fáfnir and Regin&#x27;s brother, Ótr who was eating a salmon on the bank, in the shape of an otter. Loki killed Ótr with a stone and the gods skinned him before seeking lodgings at the house of Hreiðmarr, the father of Fáfnir and his siblings. Seeing the otter skin, the family seized the gods and demanded that the gods fill and cover the skin in red gold as weregild. Loki caught Andvari using Rán&#x27;s net and exports the gold from him. In the poem, Andvari curses the gold which the gods give to Hreiðmarr. Fáfnir and Regin asked their father for some of the weregild but he refused, leading Fáfnir to kill him. As he dies, Hreiðmarr calls out to his daughters Lyngheiðr and Lofnheiðr, but they take no action. Fáfnir then takes all the hoard, refusing to share it with his brother, and takes to Gnitaheath, where he took the shape of a worm. Along with Andvari&#x27;s ring, Andvaranaut, the treasure here is described as including the Helm of fear ().

In the second poem, Fáfnismál, the prose prologue describes Sigurð and Regin going to Gnitaheath, where they find the track Fáfnir made as he crawled to the water to drink. Sigurð digs a trench across the path and hides in it. Later, Fáfnir leaves his hoard, blowing out atter, and moves over Sigurð, who stabs him through the belly and into the heart. As the worm dies, the poem begins and consists of a conversation between him and Sigurð, in which Fáfnir asks for information about Sigurð, such as his name which he initially hides in riddles. Fáfnir then warns Sigurð against the gold, telling him that it will bring his death who responds, saying that a time will come for everyone to journey to hell. The poem moves to Fáfnir teaching Sigurð lore, such as the identity of the Norns and the island where the gods will meet with Surtr. Fáfnir then warns Sigurð of the hoard again before the worm dies. Regin then meets with Sigurð where they quarrel over who deserves the praise for the death of Fáfnir. Notably here, Regin refers to his brother as an &quot;ancient &quot;. Regin then cuts out Fáfnir&#x27;s heart with his sword Riðill and tells Sigurð to cook it for him while he sleeps. While cooking it on a spit, Sigurð tests to see if it is done but accidentally burns his finger in the process and sucks it, putting the heart&#x27;s blood into his mouth. The blood allows Sigurð to understand seven birds who are talking nearby about how Regin is going to kill Sigurð and take the hoard for himself. Fearing they were right, Sigurð chops off Regin&#x27;s head, eats Fáfnir&#x27;s heart, then drinks the blood of both brothers. The following prose tells how Sigurð then followed Fáfnir&#x27;s trail to his lair, which is described as a house dug down into the earth, the gates, gate posts and beams of which were all made of iron. Inside, Sigurð finds among the hoard the ægishjálmr, a golden mail coat and the sword Hrotti, and loads all of it onto his horse Grani&#x27;s back.

===Prose Edda===
In the section of the Prose Edda, Skáldskaparmál, Snorri Sturluson describes the story of Fáfnir when explaining kennings for gold such as &quot;Lair or abode of Fáfnir&quot; and &quot;Metal of Gnita Heath&quot;. This account tells of how Odin, Loki, and Hœnir were journeying when they came to a foss in which an otter was lying down eating a salmon. Loki killed it with a stone and they took both the otter and the fish with them as they walked. They came to a farm where lived Hreiðmarr with his sons, Regin and Fáfnir. The family recognised the otter skin as being their kinsman Ótr and bound the gods, who offered a ransom for their lives. It was agreed that the gods were to fill and cover the skin with red gold. The gods sent Loki to Svartálfaheim to gather the ransom which he fulfilled by coercing the dwarf Andvari to give up his gold and the ring, Andvaranaut. The treasure further included the sword Hrotti and the , here explicitly referred to as a helm. As Loki left, Andvari cursed the ring and warned that the treasure would be the death of anyone who owned it.

In contrast to in Reginsmál, both the brothers kill their father when he refuses to share the gold and as in the poem, when Regin asked again to share the gold, Fáfnir threatened to kill him too. Fáfnir then leaves to Gnitaheath where he made a lair and took on the form of a worm. Regin left and began working as a smith for King Hjálprekr and began fostering Sigurð. He forged the sword Gram and gave it to Sigurð, encouraging him to kill Fáfnir and take the hoard. Following Regin&#x27;s advice, Sigurð dug a pit along a path Fáfnir would take to take a drink and hid in it, waiting for him to pass over. As he did, Sigurð stabbed him and the dragon died without any further conversation. As a sign of thanks, Regin asks Sigurð if he could roast his brother&#x27;s heart in a fire so the smith could eat it. Agreeing, Sigurð began cooking it, but as he did, he burnt his finger on it and sucked it. The juices from the heart gave him knowledge of the speech of birds. Snorri then quotes Fáfnismál, in which the birds tell Sigurð that Regin is planning to betray him. Heeding the birds&#x27; warning, Sigurð kills Regin and takes the hoard for himself and loads it onto his horse Grani.

===Völsunga saga===

Völsunga saga presents the most cohesive and extensive account of the Sigurð tradition and its author likely had access to the Poetic Edda as a source.

Within it, Fáfnir&#x27;s brother Regin recounts to his foster son Sigurð a story closely following the version in the Poetic and Prose Eddas, in which Odin, Loki, and Hœnir had to pay a large amount of gold as weregild for the killing of Ótr, who in this account is described as having the likeness of an otter by day. After the gods gave the gold to Hreiðmarr, Fáfnir killed his father Hreiðmarr to get all the gold for himself, venturing into the wilderness to keep his fortune. There he became ill-natured and greedy and so became a worm and took to ever lying on his treasure to protect it.

Plotting revenge to get the treasure, Regin sends Sigurð to kill the worm. Regin instructed Sigurð to dig a pit where he could lie in wait under the trail Fáfnir used to go to drink and stab him with the sword Gram as he crawls over the pit. Regin then ran away in fear, leaving Sigurð to the task. As Sigurð dug, Odin appeared as an old man with a long beard. He advised the warrior to dig more than one trench for the blood of Fáfnir to run into, and then disappeared. The earth shook as Fáfnir made his way to the stream, blowing poison before him. Sigurð, waiting in the hole below, stabbed Fáfnir in the left shoulder as he crawled over the ditch, mortally wounding the worm who thrashed about with his head and tail. As Fáfnir died, he spoke to Sigurð and asked for his name, his parentage, and who sent him on such a dangerous mission. Sigurð in return asks the dragon questions about lore as in Fáfnismál. During this, Fáfnir figured out that his brother, Regin, orchestrated his killing and foretold that the hoard would also cause Sigurð&#x27;s death.

After Fáfnir&#x27;s death, Sigurð cut the worm&#x27;s heart out with the sword Riðill and Regin returns, drinking his brother&#x27;s blood. Regin then asked if he could eat the heart, and agreeing, Sigurð roasted it on a spit. He touched it to check its doneness, and it burnt his finger. He stuck his finger in his mouth, and once Fáfnir&#x27;s heart-blood touched his tongue, he became able to understand the speech of birds. He then overhears nearby birds warning him of Regin&#x27;s treachery and advising him to eat the heart himself and kill Regin. Following their words, he ate some of Fáfnir&#x27;s heart and saved some, before decapitating Regin with Gram.

===Norna-Gests þáttr===
In Norna-Gests þáttr, Norna-Gestr tells a brief version of the story of Fáfnir in which he visits the house of Regin where he hears Regin telling Sigurð about Fáfnir who is living in the form of a large worm in Gnitaheath. As in the other accounts, Regin makes the sword Gram and gives it to Sigurð, begging him to kill Fáfnir, which he does, although no further details are given of the deed. Because of this, Sigurð is referred to throughout the þáttr as Sigurð Fáfnisbane ().

===Icelandic rune poem===
In some manuscript versions of the Icelandic rune poem, the rune ᚠ (Fé) is described by the kenning (&quot;Fáfnir&#x27;s bane&quot;), referring to the worm&#x27;s possession of the hoard leading to his killing by Sigurð.

===Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan===
In Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan, an Old Norse travel account of a pilgrimage route from Iceland to the Holy Land. The author integrates into the journey accounts of Germanic lore, including locating Gnita-heath between Paderborn and Mainz and stating that this is where Sigurð killed Fáfnir. The position in which the author located Gnita-heath is unclear however it has been proposed to correspond to modern Niddagau or modern Knetterheide, though the latter toponym is only attested from the 17th century and is a significant distance from the location given in Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan.

==Unnamed attestations==
A number of sources have been proposed by scholars to refer to Fáfnir and his killing, despite his name not featuring, based on similarities with named accounts of the story, such as his death at the hand of a Völsung or his stabbing from below.

===Skaldic poetry===
====Þorfinnr munnra====
Þorfinnr munnr is attributed with composing a lausavísa, recorded in Ólafssaga. In this account, Olaf asked him to compose a poem about a tapestry depicting the killing of Fáfnir hanging on the walls:

====Illugi bryndœlaskáld====
The poetry of Illugi bryndœlaskáld about Harald Hardrada contain two stanzas about the death of Fáfnir. The first refers to the killing by Sigurð:
The second describes the cooking of Fáfnir&#x27;s heart:
====Háttalykill====
In a fragmentary stanza in Háttalykill, a reference is made to a worm being stabbed in the heart, which has been interpreted as Fáfnir:

===Old English===
The earliest known account of the Völsung tradition is the Sigemund episode in Beowulf, in which a thegn recalls the Wælsing () Sigemund killing, with a sword, an unnamed worm that was guarding a hoard of treasure. This worm is typically identified with, or seen as the English form of, Fáfnir however the Sigemund episode differs from later Old Norse accounts that attribute to Sigurð the killing.

The discrepancy in killer has been variously proposed by scholars to be due to the Beowulf account representing an older version of the story, the Beowulf author making a mistake, or the existence of parallel traditions.

===Continental Germanic===
The tradition of a dragon-killing Völsung is also found in the continental Germanic record. In &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, Sigefried () kills a dragon to obtain its hoard and in this version, rather than gaining knowledge through the dragon&#x27;s heart-blood, he bathes in the dragon&#x27;s blood to harden his skin and protect him from weapons. Similar to the account in Beowulf, this dragon is normally viewed by scholars as the German equivalent of Fáfnir.

===Þiðreks saga===
Þiðreks saga gives an account of Sigurð killing a dragon that shows similarities with both Old Norse and continental accounts, consistent with the saga being written in Norway but likely being based on earlier German material. In this telling, a smith Mymmer tries to have Sigurð killed by sending him into the woods where his brother Regin lived as a dragon. When he found the dragon, Sigurð killed it with his axe, cutting off its head. Hungry, he then boiled meat from the dead dragon but burnt his finger in the process, and so put his finger in his mouth. The juices from the meat made him able to understand the speech of birds, who he overhears telling him to kill Mymmer as he tried to have Sigurð killed. Sigurð then bathes in the dragon-blood which made his skin as hard as horn, except for where a maple leaf had stuck to him between his shoulders. Carrying the dragon head back to Mymmer, who offered gifts to make up for his ill deed, including armour made for King Herding in Nogard, the horse Grane and the sword Gram. Accepting these gifts, Sigurð then kills Mymmer and leaves to seek the maiden Brynilla.

==Medieval depictions==

Fáfnir&#x27;s killing is depicted in a large number of carvings in Northern Europe, although some identifications are not agreed on by scholars, with the principal distinction from other dragon slayers typically being the stab from below, sometimes from a pit. Identifications are sometimes further supported by surrounding imagery consistent with the story of Fáfnir, and comparisons with other depictions.

Some Sigurd stones depict scenes from the story of Fáfnir. Most commonly, Fáfnir is presented as a worm that encircles the stone and is killed by Sigurð, who is shown stabbing from beneath. In the case of the Ramsund and Gök stones, images of the wider story are present, such as the cooking of Fáfnir&#x27;s heart, the speaking birds and the killing of Regin (who is identified by the nearby tools, referencing his role as a smith). The sucking of Sigurð&#x27;s finger also features in depictions both in Sweden and the British Isles, where it is typically his thumb that is sucked, though this is proposed to be due to increased pictorial distinctiveness, rather than of specific importance to the story. In the Isle of Man, the stone cross from Jurby depicts Fáfnir as he is stabbed and the cross from Maughold depicts Sigurð cooking his heart. In Telemark in Norway, Fáfnir is depicted being stabbed from below by Sigurð on a 12th-century capital from Lunde and the base of a pillar from Nes church, dating to the second half of the 12th century. Carvings in the Hylestad Stave Church depict the story of Fáfnir, including his death and the roasting of his heart. One example survives from Denmark, from Låsby and outside of the British Isles and Scadinavia, an axe of Scandinavian style found in Vladimir Oblast in Russia likely shows the death of Fáfnir.

Potential depictions of Fáfnir include carvings on three other crosses from the Isle of Man, a now lost cross fragment, with a similar artistic style, from the church at Kirby Hill in England, and a number of Swedish runestones such as that found in Årsunda.

==Interpretation and discussion==
===Christian reception===
Scholars have debated the reception and presentation of the tale of Fáfnir and how this relates to its continued popularity after the establishment of the church in Scandinavia, despite its heathen origin. It has been suggested that the tale was presented as principally historical and separate from its heathen origins. Furthermore, similarities have been noted between the role of Sigurð and of the archangel Michael, who struggles with the serpent of the Apocalypse, and of St. George, who also slays a dragon. It has thus been suggested that Sigurð was presented by Christian authorities as a soldier of Christ who triumphs over evil in the form of Fáfnir, rather than the earlier narrative components of gold, a curse and revenge. In some cases, he was likely identified with Jesus or Michael, in a form of adaptation of Christianity to local traditions to facilitate conversion from Old Nordic religion.

A further, and not mutually exclusive, proposal is that images of Sigurð and Fáfnir were used in England as ancestry claims by Tostig, Earl of Northumbria, who claimed descent from Sigurð.
It has been noted, however, that others claimed descent from Sigurð and that the popularity of Sigurð extended beyond Tostig&#x27;s lands. Alternatively, the carvings may seek to praise a dead person by comparing him to an ancient hero.

==Cultural influence ==
=== In Wagner ===

Fáfnir appears with the spelling &quot;Fafner&quot; in Richard Wagner&#x27;s epic opera cycle &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot; (1848–1874), although he began life as a giant rather than a dwarf. In the first opera, &quot;Das Rheingold&quot; (1869), which has some basis in Gylfaginning, Fafner and his brother Fasolt try to kidnap the goddess Freia, a composite of the goddesses Freyja and Iðunn, who has been promised to them by Wotan, the king of the gods, in exchange for building the castle Valhalla. Fasolt is in love with her while Fafner wants her as without her golden apples the gods will lose their youth. The giants, mainly Fafner, agree to accept a massive hoard of treasure stolen from the dwarf Alberich instead. The treasure includes the magic helmet Tarnhelm and a magic ring. As they divide the treasure, the brothers argue and Fafner kills Fasolt and takes the ring for himself. Escaping to Earth, he uses the Tarnhelm to transform himself into a dragon and guards the treasure in a cave for many years before being ultimately killed by Wotan&#x27;s mortal grandson Siegfried as depicted in the opera of the same name. However, while Fasolt is a romantic revolutionary, Fafner is a more violent and jealous figure, plotting to overthrow the gods. In many productions, he is shown to return to his original giant form while delivering his death-speech to Siegfried.

=== As inspiration for Tolkien ===
Much of J.R.R. Tolkien&#x27;s work was inspired by Northern European mythology. Many parallels can be drawn between Fáfnir and Smaug, the main antagonist of &quot;The Hobbit&quot;. The exchange between Smaug and Bilbo Baggins nearly mirrors Fáfnir&#x27;s and Sigurð&#x27;s. The main difference is that Sigurð&#x27;s conversation occurs after the death blow has been struck. This is most likely due to dramatic effect, as Bilbo has much more at stake when speaking with Smaug.

Glaurung, another dragon featured in Tolkien&#x27;s legendarium, has many similarities to Fáfnir as well. In Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Book of Lost Tales&quot;, Glaurung is described as a flightless dragon that hoards gold, breathes poison, and has &quot;Great cunning and wisdom&quot;. In Tolkien&#x27;s book &quot;The Children of Húrin&quot;, he is slain by Turin Turambar from below, much like Fáfnir. Turin and Glaurung also have an exchange after the mortal blow is dealt.

Fáfnir&#x27;s downfall due to obsessive greed is also mirrored in Tolkien&#x27;s character Gollum, who appears in &quot;The Hobbit&quot; and &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. Both are driven to murder out of lust for treasure (in both cases, a magical ring) and flee into exile to hoard it. As with Fafnir, that which Gollum so covets proves to be his curse. Both characters are seen devolving into wicked creatures, living only to guard the treasures that have consumed their minds, until that which is so valuable to them finally leads to their own destruction.

=== Other ===
* In 2015, the star designated 42 Draconis was named Fafnir by the International Astronomical Union.
* Fáfnir was depicted in Marvel Comics&#x27; &quot;Thor&quot; series, as &quot;Fafnir&quot;.
* Fáfnir appears as an enemy in the 2018 video game &quot;God of War&quot;.
* Fáfnir appears as a recurring character in the manga series and anime &quot;Miss Kobayashi&#x27;s Dragon Maid&quot;.
* Fáfnir appears as a stamina type beyblade in the anime &quot;Beyblade Burst Evolution&quot;, owned by Free de la Hoya.
* French neofolk group Skáld&#x27;s 2023 song &quot;Hinn Mikli Dreki&quot; is centred on the figure of Fafnir.
* The Science Museum of Minnesota&#x27;s &quot;Triceratops&quot; skeleton was named Fafner by Friedelind Wagner, Richard Wagner&#x27;s granddaughter, at its dedication in 1966.
* Fáfnir appears as a playable character in the video game &quot;Smite&quot;, a free-to-play, third-person multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA).
* &quot;Fafner&#x27;s Gold&quot;, the opening track from the 2019 album Berserker by Swedish melodic death metal band Amon Amarth, tells a stripped back story of Fáfnir. Vocalist Johan Hegg actually used this Wikipedia article as his primary source.
* is a recurring character in the &quot;Mega Man Zero&quot; video game series.
* Fafnir can be trained as a myth unit in the 2024 video game &quot;Age of Mythology: Retold&quot; by choosing the major god Freyr and worshipping Vidar in the Mythic Age.

==See also==
* Salmon of Knowledge – a fish in Irish folklore that gave knowledge once eaten, similar to Fáfnir

== Citations ==
== References ==
===Primary===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Secondary===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="3" end="25" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="Germanic heroic legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q107585025" start="30" end="38" title="Germanic folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="40" end="46" title="Fáfnir" label="Fáfnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="52" end="66" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm or dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263694" start="92" end="99" title="Völsung" label="Völsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="118" end="124" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="129" end="145" title="Nordic mythology" label="Nordic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="164" end="173" title="Hreiðmarr" label="Hreiðmarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="190" end="195" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="200" end="203" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202175" start="235" end="248" title="Völsung Cycle" label="Völsung Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="306" end="310" title="Andvaranaut" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="328" end="333" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="334" end="341" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="446" end="450" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="579" end="586" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="592" end="604" title="Nibelunglied" label="Nibelunglied"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="621" end="634" title="skaldic poems" label="skaldic poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="732" end="745" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="750" end="761" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="818" end="824" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="924" end="937" title="J.R.R Tolkien" label="J.R.R Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q46302" start="1005" end="1010" title="Smaug" label="Smaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q15007" start="1015" end="1021" title="Gollum" label="Gollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1087" end="1096" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="1307" end="1312" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q119224" start="1316" end="1333" title="Norna-Gests þáttr" label="Norna-Gests þáttr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1500" end="1517" title="Dwarf (folklore)#Attributes and themes" label="dwarf appearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1540" end="1555" title="medieval period" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="1621" end="1628" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478663" start="1690" end="1699" title="Fáfnismál" label="Fáfnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="1804" end="1817" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q339991" start="2084" end="2103" title="Chivalric sagas" label="translated romances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="2307" end="2316" title="Hreiðmarr" label="Hreiðmarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="2373" end="2381" title="weregild" label="weregild"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="2394" end="2398" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="2400" end="2404" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q836029" start="2410" end="2415" title="Hœnir" label="Hœnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="2469" end="2472" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="2610" end="2624" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm or dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="2658" end="2663" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="2799" end="2805" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418385" start="3224" end="3229" title="Grani" label="Grani"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="3255" end="3266" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138109" start="3334" end="3343" title="Reginsmál" label="Reginsmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="3366" end="3371" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="3378" end="3384" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="3429" end="3433" title="Waterfall" label="foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="3441" end="3446" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="3447" end="3454" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="3552" end="3555" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="3573" end="3579" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="3612" end="3617" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="3879" end="3887" title="weregild" label="weregild"/>
<link wikidata="Q663348" start="3915" end="3918" title="Rán" label="Rán"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4186" end="4195" title="Lyngheiðr" label="Lyngheiðr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4200" end="4209" title="Lofnheiðr" label="Lofnheiðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="4362" end="4366" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q113947402" start="4394" end="4398" title="Rings in Germanic cultures" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="4400" end="4411" title="Andvaranaut" label="Andvaranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478663" start="4499" end="4508" title="Fáfnismál" label="Fáfnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293225" start="4750" end="4755" title="atter" label="atter"/>
<link wikidata="Q644341" start="5180" end="5184" title="Hel (location)" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q204608" start="5261" end="5266" title="Norns" label="Norns"/>
<link wikidata="Q211700" start="5312" end="5317" title="Surtr" label="Surtr"/>
<link wikidata="Q495047" start="5612" end="5618" title="Riðill" label="Riðill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732901" start="6405" end="6411" title="Hrotti" label="Hrotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="6507" end="6517" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="6519" end="6533" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="6535" end="6551" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="6598" end="6606" title="kennings" label="kennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="6782" end="6786" title="Waterfall" label="foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502974" start="6990" end="6995" title="Regin" label="Regin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="7068" end="7071" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055292" start="7227" end="7240" title="Svartálfaheim" label="Svartálfaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="7448" end="7452" title="Helmet" label="helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="7841" end="7845" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="7926" end="7932" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="7954" end="7958" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="8776" end="8789" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="9735" end="9739" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q119224" start="11282" end="11299" title="Norna-Gests þáttr" label="Norna-Gests þáttr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="11482" end="11486" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336402" start="11727" end="11732" title="þáttr" label="þáttr"/>
<link wikidata="Q586911" start="11820" end="11839" title="Icelandic rune poem" label="Icelandic rune poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401388" start="11850" end="11856" title="ᚠ" label="ᚠ (Fé)"/>
<link wikidata="Q589784" start="12044" end="12071" title="Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan" label="Leiðarvísir og borgarskipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="12143" end="12152" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2971" start="12259" end="12268" title="Paderborn" label="Paderborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="12273" end="12278" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q569625" start="12449" end="12457" title="Niddagau" label="Niddagau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12468" end="12480" title="Knetterheide" label="Knetterheide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619788" start="12951" end="12965" title="Þorfinnr munnr" label="Þorfinnr munnr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808469" start="12997" end="13006" title="lausavísa" label="lausavísa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619788" start="13196" end="13216" title="Illugi bryndœlaskáld" label="Illugi bryndœlaskáld"/>
<link wikidata="Q203647" start="13223" end="13238" title="Harald Hardrada" label="Harald Hardrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963067" start="13433" end="13444" title="Háttalykill" label="Háttalykill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="13620" end="13628" title="Sigemund" label="Sigemund"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="13640" end="13647" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="13660" end="13665" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263694" start="13678" end="13685" title="Wælsing" label="Wælsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="13903" end="13912" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="14311" end="14325" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="14691" end="14703" title="Þiðreks saga" label="Þiðreks saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="15803" end="15811" title="Brynhilda" label="Brynilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="15906" end="15921" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326853" start="16253" end="16266" title="Sigurd stones" label="Sigurd stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="16962" end="16973" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734559" start="16996" end="17001" title="Jurby" label="Jurby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734578" start="17053" end="17061" title="Maughold (parish)" label="Maughold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254" start="17099" end="17107" title="Telemark" label="Telemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991157" start="17240" end="17250" title="Nes Church (Telemark)" label="Nes church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442778" start="17315" end="17336" title="Hylestad Stave Church" label="Hylestad Stave Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="17442" end="17449" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242300" start="17456" end="17461" title="Låsby" label="Låsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="17481" end="17494" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="17499" end="17509" title="Scadinavia" label="Scadinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702" start="17549" end="17564" title="Vladimir Oblast" label="Vladimir Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="17568" end="17574" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="17690" end="17701" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360894" start="17780" end="17790" title="Kirby Hill, Harrogate" label="Kirby Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089974" start="17860" end="17867" title="Årsunda" label="Årsunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965826" start="18064" end="18106" title="Christianisation of Scandinavia" label="establishment of the church in Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="18120" end="18127" title="Germanic paganism" label="heathen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="18331" end="18348" title="archangel Michael" label="archangel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="18407" end="18417" title="St. George" label="St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678054" start="18527" end="18544" title="soldier of Christ" label="soldier of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="18711" end="18716" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="18756" end="18768" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="18819" end="18838" title="Old Nordic religion" label="Old Nordic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q345420" start="18968" end="18974" title="Tostig" label="Tostig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250180" start="18976" end="18995" title="Earl of Northumbria" label="Earl of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="19366" end="19380" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="19411" end="19434" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707571" start="19482" end="19487" title="giant" label="giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="19502" end="19507" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="19535" end="19548" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="19587" end="19599" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="19693" end="19699" title="Freyja" label="Freyja"/>
<link wikidata="Q204691" start="19704" end="19709" title="Iðunn" label="Iðunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="19744" end="19749" title="Odin" label="Wotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="19809" end="19817" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257886" start="20023" end="20031" title="Alberich" label="Alberich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686415" start="20080" end="20088" title="Tarnhelm" label="Tarnhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500666" start="20095" end="20105" title="magic ring" label="magic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058816" start="20279" end="20285" title="European dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="20398" end="20407" title="Sigurd" label="Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q333146" start="20427" end="20449" title="Siegfried (opera)" label="opera of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="20478" end="20486" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="20487" end="20500" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="20741" end="20755" title="J.R.R. Tolkien" label="J.R.R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q46302" start="20860" end="20865" title="Smaug" label="Smaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="20896" end="20906" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q185737" start="20945" end="20958" title="Bilbo Baggins" label="Bilbo Baggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q81738" start="21247" end="21273" title="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium" label="Tolkien&amp;#x27;s legendarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q340401" start="21340" end="21362" title="The Book of Lost Tales" label="The Book of Lost Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q331651" start="21525" end="21546" title="The Children of Húrin" label="The Children of Húrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q572434" start="21569" end="21583" title="Turin Turambar" label="Turin Turambar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15007" start="21779" end="21785" title="Gollum" label="Gollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="21835" end="21856" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152871" start="22299" end="22310" title="42 Draconis" label="42 Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="22335" end="22367" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="22394" end="22407" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q717588" start="22414" end="22430" title="Thor (Marvel Comics)" label="&amp;quot;Thor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345138" start="22520" end="22530" title="God of War (2018 video game)" label="God of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="22587" end="22592" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="22604" end="22609" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991408" start="22616" end="22649" title="Miss Kobayashi&amp;#x27;s Dragon Maid" label="Miss Kobayashi&amp;#x27;s Dragon Maid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3727757" start="22720" end="22744" title="Beyblade Burst Evolution" label="Beyblade Burst Evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22780" end="22786" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="22787" end="22794" title="neofolk" label="neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65158644" start="22801" end="22806" title="Skáld (band)" label="Skáld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777245" start="22895" end="22922" title="Science Museum of Minnesota" label="Science Museum of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14384" start="22936" end="22947" title="Triceratops" label="Triceratops"/>
<link wikidata="Q70091" start="22983" end="23000" title="Friedelind Wagner" label="Friedelind Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357719" start="23131" end="23136" title="Smite (video game)" label="Smite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414510" start="23146" end="23158" title="free-to-play" label="free-to-play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561045" start="23160" end="23172" title="Virtual camera system" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="23173" end="23204" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q62272261" start="23285" end="23294" title="Berserker (Amon Amarth album)" label="Berserker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192863" start="23331" end="23342" title="Amon Amarth" label="Amon Amarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192863" start="23392" end="23402" title="Johan Hegg" label="Johan Hegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235856" start="23503" end="23516" title="Mega Man Zero" label="Mega Man Zero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23610" end="23634" title="Age of Mythology: Retold" label="Age of Mythology: Retold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447830" start="23730" end="23749" title="Salmon of Knowledge" label="Salmon of Knowledge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87299" wikidata="Q322339" url="?curid=87299" title="Heaviside step function">
<text>The Heaviside step function, or the unit step function, usually denoted by or (but sometimes , or ), is a step function named after Oliver Heaviside, the value of which is zero for negative arguments and one for positive arguments. Different conventions concerning the value are in use. It is an example of the general class of step functions, all of which can be represented as linear combinations of translations of this one.

The function was originally developed in operational calculus for the solution of differential equations, where it represents a signal that switches on at a specified time and stays switched on indefinitely. Heaviside developed the operational calculus as a tool in the analysis of telegraphic communications and represented the function as .

==Formulation==
Taking the convention that , the Heaviside function may be defined as:
* a piecewise function: formula_1
* using the Iverson bracket notation: formula_2
* an indicator function: formula_3

For the alternative convention that , it may be expressed as:
* a linear transformation of the sign function, formula_4
* the arithmetic mean of two Iverson brackets, formula_5
* a one-sided limit of the two-argument arctangent formula_6
* a hyperfunction formula_7 or equivalently formula_8 where is the principal value of the complex logarithm of 

Other definitions which are undefined at include:
* the derivative of the ramp function: formula_9
* in terms of the absolute value function as
formula_10

==Relationship with Dirac delta==
The Dirac delta function is the weak derivative of the Heaviside function:
formula_11
Hence the Heaviside function can be considered to be the integral of the Dirac delta function. This is sometimes written as
formula_12
although this expansion may not hold (or even make sense) for , depending on which formalism one uses to give meaning to integrals involving . In this context, the Heaviside function is the cumulative distribution function of a random variable which is almost surely 0. (See Constant random variable.)

== Analytic approximations ==
Approximations to the Heaviside step function are of use in biochemistry and neuroscience, where logistic approximations of step functions (such as the Hill and the Michaelis–Menten equations) may be used to approximate binary cellular switches in response to chemical signals.
For a smooth approximation to the step function, one can use the logistic function
formula_13

where a larger corresponds to a sharper transition at . If we take , equality holds in the limit:
formula_14

There are many other smooth, analytic approximations to the step function. Among the possibilities are:
formula_15

These limits hold pointwise and in the sense of distributions. In general, however, pointwise convergence need not imply distributional convergence, and vice versa distributional convergence need not imply pointwise convergence. (However, if all members of a pointwise convergent sequence of functions are uniformly bounded by some &quot;nice&quot; function, then convergence holds in the sense of distributions too.)

In general, any cumulative distribution function of a continuous probability distribution that is peaked around zero and has a parameter that controls for variance can serve as an approximation, in the limit as the variance approaches zero. For example, all three of the above approximations are cumulative distribution functions of common probability distributions: the logistic, Cauchy and normal distributions, respectively.

== Non-Analytic approximations ==
Approximations to the Heaviside step function could be made through Smooth transition function like formula_16:
formula_17

==Integral representations==
Often an integral representation of the Heaviside step function is useful:
formula_18

where the second representation is easy to deduce from the first, given that the step function is real and thus is its own complex conjugate.

== Zero argument ==
Since is usually used in integration, and the value of a function at a single point does not affect its integral, it rarely matters what particular value is chosen of . Indeed when is considered as a distribution or an element of (see space) it does not even make sense to talk of a value at zero, since such objects are only defined almost everywhere. If using some analytic approximation (as in the examples above) then often whatever happens to be the relevant limit at zero is used.

There exist various reasons for choosing a particular value. 
* is often used since the graph then has rotational symmetry; put another way, is then an odd function. In this case the following relation with the sign function holds for all : formula_19
Also, H(x) + H(-x) = 1 for all x.
* is used when needs to be right-continuous. For instance cumulative distribution functions are usually taken to be right continuous, as are functions integrated against in Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration. In this case is the indicator function of a closed semi-infinite interval: formula_20 The corresponding probability distribution is the degenerate distribution.
* is used when needs to be left-continuous. In this case is an indicator function of an open semi-infinite interval: formula_21
* In functional-analysis contexts from optimization and game theory, it is often useful to define the Heaviside function as a set-valued function to preserve the continuity of the limiting functions and ensure the existence of certain solutions. In these cases, the Heaviside function returns a whole interval of possible solutions, .

==Discrete form==

An alternative form of the unit step, defined instead as a function formula_22 (that is, taking in a discrete variable ), is:

formula_23

or using the half-maximum convention:

formula_24

where is an integer. If is an integer, then must imply that , while must imply that the function attains unity at . Therefore the &quot;step function&quot; exhibits ramp-like behavior over the domain of , and cannot authentically be a step function, using the half-maximum convention. 

Unlike the continuous case, the definition of is significant.

The discrete-time unit impulse is the first difference of the discrete-time step

formula_25

This function is the cumulative summation of the Kronecker delta:

formula_26

where

formula_27

is the discrete unit impulse function.

== Antiderivative and derivative==
The ramp function is an antiderivative of the Heaviside step function: 
formula_28

The distributional derivative of the Heaviside step function is the Dirac delta function:
formula_29

== Fourier transform ==
The Fourier transform of the Heaviside step function is a distribution. Using one choice of constants for the definition of the Fourier transform we have
formula_30

Here is the distribution that takes a test function to the Cauchy principal value of formula_31. The limit appearing in the integral is also taken in the sense of (tempered) distributions.

== Unilateral Laplace transform ==

The Laplace transform of the Heaviside step function is a meromorphic function. Using the unilateral Laplace transform we have:
formula_32

When the bilateral transform is used, the integral can be split in two parts and the result will be the same.

==See also==

* Gamma function
* Dirac delta function
* Indicator function
* Iverson bracket
* Laplace transform
* Laplacian of the indicator
* List of mathematical functions
* Macaulay brackets
* Negative number
* Rectangular function
* Sign function
* Sine integral
* Step response
==References==

== External links ==
* Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, NIST, .
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q322339" start="4" end="27" title="Heaviside step function" label="Heaviside step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q322339" start="36" end="54" title="Heaviside step function" label="unit step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q917657" start="106" end="119" title="step function" label="step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q154345" start="132" end="148" title="Oliver Heaviside" label="Oliver Heaviside"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="172" end="176" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="204" end="207" title="1 (number)" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="379" end="397" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162633" start="470" end="490" title="operational calculus" label="operational calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="511" end="532" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037833" start="864" end="882" title="piecewise function" label="piecewise function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114682" start="906" end="921" title="Iverson bracket" label="Iverson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="947" end="965" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="1044" end="1065" title="linear transformation" label="linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="1073" end="1086" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="1104" end="1119" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114682" start="1127" end="1142" title="Iverson bracket" label="Iverson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633817" start="1159" end="1174" title="one-sided limit" label="one-sided limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q776598" start="1182" end="1205" title="atan2" label="two-argument arctangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567017" start="1220" end="1233" title="hyperfunction" label="hyperfunction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1283" end="1323" title="Complex logarithm#Principal value" label="principal value of the complex logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047481" start="1403" end="1416" title="ramp function" label="ramp function"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1446" end="1460" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q209675" start="1523" end="1543" title="Dirac delta function" label="Dirac delta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143116" start="1551" end="1566" title="weak derivative" label="weak derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="1662" end="1670" title="integral" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="1930" end="1962" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="1968" end="1983" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="1993" end="2006" title="almost surely" label="almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="Q262464" start="2015" end="2039" title="Constant random variable" label="Constant random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="2133" end="2145" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="2150" end="2162" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052379" start="2170" end="2178" title="logistic function" label="logistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554020" start="2225" end="2229" title="Hill equation (biochemistry)" label="Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q613955" start="2238" end="2264" title="Michaelis–Menten kinetics" label="Michaelis–Menten equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="2357" end="2363" title="Smooth function" label="smooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052379" start="2416" end="2433" title="logistic function" label="logistic function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2566" end="2608" title="Sigmoid function#Examples" label="many other smooth, analytic approximations"/>
<link wikidata="Q122391649" start="2690" end="2699" title="pointwise" label="pointwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="2720" end="2733" title="distribution (mathematics)" label="distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067156" start="3036" end="3087" title="Lebesgue dominated convergence theorem" label="convergence holds in the sense of distributions too"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="3107" end="3139" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="3145" end="3155" title="continuous distribution" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="3156" end="3180" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="3246" end="3254" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="3387" end="3420" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q589603" start="3462" end="3470" title="logistic distribution" label="logistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726441" start="3472" end="3478" title="Cauchy distribution" label="Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="3483" end="3489" title="normal distribution" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3622" end="3648" title="Non-analytic_smooth_function#Smooth_transition_functions" label="Smooth transition function"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="3716" end="3724" title="integration (mathematics)" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="4157" end="4169" title="distribution (mathematics)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="4192" end="4197" title="Lp space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="4291" end="4308" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4358" end="4372" title="#Analytic approximations" label="examples above"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="4533" end="4538" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q126592" start="4597" end="4609" title="odd function" label="odd function"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="4656" end="4669" title="sign function" label="sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="4758" end="4774" title="right-continuous" label="right-continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="4789" end="4821" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799278" start="4904" end="4934" title="Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration" label="Lebesgue–Stieltjes integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="4956" end="4974" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="4980" end="4986" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q262464" start="5072" end="5095" title="degenerate distribution" label="degenerate distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="5124" end="5139" title="left-continuous" label="left-continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="5185" end="5189" title="open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q629085" start="5351" end="5370" title="Multivalued function" label="set-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="5782" end="5789" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="6263" end="6278" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q262464" start="6319" end="6349" title="degenerate distribution" label="discrete unit impulse function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047481" start="6391" end="6404" title="ramp function" label="ramp function"/>
<link wikidata="Q114326" start="6411" end="6425" title="antiderivative" label="antiderivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="6475" end="6500" title="distributional derivative" label="distributional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q209675" start="6539" end="6559" title="Dirac delta function" label="Dirac delta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="6601" end="6618" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="6775" end="6787" title="distribution (mathematics)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q769374" start="6822" end="6844" title="Cauchy principal value" label="Cauchy principal value"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="6993" end="7010" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q217616" start="7047" end="7067" title="meromorphic function" label="meromorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="7256" end="7270" title="Gamma function" label="Gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q209675" start="7273" end="7293" title="Dirac delta function" label="Dirac delta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="7296" end="7314" title="Indicator function" label="Indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114682" start="7317" end="7332" title="Iverson bracket" label="Iverson bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q199691" start="7335" end="7352" title="Laplace transform" label="Laplace transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488263" start="7355" end="7381" title="Laplacian of the indicator" label="Laplacian of the indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991505" start="7384" end="7414" title="List of mathematical functions" label="List of mathematical functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479850" start="7417" end="7434" title="Macaulay brackets" label="Macaulay brackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q200227" start="7437" end="7452" title="Negative number" label="Negative number"/>
<link wikidata="Q946860" start="7455" end="7475" title="Rectangular function" label="Rectangular function"/>
<link wikidata="Q236813" start="7478" end="7491" title="Sign function" label="Sign function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094282" start="7494" end="7507" title="Sine integral" label="Sine integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142864" start="7510" end="7523" title="Step response" label="Step response"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87302" wikidata="Q1158552" url="?curid=87302" title="Sigmund">
<text>In Germanic mythology, Sigmund ( , ) is a hero whose story is told in the Völsunga saga. He and his sister, Signý, are the children of Völsung and his wife Hljod. Sigmund is best known as the father of Sigurð the dragon-slayer, though Sigurð&#x27;s tale has almost no connections to the Völsung cycle except that he was a dragonslayer.

==&quot;Völsunga saga&quot;==

In the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot;, Signý marries Siggeir, the king of Gautland (modern Västergötland). Völsung and Sigmund are attending the wedding feast (which lasted for some time before and after the marriage), when Odin, disguised as a beggar, plunges a sword (Gram) into the living tree Barnstokk (&quot;offspring-trunk&quot;) around which Völsung&#x27;s hall is built. The disguised Odin announces that the man who can remove the sword will have it as a gift. Only Sigmund is able to free the sword from the tree.

Siggeir is smitten with envy and desire for the sword. He tries to buy it but Sigmund refuses. Siggeir invites Sigmund, his father Völsung and Sigmund&#x27;s nine brothers to visit him in Gautland to see the newlyweds three months later. When the Völsung clan arrive, they are attacked by the Gauts; King Völsung is killed and his sons captured. Signý beseeches her husband to spare her brothers and to put them in stocks instead of killing them. As Siggeir thinks that the brothers deserve to be tortured before they are killed, he agrees.

He then lets his shapeshifting mother turn into a wolf and devour one of the brothers each night. During that time, Signý tries various ruses but fails every time until only Sigmund remains. On the ninth night, she has a servant smear honey on Sigmund&#x27;s face and when the she-wolf arrives, she starts licking the honey off and sticks her tongue into Sigmund&#x27;s mouth, whereupon Sigmund bites her tongue off, killing her. Sigmund then escapes his bonds and hides in the forest.

Signý brings Sigmund everything he needs. Bent on revenge for their father&#x27;s death, she also sends her sons to him in the wilderness, one by one, to be tested. As each fails, she urges Sigmund to kill them, until one day when he refuses to continue killing innocent children. Finally, in despair, she comes to him in the guise of a völva and conceives a child by him, Sinfjötli (named &quot;Fitela&quot; in &quot;Beowulf&quot;). Sinfjötli, born of their incest, passes the test.

Sigmund and his son/nephew, Sinfjötli, grow wealthy as outlaws. In their wanderings, they come upon men sleeping in cursed wolf skins. Upon killing the men and putting on the wolf skins, they are cursed with a type of lycanthropy. Eventually, they avenge the death of Völsung.

After Signý dies, Sigmund and Sinfjötli go harrying together. Sigmund marries a woman named Borghild and has two sons, one of them named Helgi. Sinfjötli slays Borghild&#x27;s brother while vying for a woman they both want. Borghild avenges her brother by poisoning Sinfjötli.

Later, Sigmund marries a woman named Hjördís. After a short time of peace, Sigmund&#x27;s lands are attacked by King Lyngi. In battle, Sigmund matches up against an old man who is Odin in disguise. Odin shatters Sigmund&#x27;s sword, and Sigmund falls at the hands of others. Dying, he tells Hjördís that she is pregnant and that her son will one day make a great weapon out of the fragments of his sword. That son was to be Sigurd, who avenged his father by carving a blood eagle on Lyngvi&#x27;s back. Sigurd himself had a son named Sigmund, who was killed when he was three-years-old by a vengeful Brynhild.

==Relation to other Germanic heroes==
Sigmund/Siegmund is also the name of Sigurd/Siegfried&#x27;s father in other versions of the Sigurd story, but without any of the details about his life or family that appear in Norse Völsung tales and poems. On the other hand, the Old English poem &quot;Beowulf&quot; includes Sigemund the Wælsing and his nephew Fitela in a tale of dragon slaying told within the main story. Herein the story of Sigemund is told to Beowulf, a warrior also from Gautland.

==Parallels==
Parallels to Sigmund&#x27;s pulling the sword from the tree can be found in other mythologies (notably in the Arthurian legends). Also, Sinfjötli and Mordred share the characteristic of being nephew and son to the main characters. The gaining of mythical powers through a sword is also similar to the Norse god Frey.

==In modern fiction==
Siegmund is a character in Richard Wagner&#x27;s music drama &quot;Die Walkure&quot;, part of the larger Ring cycle, which tells the story of an incestuous romance between Siegmund and his sister Sieglinde, who have a son named Siegfried. In this story, Wotan (Odin) breaks Siegmund&#x27;s sword Nothung with his spear, and Siegfried later reforges the broken sword.

The story of Sigmund, beginning with the marriage of Signy to Siggeir and ending with Sigmund&#x27;s vengeance on Siggeir, was retold in the novelette &quot;Vengeance&quot; by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur, which appeared in the magazine &quot;Adventure&quot;, June 30, 1925. Brodeur was a professor at Berkeley and became well known for his scholarship on &quot;Beowulf&quot; and Norse sagas.

==See also==
*Simonside Hills

==Notes==
==References==
*Orchard, Andy (1997). &quot;Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend&quot;. Cassell. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="3" end="21" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="23" end="30" title="Sigmund" label="Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="74" end="87" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039590" start="108" end="113" title="Signý" label="Signý"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263694" start="135" end="142" title="Völsung" label="Völsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138818" start="156" end="161" title="Hljod" label="Hljod"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="202" end="208" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365214" start="322" end="334" title="dragonslayer" label="dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810814" start="416" end="423" title="Siggeir" label="Siggeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="437" end="445" title="Gautland" label="Gautland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="454" end="467" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="587" end="591" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="633" end="637" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861975" start="660" end="669" title="Barnstokk" label="Barnstokk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810814" start="889" end="896" title="Siggeir" label="Siggeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509240" start="1047" end="1051" title="Numbers in Norse mythology" label="nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484064" start="1304" end="1310" title="stocks" label="stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="1448" end="1461" title="shapeshifting" label="shapeshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="1666" end="1671" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477129" start="2255" end="2260" title="völva" label="völva"/>
<link wikidata="Q513564" start="2291" end="2300" title="Sinfjötli" label="Sinfjötli"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="2336" end="2343" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="2377" end="2383" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q254508" start="2458" end="2464" title="outlaw" label="outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="2621" end="2632" title="lycanthropy" label="lycanthropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945056" start="2773" end="2781" title="Borghild" label="Borghild"/>
<link wikidata="Q155432" start="2818" end="2823" title="Helgi Hundingsbane" label="Helgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58639539" start="2996" end="3003" title="Hjördís" label="Hjördís"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="3139" end="3143" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="3384" end="3390" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q886459" start="3428" end="3439" title="blood eagle" label="blood eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="3560" end="3568" title="Brynhild" label="Brynhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3841" end="3852" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="3864" end="3871" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="4055" end="4063" title="Geats" label="Gautland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="4190" end="4199" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q513564" start="4216" end="4225" title="Sinfjötli" label="Sinfjötli"/>
<link wikidata="Q81109" start="4230" end="4237" title="Mordred" label="Mordred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="4447" end="4461" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q279272" start="4469" end="4480" title="music drama" label="music drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q324319" start="4487" end="4498" title="Die Walkure" label="Die Walkure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="4525" end="4535" title="Ring cycle" label="Ring cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="4716" end="4723" title="Nothung" label="Nothung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798817" start="4964" end="4988" title="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur" label="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686486" start="5027" end="5036" title="Adventure (magazine)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520494" start="5192" end="5207" title="Simonside Hills" label="Simonside Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="5306" end="5313" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Cassell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87303" wikidata="Q1263694" url="?curid=87303" title="Völsung">
<text>Völsung ( , ) is a figure in Germanic mythology, where he is the eponymous ancestor of the Völsung family (, ), which includes the hero Sigurð. In Nordic mythology, he is the son of Rerir and was murdered by the Geatish king Siggeir. He was later avenged by one of his sons, Sigmund, and his daughter Signy, who was married to Siggeir.

Völsung&#x27;s story is recorded in the Völsung Cycle, a series of legends about the clan. The earliest extant versions of the cycle were recorded in medieval Iceland; the tales of the cycle were expanded with local Scandinavian folklore, including that of Helgi Hundingsbane (which appears to originally have been part of the separate tradition of the Ylfings), and form the material of the epic poems in the Elder Edda and of , which preserves material from lost poems. Völsung is also the subject matter of the Middle High German epic poem and is referred to in the Old English epic &quot;Beowulf&quot;.

==Name==
The Old English is composed of a suffix denoting a family (&quot;-ing&quot;) the name of the family&#x27;s ancestor, Wæls. similarly has the cognate suffix &quot;-ung&quot;, leading to the suggestion of an older Old Norse name for Völsung as Völsi, a cognate of Wæls. The name Völsi appears elsewhere in Völsa þáttr, a short story from Óláfs saga helga describing a preserved phallus, likely from a horse, referred to as &quot;Völsi&quot; being used in a heathen religious context. Following from this, it has been suggested that the original name of Völsung and his family evoked the fertility of a stallion.

==Attestations==
===Völsunga saga===
According to Völsunga saga, Völsung was the son of King Rerir of Hunaland, in turn, a grandson of Odin. The king and the queen were struggling to have a child and so prayed to the gods for help. In response, Frigg gave an apple of fertility to Hljóð, the daughter of the jötunn Hrímnir, who travelled to the queen using her (&quot;crow-shape&quot;). Völsung&#x27;s father the king died shortly after this, but the queen became pregnant for six years, until her health began to fail. She commanded that the child be delivered by caesarean section.

Völsung was born a well-grown child and was able to kiss his mother before she died. He was immediately proclaimed king of Hunaland, and when he had grown up he married Hljóð. Together they had ten sons and one daughter, including the twins Signy, their daughter, and Sigmund, the most courageous and beautiful of their sons.

Völsung built himself a great hall in the centre of which stood a large tree called the Barnstokkr. Siggeir, the King of the Geats, soon arrived and proposed to Signy. Both Völsung and his sons approved, but Signy was less enthusiastic. A great wedding was held in the hall, when suddenly a stranger appeared. He was a tall old man with only one eye and could not be anyone but Odin. He went to the tree, took his sword and stuck it deep into the trunk. Odin told everyone that the sword was meant for the man who could pull the sword from the tree. Then he vanished.

Everyone at the wedding tried to pull the sword but only Sigmund succeeded, and he did so effortlessly. Siggeir, his brother-in-law, offered thrice its weight in gold for the sword, but Sigmund scornfully said no. This greatly angered Siggeir, and he swore that one day the sword would be his and that he would avenge his humiliation upon the Völsung family. He returned home the next day, ending the wedding feast early. Before he left he invited the Völsungs to conclude the feast with him when the winter had passed.

Three months later Völsung and his sons sailed to Siggeir&#x27;s land. They were met by Signy, who warned them that Siggeir intended to ambush them. They refused to turn back, whereupon Signy cried and implored them to go home. Soon they were attacked by Siggeir&#x27;s army. Völsung fell and his ten sons were taken captive. His son Sigmund escapes and later avenges him by burning King Siggeir in his hall.

===Beowulf===
Völsung () and his family are referred to in Beowulf when a thegn is singing of how Sigemund slew a worm:

==Modern influence==
===Retellings===
The story of Völsung and his children, from the marriage of Signy to Siggeir to Sigmund&#x27;s vengeance on Siggeir, is retold in the novelette &quot;Vengeance&quot; by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur, which appeared in the magazine &quot;Adventure&quot;, June 30, 1925. Brodeur was a professor at Berkeley and became well known for his scholarship on Beowulf and sagas.

As &quot;Völsungakviđa en Nýja&quot; (&quot;The New Lay of the Völsungs&quot;) J. R. R. Tolkien retells the story in the Old Norse verse style of the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;. It was published posthumously together with a poetic retelling of the Niflung saga under the title, &quot;The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún&quot;.

===Wagner===
The Völsung tale was also the inspiration for much of Richard Wagner&#x27;s second and third operas of the Ring cycle. Siegmund and his twin sister Sieglinde reconnect and fall in love in &quot;Die Walküre&quot; (The Valkyrie) and Siegmund pulls the sword from the tree. Their son Siegfried goes on to become a hero in the following opera, &quot;Siegfried&quot;.

==Toponomy==
Place names derived from names of Völsung or his family:

England:
* Walsingham (&quot;Homestead of the Wælsings&quot;), parish in Norfolk comprising Little and Great Walsingham

==See also==
* Völsung Cycle
* Tyrfing Cycle

==Citations==
==References==
===Primary===
* 

==External links==
* The Story of Sigurd: &quot;Völsunga Saga&quot; retold by Andrew Lang
* &quot;Beowulf&quot; in modern English by Francis Barton Gummere
* &quot;Beowulf&quot; in modern English by John Lesslie Hall
* &quot;Dráp Niflunga&quot; translated by Henry Adams Bellows</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1263694" start="0" end="7" title="Völsung" label="Völsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="29" end="47" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="136" end="142" title="Sigurð" label="Sigurð"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="147" end="163" title="Nordic mythology" label="Nordic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q457767" start="182" end="187" title="Rerir" label="Rerir"/>
<link wikidata="Q511123" start="212" end="224" title="Geatish king" label="Geatish king"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810814" start="225" end="232" title="Siggeir" label="Siggeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="275" end="282" title="Sigmund" label="Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039590" start="301" end="306" title="Signy" label="Signy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202175" start="377" end="390" title="Völsung Cycle" label="Völsung Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="404" end="410" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="487" end="495" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="496" end="503" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039796" start="553" end="574" title="Scandinavian folklore" label="Scandinavian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q155432" start="594" end="612" title="Helgi Hundingsbane" label="Helgi Hundingsbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021120" start="690" end="696" title="Ylfing" label="Ylfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="747" end="757" title="Elder Edda" label="Elder Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q837985" start="851" end="869" title="Middle High German" label="Middle High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="870" end="879" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="906" end="917" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="929" end="936" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="958" end="969" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177735" start="1258" end="1269" title="Völsa þáttr" label="Völsa þáttr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182740" start="1290" end="1306" title="Óláfs saga helga" label="Óláfs saga helga"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="1409" end="1416" title="Old Norse religion" label="heathen"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="1615" end="1628" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q457767" start="1658" end="1663" title="Rerir" label="Rerir"/>
<link wikidata="Q9005425" start="1667" end="1675" title="Hunaland" label="Hunaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1700" end="1704" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131654" start="1810" end="1815" title="Frigg" label="Frigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138818" start="1846" end="1851" title="Hljóð" label="Hljóð"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="1873" end="1879" title="jötunn" label="jötunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10526770" start="1880" end="1887" title="Hrímnir" label="Hrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="2130" end="2147" title="caesarean section" label="caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039590" start="2391" end="2396" title="Signy" label="Signy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="2418" end="2425" title="Sigmund" label="Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861975" start="2565" end="2575" title="Barnstokkr" label="Barnstokkr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810814" start="2577" end="2584" title="Siggeir" label="Siggeir"/>
<link wikidata="Q511123" start="2590" end="2607" title="King of the Geats" label="King of the Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="2855" end="2859" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="4036" end="4043" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="4051" end="4056" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="4075" end="4083" title="Sigemund" label="Sigemund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="4091" end="4095" title="Germanic dragon" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798817" start="4305" end="4329" title="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur" label="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686486" start="4368" end="4377" title="Adventure (magazine)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="4493" end="4498" title="sagas" label="sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="4580" end="4596" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="4657" end="4668" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093934" start="4746" end="4758" title="Nibelung" label="Niflung saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q535639" start="4782" end="4813" title="The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún" label="The Legend of Sigurd and Gudrún"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="4889" end="4903" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="4942" end="4952" title="Ring of the Nibelung" label="Ring cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5270" end="5277" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q739666" start="5281" end="5291" title="Walsingham" label="Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="5343" end="5350" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202175" start="5406" end="5419" title="Völsung Cycle" label="Völsung Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328328" start="5422" end="5435" title="Tyrfing Cycle" label="Tyrfing Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q505827" start="5562" end="5573" title="Andrew Lang" label="Andrew Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719178" start="5617" end="5639" title="Francis Barton Gummere" label="Francis Barton Gummere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244660" start="5683" end="5700" title="John Lesslie Hall" label="John Lesslie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336703" start="5743" end="5762" title="Henry Adams Bellows (businessman)" label="Henry Adams Bellows"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87305" wikidata="Q525117" url="?curid=87305" title="Andvaranaut">
<text>In Norse mythology, Andvaranaut (12th c. Old Norse: ), meaning &quot;Andvari&#x27;s Gem&quot; (&quot;Andvari&#x27;s precious possession&quot;), is a magic ring, initially owned by Andvari, that could help with finding sources of gold.

The mischievous god Loki stole Andvari&#x27;s treasure and the ring. In revenge, Andvari cursed the ring to bring misfortune and destruction to whoever possessed it. Loki quickly gave the cursed Andvaranaut to Hreidmar, King of the Dwarves, as reparation for having inadvertently killed Hreidmar&#x27;s son, Ótr. Ótr&#x27;s brother, Fafnir, then murdered Hreidmar and took the ring, turning into a dragon to guard it. Sigurd (Siegfried) later killed Fafnir and gave Andvaranaut to Brynhildr (Brünnehilde). Queen Grimhild of the Nibelungs then manipulated Sigurd and Brynhildr into marrying her children, bringing Andvaranaut&#x27;s curse into her family.

== Literary references ==

Richard Wagner used Andvaranaut as inspiration for the title of his musical drama &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;. J.R.R. Tolkien may have been inspired by Andvaranaut when designing the One Ring, both by making the One Ring cursed and by making one of its aspects to allow the wearer to find the other Rings of Power, knowing the location of the wearer of each of the Rings of Power, so that the wearer of the One Ring could control these Ringbearers.

== See also ==
* Rings in early Germanic cultures

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q648336" start="33" end="40" title="First Grammatical Treatise" label="12th c."/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="41" end="50" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500666" start="149" end="159" title="magic ring" label="magic ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="180" end="187" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="240" end="251" title="trickster" label="mischievous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="256" end="260" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390232" start="446" end="454" title="Hreidmar" label="Hreidmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="468" end="475" title="Norse dwarf" label="Dwarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313906" start="480" end="490" title="Reparation (legal)" label="reparation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967084" start="544" end="547" title="Ótr" label="Ótr"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="569" end="575" title="Fafnir" label="Fafnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053400" start="634" end="640" title="Germanic dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="654" end="660" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="717" end="726" title="Brunhild" label="Brynhildr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565635" start="748" end="756" title="Grimhild" label="Grimhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093934" start="764" end="772" title="Nibelung" label="Nibelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="919" end="933" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="1007" end="1030" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="1038" end="1052" title="J.R.R. Tolkien" label="J.R.R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q19852" start="1110" end="1118" title="One Ring" label="One Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406822" start="1226" end="1240" title="Rings of Power" label="Rings of Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q113947402" start="1394" end="1426" title="Rings in early Germanic cultures" label="Rings in early Germanic cultures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87306" wikidata="Q1257834" url="?curid=87306" title="Gudrun">
<text>Gudrun ( ; ) or Kriemhild ( ; ) is the wife of Sigurd/Siegfried and a major figure in Germanic heroic legend and literature. She is believed to have her origins in Ildico, last wife of Attila the Hun, and two queens of the Merovingian dynasty, Brunhilda of Austrasia and Fredegund.

In both the Continental (German) and Scandinavian traditions, Gudrun/Kriemhild is the sister of the Burgundian king Gunther/Gunnar and marries the hero Siegfried/Sigurd. Both traditions also feature a major rivalry between Gudrun and Brunhild, Gunther&#x27;s wife, over their respective ranks. In both traditions, once Sigurd has been murdered, Gudrun is married to Etzel/Atli, the legendary analogue of Attila the Hun. In the Norse tradition, Atli desires the hoard of the Nibelungen, which the Burgundians had taken after murdering Sigurd, and invites them to his court; intending to kill them. Gudrun then avenges her brothers by killing Atli and burning down his hall. The Norse tradition then tells of her further life as mother of Svanhild and enemy of Jormunrekr. In the continental tradition, Kriemhild instead desires revenge for her brothers&#x27; murder of Siegfried, and invites them to visit Etzel&#x27;s court intending to kill them. Her revenge destroys both the Huns and the Burgundians, and in the end she herself is killed.

In Richard Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;, Siegfried&#x27;s wife is known as Gutrune. As Wagner&#x27;s cycle ends with Siegfried&#x27;s funeral and its immediate aftermath, it does not include her marriage to Atli/Etzel or revenge for Siegfried&#x27;s death. 

Some of the differences and similarities between Gudrun and Kriemhild in the Scandinavian and continental Germanic traditions can be seen in the following two stanzas taken from original sources. The first is Kriemhild&#x27;s introduction in the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;:
And this is how Gudrun is described at the end of the Eddic poem &quot;Atlakviða&quot;:
==Etymology==
The etymology of &quot;Gudrun&quot; (&quot;Guðrún&quot;) is straightforward: it consists of two elements. The first is Proto-Germanic &quot;*gunþ-&quot;, Old Norse &quot;gunnr&quot;, meaning battle; it shows the typical North Sea Germanic loss of a nasal before a dental spirant (&quot;*Gunþrūn&quot; to &quot;Guðrún&quot;). The second element is Old Norse &quot;rún&quot;, meaning secret. On the continent, this name is only attested for an apparently unrelated figure (see &quot;Kudrun&quot;).

The etymology of &quot;Kriemhild&quot; is less clear. The second element is clearly &quot;-hild&quot;, meaning battle or conflict. There is no consensus about the first element though, and it is also variously spelled &quot;Grim-&quot; and &quot;Crem-&quot;. One theory derives it from a root &quot;*Grīm-&quot; (cf. Old English &quot;grīma&quot;) meaning mask. Another theory connects it an otherwise unattested root &quot;Krēm-&quot;. According to both theories, the form &quot;Grim-&quot; with a short vowel represents an alteration of the original root to be more similar to the word &quot;grim&quot;, meaning terrible. Yet another theory derives the first element from a verb similar to Middle High German &quot;grimmen&quot;, meaning to rage.

In the Scandinavian tradition, Gudrun&#x27;s mother is known as Grimhild (&quot;Grimhildr&quot;), the cognate name to Kriemhild. Victor Millet suggests that the name, along with the mother&#x27;s wickedness, may derive from the continental tradition.

Scholarly opinion diverges as to which name is more original: either both names are old, the name &quot;Gudrun&quot; is the original name and the name &quot;Kriemhild&quot; a later invention, or the name &quot;Kriemhild&quot; is the original name and the name &quot;Gudrun&quot; was created to share the same first element as the other Burgundians &quot;Gunther&quot; (&quot;Gunnar&quot;) and &quot;Guthorm&quot; (see Gundomar I).

==Origins==
Gudrun is believed to have her origins in two historical figures who featured in two originally independent traditions, one about the death of Sigurd and another about the destruction of the Burgundians by the Huns.

In the first instance, Gudrun&#x27;s quarrel with Brunhild, which results in Sigurd&#x27;s death at the urging of the latter, is widely thought to have its origins in the quarrel between the two historical Frankish queens, Brunhilda of Austrasia and Fredegund, the latter of whom had Brunhild&#x27;s husband Sigebert I murdered by his brother Chilperic I, her husband. In the oral tradition, Brunhilda&#x27;s name has become attached to the murderer rather than the wife. The second element of Fredegund&#x27;s name, meanwhile, corresponds with the first in Gudrun&#x27;s.

In the case of the destruction of the Burgundians, Gudrun can be traced to Attila&#x27;s wife Ildico, who was rumored to have murdered him. The written form Ildico is generally taken to represent the Germanic name &quot;*Hildiko&quot;, which would be a diminutive form of the name &quot;Hild&quot; and would thus correspond to the second element in &quot;Kriemhild&quot;.

==Continental Germanic traditions and attestations==
===&quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;===

Kriemhild is the main character of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot; (c. 1200): she is the first character to be introduced and the romance ends with her death. The poem is even called &quot;Kriemhild&quot; in at least one manuscript. It has even been argued that the epic represents a sort of &quot;Bildungsroman&quot; for Kriemhild, as she develops from a relatively mild-manner courtly lady into a forceful and ferocious avenger of her dead husband. Various versions of the text judge her actions differently; in the A and B versions, she is condemned as a &quot;vâlendinne&quot; (fiend) for her bloody revenge, but the C version emphasizes her love for her dead husband as her motivation and absolves her of most blame.

In the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, Kriemhild is the daughter of king Dancrat and queen Ute of Burgundy, a kingdom centered around Worms. Her brothers are Gunther, Gernot, and Giselher, with Gunther being the king. The poem opens when Kriemhild has a dream that she raised a falcon only to see it killed by two eagles. Her mother explains to her that this means she will love a man very much, but he will be killed. One day, Siegfried comes to the Burgundian court, intending to woo Kriemhild. The two do not speak for a year, but once Siegfried has helped the Burgundians in a war the two are allowed to see each other for the first time. They fall deeply in love and see each other daily. Once Siegfried has helped Kriemhild&#x27;s brother king Gunther acquire Brunhild as his bride, Kriemhild and Siegfried are also married. The couple then leaves from Siegfried&#x27;s own kingdom at Xanten.

Some years pass, and Kriemhild and Siegfried have a son whom they name Gunther. One day, Brunhild, who had been convinced that Siegfried was Gunther&#x27;s vassal rather than an equal king, convinces Gunther to invite his sister and Siegfried to stay with them at Worms. Initially, Brunhild and Kriemhild get along, but in the private while they are watching a tournament, they soon argue over which of them has the highest ranking husband. Brunhild accuses Kriemhild of being married to a vassal. The queens part in anger. Later, the two queens encounter each other before entering the cathedral at Worms for mass. Brunhild and Kriemhild each insist that they should be allowed to enter the church before the other. Brunhild repeats her accusation that Kriemhild is married to a vassal publicly. Kriemhild then declares that Siegfried, and not Gunther, has taken Brunhild&#x27;s virginity, displaying Brunhild apparent proof. Kriemhild then enters the church before Brunhild.

Siegfried is forced to publicly deny the accusation to Gunther, and beats Kriemhild to punish her. Brunhild is not satisfied, however, and Hagen convinces Gunther to have Siegfried murdered. Under the pretext that he wants to protect Siegfried, Hagen convinces Kriemhild to reveal the only spot where impenetrable Siegfried may be wounded. Once Siegfried is murdered while hunting with Hagen and Gunther, his body is thrown in front of Kriemhild&#x27;s bedroom door. Kriemhild quickly realizes that Siegfried was murdered by Gunther and Hagen. Kriemhild sees to Siegfried&#x27;s burial and refuses to return to Xanten with Siegfried&#x27;s father, instead remaining in Worms near her family and Siegfried&#x27;s tomb. Eventually, Gunther and his brothers are able to reconcile with Kriemhild, but she refuses to forgive Hagen. Kriemhild has the hoard of the Nibelungen, which she has inherited after Siegfried&#x27;s death, brought to Worms. She uses the hoard to acquire warriors; Hagen, realizing that she is dangerous, conspires to steal the hoard and sink it in the Rhine.

Thirteen years later, king Etzel of the Huns seeks Kriemhild&#x27;s hand in marriage, and she reluctantly agrees. Thirteen years after her arrival in Etzel&#x27;s kingdom, she convinces Etzel to invite her brothers to a feast. Gunther agrees and the Burgundians and their vassals arrive at Etzel&#x27;s court. Kriemhild greets her brothers but mockingly asks Hagen whether he has brought her what he stole at Worms. Later, Kriemhild confronts Hagen with a group of Huns, and Hagen provokes her by bragging that he killed Siegfried. None of the Huns is brave enough to attack, and the Burgundians prevent an attack that Kriemhild had planned for that night. The next day, Kriemhild convinces Etzel&#x27;s brother Bloedelin to attack the Burgundians&#x27; supplies; this occurs while Etzel, Kriemhild, and their son Ortlieb are seated in the hall with Burgundians. Upon hearing of the attack, Hagen decapitates the Hunnish prince. Fighting erupts, but Dietrich von Bern arranges for Kriemhild and Etzel to leave the hall. Kriemhild later demands that Gunther surrender Hagen to her, but he refuses: she then has the hall set on fire. Eventually, Dietrich von Bern captures Gunther and Hagen as the last survivors in the hall, handing them over to Kriemhild. Kriemhild separates the two and demands that Hagen give back to her what he has taken from her. Hagen says he cannot tell her where the hoard is as long as his lord Gunther lives; Kriemhild then has Gunther decapitated. Hagen then reveals that the hoard is in the Rhine; Kriemhild takes Siegfried&#x27;s sword, which Hagen had stolen, and beheads him with it herself. Dietrich&#x27;s mentor Hildebrand, outraged that a woman has killed a great warrior, then hacks Kriemhild to pieces.

===&quot;Nibelungenklage&quot;===
Although Kriemhild does not appear as a living character in the &quot;Nibelungenklage&quot;, the sequel to the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, the poem nevertheless goes to great lengths to absolve her of blame for the catastrophe of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;. According to the &quot;Nibelungenklage&quot;, Kriemhild was acting out of true love for Siegfried and the true treachery was that of Hagen. This is underlined by having Hildebrand specifically blame Hagen for the disaster, calling him a &quot;vâlant&quot; (fiend), the male counterpart to the accusation that Kriemhild is a &quot;vâlandinne&quot; (fiend).

=== &quot;Þiðrekssaga&quot; ===
Although the &quot;Þiðrekssaga&quot; (c. 1250) is written in Old Norse, the majority of the material is translated from German (particularly Low German) oral tales, as well as possibly some from German written sources such as the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;. Therefore, it is included here.

In the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot;, Grimhild (Kriemhild) is the daughter of king Aldrian of Niflungaland and Oda, sister of king Gunnar (Gunther), Gisler (Giselher), and Gernoz (Gernot), and half sister of Högni (Hagen). When Sigurd (Siegfried) comes to Gunnar&#x27;s kingdom one day, he marries Grimhild and suggests that Gunnar marry Brunhild. Some time later, Grimhild and Brunhild argue over precedent in the king&#x27;s hall. Brunhild accuses Grimhild of not even being married to a man of noble birth, whereupon Grimhild reveals that Sigurd and not Gunnar took Brunhild&#x27;s virginity, showing a ring that Sigurd had given her as proof. Brunhild then agitates for Sigurd&#x27;s murder; once Grimhild&#x27;s brothers have murdered Sigurd, they place his corpse in her bed.

Some time later, Atli (Etzel) woos Grimhild to be his new wife. Seven years later Grimhild convinces Atli to invite the Burgundians (called Niflungs) to visit her by mentioning the hoard of the Nibelungen which her brothers had stolen from her. Atli is seized by greed for the hoard and agrees. Once the Burgundians arrive, Grimhild demands the hoard from them, but Högni replies that it was left behind. Grimhild attempts to convince Atli&#x27;s brother Bloedel and Thidrek (Dietrich von Bern) to help her take revenge, but both refuse. Finally, she provokes a fight by bringing her and Atli&#x27;s son into the hall, seating him across from Högni, and telling the son to hit Högni. Högni reacts to a second blow by cutting off the prince&#x27;s head, leading to a terrible massacre. After severe fighting, Gunnar is captured, and Grimhild tells Atli to throw him in a tower full of snakes. Högni now leads the Burgundians, who lock themselves in the king&#x27;s hall. Grimhild orders the hall set on fire, and in the following battle Gisler and Gernoz die. Grimhild sticks a piece of flaming wood into her dead brothers&#x27; mouths to see if they are dead, causing an enraged Thidrek to kill her.

The author of the saga has made a number of changes to create a more or less coherent story out of the many oral and possibly written sources that he used to create the saga. The author mentions alternative Scandinavian versions of many of these same tales, and appears to have changed some details to match the stories known by his Scandinavian audience. The saga&#x27;s version of the downfall of the Burgundians represents a unique mix of elements known from the Norse and continental traditions.

===&quot;Rosengarten zu Worms&quot;===

In the &quot;Rosengarten zu Worms&quot; (c. 1250), Kriemhild is the daughter of king Gibeche. She possesses a rose garden that is guarded by twelve heroes, including her fiancé, Siegfried. Desiring to see whether Siegfried can beat Dietrich von Bern in combat, she challenges Dietrich to bring twelve of his own heroes for a day of tournaments in the rose garden. The winner will receive a garland and a kiss from her as a reward. Dietrich accepts the challenge, and the heroes come to Worms. Eventually, all of the Burgundian heroes are defeated, including Siegfried, who flees to Kriemhild&#x27;s lap in fear when Dietrich starts breathing fire. Dietrich&#x27;s warrior Ilsan, a monk, punishes Kriemhild for her haughtiness in challenging Dietrich by demanding so many kisses from Kriemhild that his rough beard causes her face to bleed. In one version of the poem, Hagen curses Kriemhild for having provoked the combat.

The poem takes a highly critical judgment of Kriemhild. As in the A and B versions of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, she is called a &quot;vâlandinne&quot; (fiend) and she derives great joy from watching the knights fight in at times brutal combat.

The name of Kriemhild&#x27;s father, Gibeche, corresponds to Gjúki in the Scandinavian tradition, and is also found in the &quot;Lied vom Hürnen Seyfrid&quot; and Heldenbuch-Prosa (see below); this shows the &quot;Rosengarten&#x27;s&quot; connection to an oral tradition outside of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, despite the &quot;Rosengarten&#x27;s&quot; obvious knowledge of the earlier poem.

===Heldenbuch-Prosa===
The Heldenbuch-Prosa, first found in the 1480 Heldenbuch of Diebolt von Hanowe and afterwards contained in printings until 1590, is considered one of the most important attestations of a continued oral tradition outside of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, with many details agreeing with the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot;.

In the Heldenbuch-Prosa, Kriemhild is the daughter of king Gibeche and married to Siegfried. She arranges for the disaster at Etzel&#x27;s hall in order to take vengeance on Dietrich von Bern for having killed Siegfried in the rose garden. She provokes the fighting by having her and Etzel&#x27;s son brought into the hall and having the child provoke Hagen, who kills him. This leads to an outbreak of hostilities in which many heroes die. When Dietrich takes Gunther and Hagen prisoner, she cuts off their heads, causing Dietrich to cut her to pieces.

===&quot;Das Lied vom Hürnen Seyfrid&quot;===

In the late medieval/early modern heroic ballad &quot;Das Lied vom Hürnen Seyfrid&quot;, Kriemhild is the daughter of king Gybich and sister of Gunther, Gyrnot (Gernot), and Hagen. The name Gybich agrees with the &quot;Rosengarten zu Worms&quot; and corresponds to the Old Norse Gjúki, and the fact that Hagen is one of Kriemhild&#x27;s brothers accords with the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot; and the Scandinavian tradition as well. This is taken as evidence that these elements of the tradition existed in oral story-telling into the late Middle Ages.

In the middle of the ballad, a dragon abducts Kriemhild from her home in Worms. The dragon holds Kriemhild captive for years in his lair of mount Trachenstein (dragon stone), treating her well. One day it lays its head in her lap and transforms into a man, explaining that she needs to stay with him for five years. After that time he will marry her and they will travel to hell together. Kriemhild prays to avoid this fate. Finally, Siegfried (Seyfrid) arrives to save her, but the dragon appears. The dragon forces Siegfried and Kriemhild to flee into the depths of the mountain, where they find the treasure of the Nibelungen and a sword that can cut through the dragon&#x27;s skin. Siegfried defeats the dragon, and Kriemhild and Siegfried return to Worms, where they are married and Siegfried rules together with Kriemhild&#x27;s brothers. Her brothers, however, resent how powerful Siegfried has become and after seven years, they murder him.

It has been suggested that Siegfried&#x27;s liberation of Kriemhild may be a repurposing of a lost German story about Brunhild, though this is far from certain. The &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot; version m includes a version of Siegfried&#x27;s freeing of Kriemhild from a dragon, meaning the legend developed by 1400. The earliest surviving copy of the ballad itself is from 1530.

===Other traditions and attestations===
The ninth-century anonymous Saxon poet known as Poeta Saxo records that Attila&#x27;s wife killed him to avenge the death of her father.

The Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus records in his &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; that a Saxon minstrel tried unsuccessfully to warn the Danish prince Canute Lavard of the betrayal of his cousin Magnus the Strong by singing of &quot;the famous treachery of Grimhild against her brothers&quot; (&quot;notissimam Grimildae erga fratres perfidiam&quot;).

The phrase &quot;Kriemhilden hôchzît&quot; (Kriemhild&#x27;s festival) is attested in other medieval German works to denote an especially bloody battle.

In a song of the mid-thirteenth-century wandering lyric poet Der Marner, &quot;whom Kriemhild betrayed&quot; (&quot;wen Kriemhilt verriet&quot;) is mentioned as a popular story that the German courtly public enjoyed hearing, along with tales of Sigurd&#x27;s death and the hoard of the Nibelungs.

The Hungarian chronicler Simon of Kéza (late thirteenth-century) records that Attila the Hun was killed by his wife Kriemhild.

==Scandinavian traditions and attestations==
===&quot;Gesta Danorum&quot;===
The Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus records a version of the story of Jorumrek (Ermanaric)&#x27;s death that includes Gudrun (as Guthruna) in Latin in his &quot;Gesta Danorum&quot; . In this version, in which &quot;Jarmericus&quot; is a Danish king, Gudrun appears as a powerful sorceress who casts spells on the weapons of the brothers coming to avenge Svanhild&#x27;s death that make them invincible.

Saxo probably completed his history before 1208, making this the earliest version of the Scandinavian tradition to have survived and roughly contemporary with the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;. Victor Millet nevertheless believes that Saxo is of little value as a source for authentic heroic traditions, as he appears to have thoroughly altered whatever sources he used.

===&quot;Prose Edda&quot;===
The so-called Prose Edda of Snorri Sturluson is the earliest attestation of the full Scandinavian version of Gudrun&#x27;s life, dating to around 1220. Snorri tells the story of Gudrun in several chapters of the section of the poem called &quot;Skáldskaparsmál&quot;. His presentation of the story is very similar to that found in the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot; (see below), but is considerably shorter.

Gudrun is introduced as the daughter of Gjúki and Grimhild, full sister to Gunnar and Högni, and half-sister to Guthorm. Gudrun marries Sigurd when he comes to Gjúki&#x27;s kingdom. When Sigurd returns from aiding Gunnar in his wooing of Brunhild, Sigurd and Gudrun have two children, a son named Sigmund and a daughter named Svanhild. Some time later, Gudrun and Brunhild have a quarrel while washing their hair in a river: Brunhild says that she cannot have the water that touched Gudrun&#x27;s hair touch hers, for she is married to the braver husband. The fight leads Gudrun to reveal that it was Sigurd in Gunnar&#x27;s shape who rode through the flames to woo Brunhild, producing a ring that Sigurd had taken from Brunhild as proof. This knowledge leads Brunhild to agitate for Sigurd&#x27;s murder, which is performed by Gudrun&#x27;s half-brother Guthorm, who also kills the young Sigmund.

Following this, Gudrun is married to king Atli (Attila). When Atli invites Gudrun&#x27;s brothers and kills them for their gold, Gudrun kills her two sons by Atli. She makes their skulls into drinking goblets and cooks their hearts, giving them to Atli to eat. She then tells Atli what she has done, and later kills Atli together with Högni&#x27;s son. She then burns down the hall.

Afterwards, Gudrun tries to drown herself in the sea, but she washes ashore in the land of King Jonak. Jonak marries her and has three sons with her, Sorli, Hamdir, and Erp. Svanhild, Sigurd&#x27;s daughter, is also raised there, before being married to king Jormunrek. When Jormunrek kills Svanhild for adultery, Gudrun tells her sons to kill him, giving them special weapons that could not be pierced by iron. The sons die in the attempt, leading to the extinction of Gjúki&#x27;s line.

===&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;===
The &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, a collection of heroic and mythological Nordic poems, appears to have been compiled around 1270 in Iceland, and assembles mythological and heroic songs of various ages. As elsewhere in the Scandinavian tradition, Gudrun is portrayed as the sister of Gunnar and Högni. Depending on the poem Guthorm is either her full brother, step-brother, or half-brother. A sister Gullrönd also appears in one poem.

Generally, none of the poems in the collection is thought to be older than 900 and some appear to have been written in the thirteenth century. It is also possible that apparently old poems have been written in an archaicizing style and that apparently recent poems are reworkings of older material, so that reliable dating is impossible.

====&quot;Grípisspá&quot;====
In &quot;Grípisspá&quot;, a prophecy that Sigurd receives about his future life and deeds, it is mentioned that Gudrun will be his wife, and that Brunhild will feel insulted by this. The prophecy ends shortly after describing Gudrun&#x27;s grief and blaming her mother Grimhild for the whole debacle.

The poem is probably not very old.

====&quot;Brot af Sigurðarkviðu&quot;====
&quot;Brot af Sigurðarkviðu&quot; is only preserved fragmentarily: the surviving part of the poem tells the story of Sigurd&#x27;s murder. The poem briefly shows Gudrun&#x27;s surprise and grief at Sigurd&#x27;s death, as well as her hostility to Brunhild. She is portrayed as a less important character than Brunhild. The lost part of the poem probably shows Gudrun to reveal Sigurd and Gunnar&#x27;s deception in the wooing.

====&quot;Guðrúnarkviða I&quot;====
In &quot;Guðrúnarkviða I&quot;, Gudrun lies besides Sigurd&#x27;s corpse but is unable to weep. Two other women attempt to comfort her by telling of their own grief, but it is only when Gudrun&#x27;s sister Gullrönd uncovers Sigurd&#x27;s body and tells her to kiss it that she is able to weep. Gudrun now accuses Gunnar of the murder and denies him any right to Sigurd&#x27;s treasure. She warns that she will avenge her husband. It is implied that if Gudrun had been unable to weep, she may have died.

The poem focuses entirely on Gudrun&#x27;s grief at the death of Sigurd, omitting almost all details surrounding his death. The three women, including Gudrun&#x27;s sister Gullrönd, are probably inventions of the poet.

====&quot;Sigurðarkviða hin skamma&quot;====
&quot;Sigurðarkviða hin skamma&quot; retells the story of Sigurd&#x27;s life from his arrival at Gunnar&#x27;s court to his murder.
Gudrun plays a passive role in the poem. She is shown to wake up in a pool of blood from the dying Sigurd, who then makes a short speech to her blaming Brunhild, predicting the murder of their son, assuring her that he has not slept with Brunhild, and noting that he brothers still live. After this, she disappears from the poem and is only mentioned by Brunhild.

====&quot;Dráp Niflunga&quot;====
The &quot;Dráp Niflunga&quot; is a short prose section connecting the death of Sigurd to the following poems about the Burgundians (Niflungs) and Atli (Attila). Atli, who is Brunhild&#x27;s brother, blames Gunnar for Brunhild&#x27;s death, and in order to placate him Gunnar marries Gudrun to Atli. Gudrun must be given a magic potion to make her forget about Sigurd first. Some time later Atli invites Gunnar and Högni intending to betray them and take their gold. Gudrun attempts to warn her brothers, but they come anyway. After they are taken prisoner by Atli, she asks her sons to intervene with their father on Gunnar and Högni&#x27;s behalf, but they refuse.

====&quot;Guðrúnarkviða II&quot;====
In &quot;Guðrúnarkviða II&quot;, Gudrun is at Atli&#x27;s court. She laments of her fate to Thiodrek (Þjódrekr, i.e. Dietrich von Bern and tells the story of her tribulations leading to her marriage to Atli. She recounts how Sigurd was killed and how she then wandered to Denmark, where she stayed with King Half for three and a half years. Then her family came for her, and her mother Grimhild gave her a potion to forget her sorrow. Then she was forced to marry Atli. One night, Atli awoke and told Gudrun that he had had a dream that she would kill him and cause him to eat his sons. Gudrun interprets the dream in a way that makes it seem harmless.

The poem is probably one of the most recent in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;. Its account of Sigurd&#x27;s death generally follow the account in &quot;Brot af Sigurðarkviðu&quot;, but ignores Brunhild and includes the detail that Gudrun went into the woods to mourn over Sigurd&#x27;s body. The inclusion of the figure of Thiodrek points to continental influence on the poem. The last stanza is incomplete, and scholars debate whether the poem originally also included Gudrun&#x27;s killing of Atli and his sons.

Victor Millet notes that the detail of the potion of forgetting helps explain why Gudrun does not seek to avenge Sigurd; he connects this to a possible attempt to discount the continental version of the story, which the poet appears to have known. The use of the name Grimhild for her mother, the cognate name for Kriemhild, and that character&#x27;s manifest wickedness may also derive from the continental tradition.

====&quot;Guðrúnarkviða III&quot;====
In &quot;Guðrúnarkviða III&quot;, Atli&#x27;s concubine Herkja accuses Gudrun of sleeping with Thiodrek. Gudrun denies the charges and engages in an ordeal of hot water to prove her innocence. To perform the ordeal, she puts her hand into the kettle of boiling water, and because she is innocent, she is unscathed. Herkja is then forced to perform the same ordeal and burns herself. As a punishment, she is killed by being drowned in a bog.

Like &quot;Guðrúnarkviða II&quot;, &quot;Guðrúnarkviða III&quot; shows knowledge of continental traditions with the figure of Thiodrek. In addition, Herkja corresponds to the German Helche (in the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot;, Erka), the first wife of Etzel (Atli) in the continental tradition. She only appears here in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;. Michael Curschmann argues that the poem is a transformation of a continental Germanic legend in which Dietrich (Thjodrek) is accused of sleeping with Etzel&#x27;s wife Helche (Herkja), with whom he had a close relationship; an Old Norse poet then made Herkja into a concubine and accuser and made Gudrun into the accused.

Although the poem is placed before the poems about Atli&#x27;s death in the codex, references to Gudrun being without kin seem to indicate that it takes place after the death of the Burgundians.

====&quot;Atlakviða&quot;====
In &quot;Atlakviða&quot;, Atli invites Gudrun&#x27;s brothers Högni and Gunnar to his hall with the intent of killing them. The brothers come, although Gudrun has sent them a warning. Once Gunnar and Högni are dead, Gudrun offers Atli a drink and invites him and the Huns to a feast. After all are drunk, she reveals that Atli has eaten his sons, kills him, then sets the hall on fire, killing everyone within, including herself.

&quot;Atlakviða&quot; is commonly supposedly to be one of the oldest poems in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, possibly dating from the ninth century. Gudrun feeding Atli his sons may derive from the antique story of Tereus and Procne, however. The poem is particularly notable in that Sigurd is not mentioned at all.

====&quot;Atlamál hin groenlenzku&quot;====
&quot;Atlamál hin groenlenzku&quot; tells the same story as &quot;Atlakviða&quot; with several important differences. Gudrun tries to warn her brothers of Atli&#x27;s betrayal, but they decide to come anyway. Gudrun greets her brothers when they arrive and tries to negotiate between them and Atli, but when she sees that this is not possible she fights together with them until she is captured. Gudrun and Atli then accuse each other of causing the slaughter. Atli kills Gunnar and Högni and then tells Gudrun. She curses him, and he offers her some form of compensation, which she refuses. Gudrun pretends to have reconciled herself with the situation, but secretly kills her sons and feeds them to Atli. She tells Atli what he has eaten then kills Atli with the help of Högni&#x27;s son Hniflung. While he dies, Atli claims to have treated Gudrun well and accuses her of being cruel. Gudrun defends herself and promises to bury Atli appropriately, and tries to kill herself.

This version of the poem makes the destruction of the Burgundians look like the result of a feud between Atli and Gudrun; Atli is even said to execute Gunnar and Högni to hurt his wife.

====&quot;Guðrúnarhvöt&quot;====

&quot;Guðrúnarhvöt&quot; is proceeded by a brief prose interlude that explains that tried to drown herself in the sea after killing Atli, but was instead taken to the land of King Jonak, who married her and with whom she had three sons, Hamdir, Sorli, and Erp, and where she also raises Svanhild, her daughter with Sigurd. Svanhild is married to Jormunrek, who later kills her on suspicion of jealousy.

The poem proper starts after Gudrun has learned of Svanhild&#x27;s death: she stirs up her three sons to kill Jormunrek and avenge their sister. The brothers agree, warning her, however, they will surely die. This leads Gudrun to tell them of her own woes in life. Once she is left alone, Gudrun calls for death and hopes that Sigurd will ride back from Hel to see her. They will then burn together on the same funeral pyre.

====&quot;Hamðismál&quot;====
Gudrun appears briefly at the beginning of &quot;Hamðismál&quot;: she encourages her sons to avenge Svanhild, which they reluctantly agree to do.

This lay is often supposed to be the oldest in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, but more recent scholarship suggests it may actually be fairly recent.

===&quot;Völsunga saga&quot;===
The &quot;Völsunga saga&quot; follows the plot given in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; fairly closely, although there is no indication that the author knew the other text. The author appears to have been working in Norway and to have known the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot;, and therefore the &quot;Völsunga Saga&quot; is dated to sometime in the second half of the thirteenth century.

In the saga, Gudrun is the daughter of Gjuki, sister to Gunnar and Högni, and Guthorm. Gudrun is introduced to the saga having a bad dream; she chooses to go to Brunhild to have this dream interpreted. Brunhild explains that Gudrun will marry Sigurd, even though he is betrothed to Brunhild, and that Gudrun will afterwards lose him due to conflict. When Sigurd comes to the court, Gudrun&#x27;s mother Grimhild gives Sigurd a potion to forget his betrothal to Brunhild, and he marries Gudrun. Sigurd then helps Gunnar woo Brunhild, using a spell taught them by Grimhild, and for a time Brunhild and Gudrun share Gjuki&#x27;s court.

One day Gudrun and Brunhild quarrel while washing their hair; Brunhild insists that her husband Gunnar is a higher-ranking man than Sigurd. This causes Gudrun to reveal that it was Sigurd in Gunnar&#x27;s shape who won Brunhild, and she shows Brunhild a ring that Brunhild had given Sigurd as proof. The queens continue their quarrel in the king&#x27;s hall the next day. Brunhild then persuades Gunnar and Högni to have Sigurd killed, claiming that Sigurd slept with her. The murder is carried out by their younger brother Guthorm. Guthorm attacks Sigurd while he is asleep in bed with Gudrun; Sigurd is mortally wounded, but kills Guthorm. He then assures Gudrun that he never deceived Gunnar and dies. Gudrun then cries out loudly, which Brunhild answers with a loud laugh.

Gudrun afterwards flees to the Danish king Half, but is later retrieved by her family. Grimhild gives her daughter a potion to make her forget her anger against her brothers, then convinces a reluctant Gudrun to marry Atli. Atli and Gudrun are not happily married, and Atli soon desires the gold of Gudrun&#x27;s brothers. He invites them to his hall intending to kill them for the gold. Gudrun warns them, but the warning is ignored. When the brothers arrive, Gudrun first attempts to mediate between the two sides, but afterwards fights with her brothers until they are captured and then killed. During the preparations for the funeral feast for her brothers, Gudrun kills Atli&#x27;s sons. She feeds their flesh to Atli. Then she kills Atli in his bed with the help of Högni&#x27;s son Niflung. Finally, they set the palace on fire and kill everyone inside.

Gudrun now attempts to drown herself, but she is instead washed up in the land of king Jonak, who marries her. They have three sons, Hamdir, Sorli, and Erp. Gudrun&#x27;s daughter with Sigurd, Svanhild, is also raised at Jonak&#x27;s court. Svanhild marries King Jormunrek, but kills her on suspicion of adultery. Gudrun then rallies her sons to avenge their half-sister, giving them armor that cannot be cut through by iron.

===Wild Hunt===

In the legend of the Wild Hunt, Gudhrun Gjúkadottir is referred to as Guro Rysserova (&quot;Gudrun Horse-tail&quot;).

==Theories about the development of the Gudrun figure==
Based on &quot;Atlakviða&quot;, most scholars believe that the destruction of the Burgundians and the murder of Sigurd were originally separate traditions. Gudrun&#x27;s two names may result from the merging of two different figures, one who was the wife of Sigurd, and one who was the brother of the Burgundians killed by Attila.

The first attestation of Kriemhild or Gudrun, however, is the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;. This is also the first secure attestation of a combined legend of the death of Sigurd and the destruction of the Burgundians.

===Role in the destruction of Burgundians===
The destruction of the Burgundian kingdom derives from the destruction of a historical Burgundian kingdom, ruled by king Gundicharius (Gunther) and located on the Rhine, by the Roman general Flavius Aetius in 436/437, possibly with the help of Hunnish mercenaries. The downfall of this kingdom was blamed on Attila and combined with his death at the hands of his wife at some early point in the development of the legend.

Scholars are generally in agreement that Gudrun&#x27;s original role in the destruction of Burgundians was that of the Scandinavian tradition, in which she avenges her brothers. Her role then altered in the continental tradition once the story of the destruction of the Burgundians became attached to the story of Sigurd&#x27;s murder. These changes occurred sometime before the composition of the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot; (c. 1200), the first text to securely attest either development.

Jan-Dirk Müller, however, argues that we cannot know for sure which version of Gudrun&#x27;s role is more original, as neither resembles the actual historical destruction of the Burgundians or the end of Etzel&#x27;s kingdom. He suggests that the change in roles may be because of the continental tradition&#x27;s more favorable view of Attila.

===Attachment to the legend of Ermanaric and Svanhild===
The attachment of Gudrun&#x27;s legend to that of Ermanaric (Jǫrmunrek) and Svanhild is a Scandinavian innovation that brings this legend into direct contact with the more famous legend of Sigurd. Edward Haymes and Susan Samples believe that it is a relatively late development. Other scholars date it to the tenth century, however, on the basis of a version of the story cited in the Skaldic poem &quot;Ragnarsdrápa&quot;: the narrator there refers to Ermanaric&#x27;s killers as descendants of Gjúki, Gudrun&#x27;s father. This poem is attributed to the poet Bragi Boddason, who lived in the tenth century, although other scholars date it instead to around 1000 and believe that the attribution to Bragi is incorrect.

==In popular culture==
* In 1924, Fritz Lang and Thea von Harbou produced &quot;Die Nibelungen: Kriemhilds Rache&quot; (&quot;Die Nibelungen: Kriemhild&#x27;s Revenge&quot;). Kriemhild was played by actress Margarete Schön.
* In the 2005 TV epic &quot;Ring of the Nibelungs&quot;, American actress Alicia Witt played Kriemhild in an adaptation of the Nibelungenlied saga. In this version she willingly gives up the Nibelungs&#x27; ring and gold after Siegfried&#x27;s death, having realized the deadly curse they bring on all who would try to claim them for their own.

==See also==
* &quot;Medea&quot;
* &quot;Procne&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1257834" start="0" end="6" title="Gudrun" label="Gudrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257834" start="16" end="25" title="Gudrun" label="Kriemhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="47" end="63" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd/Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="86" end="108" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="Germanic heroic legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q449672" start="164" end="170" title="Ildico" label="Ildico"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="185" end="199" title="Attila the Hun" label="Attila the Hun"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="223" end="242" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q230639" start="244" end="266" title="Brunhilda of Austrasia" label="Brunhilda of Austrasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230898" start="271" end="280" title="Fredegund" label="Fredegund"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="383" end="393" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="399" end="413" title="Gunther" label="Gunther/Gunnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="517" end="525" title="Brunhild" label="Brunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758567" start="1020" end="1028" title="Svanhildr" label="Svanhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="1042" end="1052" title="Ermanaric" label="Jormunrekr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="1329" end="1343" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="1357" end="1380" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257834" start="1422" end="1429" title="Gudrun" label="Gutrune"/>
<link wikidata="Q757387" start="1951" end="1960" title="Atlakviða" label="Atlakviða"/>
<link wikidata="Q30134" start="2202" end="2220" title="North Sea Germanic" label="North Sea Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q491164" start="2463" end="2469" title="Kudrun" label="Kudrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2796" end="2807" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565635" start="3293" end="3301" title="Grimhild" label="Grimhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="3835" end="3842" title="Gunther" label="Gunther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291267" start="3899" end="3909" title="Gundomar I" label="Gundomar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="4068" end="4074" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4348" end="4356" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q230639" start="4365" end="4387" title="Brunhilda of Austrasia" label="Brunhilda of Austrasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230898" start="4392" end="4401" title="Fredegund" label="Fredegund"/>
<link wikidata="Q309946" start="4450" end="4460" title="Sigebert I" label="Sigebert I"/>
<link wikidata="Q243118" start="4485" end="4496" title="Chilperic I" label="Chilperic I"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="4791" end="4797" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q449672" start="4810" end="4816" title="Ildico" label="Ildico"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="5221" end="5235" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="5473" end="5486" title="Bildungsroman" label="Bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="6028" end="6033" title="Worms, Germany" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="6660" end="6668" title="Brunhild" label="Brunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="8877" end="8882" title="Attila" label="Etzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802926" start="9664" end="9671" title="Ortlieb (Germanic heroic legend )" label="Ortlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224130" start="9800" end="9817" title="Dietrich von Bern" label="Dietrich von Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q26883893" start="10497" end="10507" title="Hildebrand" label="Hildebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984635" start="10696" end="10711" title="Nibelungenklage" label="Nibelungenklage"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="11296" end="11307" title="Þiðrekssaga" label="Þiðrekssaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="11418" end="11428" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q329662" start="14101" end="14121" title="Rosengarten zu Worms" label="Rosengarten zu Worms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15687" end="15703" title="Heldenbuch#The &amp;quot;Heldenbuch-Prosa&amp;quot;" label="Heldenbuch-Prosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601743" start="15729" end="15739" title="Heldenbuch" label="Heldenbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508032" start="16657" end="16684" title="Das Lied vom Hürnen Seyfrid" label="Das Lied vom Hürnen Seyfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="18220" end="18228" title="Brunhild" label="Brunhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q328214" start="18569" end="18579" title="Poeta Saxo" label="Poeta Saxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="18680" end="18696" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="18718" end="18731" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q434760" start="18807" end="18820" title="Canute Lavard" label="Canute Lavard"/>
<link wikidata="Q347954" start="18851" end="18868" title="Magnus the Strong" label="Magnus the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070134" start="19486" end="19499" title="Simon of Kéza" label="Simon of Kéza"/>
<link wikidata="Q106837" start="19687" end="19703" title="Saxo Grammaticus" label="Saxo Grammaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="19748" end="19757" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q939074" start="19829" end="19842" title="Gesta Danorum" label="Gesta Danorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="20484" end="20494" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="20498" end="20514" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="21821" end="21827" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="22687" end="22698" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118634" start="23486" end="23495" title="Grípisspá" label="Grípisspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926207" start="23863" end="23884" title="Brot af Sigurðarkviðu" label="Brot af Sigurðarkviðu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623191" start="24330" end="24345" title="Guðrúnarkviða I" label="Guðrúnarkviða I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483740" start="25097" end="25121" title="Sigurðarkviða hin skamma" label="Sigurðarkviða hin skamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309889" start="25632" end="25645" title="Dráp Niflunga" label="Dráp Niflunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122498" start="26335" end="26351" title="Guðrúnarkviða II" label="Guðrúnarkviða II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224130" start="26443" end="26460" title="Dietrich von Bern" label="Dietrich von Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118853" start="27959" end="27976" title="Guðrúnarkviða III" label="Guðrúnarkviða III"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="28099" end="28118" title="trial by ordeal" label="ordeal of hot water"/>
<link wikidata="Q199414" start="28373" end="28389" title="bog body" label="drowned in a bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q757387" start="29295" end="29304" title="Atlakviða" label="Atlakviða"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="29930" end="29936" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="29941" end="29947" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q927182" start="30082" end="30105" title="Atlamál hin groenlenzku" label="Atlamál hin groenlenzku"/>
<link wikidata="Q644341" start="32034" end="32037" title="Hel (location)" label="Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646556" start="32185" end="32194" title="Hamðismál" label="Hamðismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="32473" end="32486" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q841437" start="35581" end="35590" title="Wild Hunt" label="Wild Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="36450" end="36462" title="Gundicharius" label="Gundicharius"/>
<link wikidata="Q185476" start="36520" end="36534" title="Flavius Aetius" label="Flavius Aetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="37696" end="37705" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758567" start="37722" end="37730" title="Svanhildr" label="Svanhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="38031" end="38043" title="Skaldic poem" label="Skaldic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970724" start="38050" end="38062" title="Ragnarsdrápa" label="Ragnarsdrápa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367169" start="38207" end="38221" title="Bragi Boddason" label="Bragi Boddason"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="38401" end="38411" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q58866" start="38416" end="38431" title="Thea von Harbou" label="Thea von Harbou"/>
<link wikidata="Q460163" start="38447" end="38479" title="Die Nibelungen" label="Die Nibelungen: Kriemhilds Rache"/>
<link wikidata="Q103851" start="38574" end="38589" title="Margarete Schön" label="Margarete Schön"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38619" end="38640" title="Dark Kingdom: The Dragon King" label="Ring of the Nibelungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q236247" start="38665" end="38676" title="Alicia Witt" label="Alicia Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="38718" end="38732" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q174278" start="38958" end="38963" title="Medea" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="38978" end="38984" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87307" wikidata="Q1565635" url="?curid=87307" title="Grimhild">
<text>In Norse mythology, Grimhild or Grímhildr (&quot;masked battle&quot;) was a beautiful but evil sorceress who was married to king Gjúki of Burgundy in the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot; where she is the mother of three sons, Gunnar, Hǫgni and Guthormr, and a daughter, Gudrun. Other, similar characters of that name also appear in &quot;Illuga saga Gríðarfóstr&quot; and in &quot;Gríms saga loðinkinna&quot;.

== &quot;Völsunga saga&quot; ==
In the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot;, Queen Grimhild gave Sigurðr a magic potion that made him forget that he ever married his wife Brynhildr, so that he would marry Gudrun, her daughter, while Brynhildr would marry her son Gunnar. However, Brynhildr refused to marry Gunnar, as she would only marry a man who could cross the ring of flames she put up around herself. So Grímhildr talked Sigurðr into helping Gunnar marry Brynhildr. Since Sigurðr was the only one who could cross the flames, he and Gunnar switched bodies, so Gunnar&#x27;s body could cross the flames. Brynhildr then married Gunnar, because she made a promise. When Brynhildr learned that Sigurðr had betrayed her with Gudrun, not knowing he had been bewitched into doing so by Grímhild, she was out to get revenge. She ended up killing Sigurð and herself by the end of the saga. Grímhildr then made Gudrun marry Brynhildr&#x27;s brother Atli. Gudrun did not want to marry him because she knew he would end up killing her brothers. This is the last mention of Grímhild in the &quot;Völsunga saga&quot;. It is probable that, in the original myth, the ring&#x27;s curse also brought misfortune and even death upon Grímhild herself.

== &quot;Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra&quot; and &quot;Gríms saga loðinkinna&quot; ==
The name of Grímhild[r] was also given to another beautiful and evil sorceress who married king Áli of Alfheim (modern Bohuslän) in &quot;Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra&quot;. She had seven daughters who too became terrible witches, while King Áli had a daughter before he married Grímhild, named Signý. Signý had a daughter with a king she had married but he died in battle, so she returned home to her father, with her daughter. Grímhild poisoned the king to have a younger man, and then had ruled the kingdom in such an evil manner that it was laid waste. She then banned Signý and Hild, her daughter, from the kingdom and put a curse on them, that Signy would turn into a troll woman named Grid and they would have to live in a cave. Every man that came would fall in love with Hild, and then Signý/Grid would have to kill them, until one man is not afraid. In turn, Hildr put a counter-curse on Grímhild, that she would stand over a fire between her legs, burning her from below while her upper parts would freeze, and into this fire Grímhild would drop once their own curse was broken. Grímhild attempted to reason with Hild, as she would rather that neither of their curses hold, but to no avail as Hildr desired revenge. Eleven years and sixteen men later, a young Dane named Illugi broke Grímhild&#x27;s curse by defeating and burning all of her daughters, thus also causing her to die in the fire at last.

In &quot;Gríms saga loðinkinna&quot;, Grímhild was an evil princess who became the wife of Harald, the North Norwegian lord of the Oslofjjord, and put a curse on her stepdaughter Lofthaena to turn her into an ugly troll. Lofthaena was rescued by a man who loved her, the saga&#x27;s hero Grím, who than had Grímhild punished by having a sack put over head and being stoned to death.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Byock, Jesse L. &quot;The Saga of the Volsungs: the Norse Epic of Sigurd the Dragon Slayer.&quot; Berkeley, CA: University of California, 1990, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565635" start="20" end="28" title="Grimhild" label="Grimhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565635" start="32" end="41" title="Grimhild" label="Grímhildr"/>
<link wikidata="Q570149" start="129" end="134" title="Gjúki" label="Gjúki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="138" end="146" title="Burgundy (historical region)" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="160" end="173" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="219" end="225" title="Gunther" label="Gunnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568447" start="227" end="232" title="Hagen (legend)" label="Hǫgni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291267" start="237" end="245" title="Guthormr" label="Guthormr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257834" start="263" end="269" title="Gudrun" label="Gudrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442407" start="331" end="354" title="Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra" label="Illuga saga Gríðarfóstr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135121" start="374" end="395" title="Gríms saga loðinkinna" label="Gríms saga loðinkinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q733340" start="449" end="462" title="Völsunga saga" label="Völsunga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="490" end="497" title="Sigurðr" label="Sigurðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="564" end="573" title="Brynhildr" label="Brynhildr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257834" start="598" end="604" title="Gudrun" label="Gudrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="656" end="662" title="Gunther" label="Gunnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q250646" start="1814" end="1821" title="Alfheim" label="Alfheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="1830" end="1838" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442407" start="1849" end="1873" title="Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra" label="Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12581" start="2381" end="2386" title="troll" label="troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135121" start="3131" end="3152" title="Gríms saga loðinkinna" label="Gríms saga loðinkinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q667456" start="3253" end="3263" title="Oslofjord" label="Oslofjjord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87309" wikidata="Q176831" url="?curid=87309" title="International Financial Reporting Standards">
<text>International Financial Reporting Standards, commonly called IFRS, are accounting standards issued by the IFRS Foundation and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). They constitute a standardised way of describing the company&#x27;s financial performance and position so that company financial statements are understandable and comparable across international boundaries. They are particularly relevant for companies with shares or securities publicly listed.

IFRS have replaced many different national accounting standards around the world but have not replaced the separate accounting standards in the United States where U.S. GAAP is applied.

==History==

The International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) was established in June 1973 by accountancy bodies representing ten countries. It devised and published International Accounting Standards (IAS), interpretations and a conceptual framework. These were looked to by many national accounting standard-setters in developing national standards.

In 2001, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) replaced the IASC with a remit to bring about convergence between national accounting standards through the development of global accounting standards. During its first meeting the new Board adopted existing IAS and Standing Interpretations Committee standards (SICs). The IASB has continued to develop standards calling the new standards &quot;International Financial Reporting Standards&quot; (IFRS).

In 2002, the European Union (EU) agreed that, from 1 January 2005, International Financial Reporting Standards would apply for the consolidated accounts of the EU listed companies, bringing about the introduction of IFRS to many large entities. Other countries have since followed the lead of the EU.

In 2021, on the occasion of COP26 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow, the IFRS Foundation announced the formation of the new International Sustainability Standards Board ISSB.

==Adoption==
IFRS Standards are required or permitted in 132 jurisdictions across the world, including major countries and territories such as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, the European Union, GCC countries, Hong Kong, India, Israel, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, and Turkey.

To assess progress towards the goal of a single set of global accounting standards, the IFRS Foundation has developed and posted profiles about the use of IFRS Standards in individual jurisdictions. These are based on information from various sources. The starting point was the responses provided by standard-setting and other relevant bodies to a survey that the IFRS Foundation conducted. As of August 2019, profiles are completed for 166 jurisdictions, with 166 jurisdictions requiring the use of IFRS Standards.

Due to the difficulty of maintaining up-to-date information in individual jurisdictions, three sources of information on current worldwide IFRS adoption are recommended:
* IFRS Foundation profiles page
* The World Bank
* International Federation of Accountants

Ray J. Ball described the expectation by the European Union and others that IFRS adoption worldwide would be beneficial to investors and other users of financial statements, by reducing the costs of comparing investment opportunities and increasing the quality of information. Companies are also expected to benefit, as investors will be more willing to provide financing. Companies that have high levels of international activities are among the group that would benefit from a switch to IFRS Standards. Companies that are involved in foreign activities and investing benefit from the switch due to the increased comparability of a set accounting standard. However, Ray J. Ball has expressed some scepticism of the overall cost of the international standard; he argues that the enforcement of the standards could be lax, and the regional differences in accounting could become obscured behind a label. He also expressed concerns about the fair value emphasis of IFRS and the influence of accountants from non-common-law regions, where losses have been recognised in a less timely manner.

==US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles==

US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, commonly called US GAAP, remains separate from IFRS. The Securities Exchange Committee (SEC) requires the use of US GAAP by domestic companies with listed securities and does not permit them to use IFRS; US GAAP is also used by some companies in Japan and the rest of the world.

In 2002 IASB and the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), the body supporting US GAAP, announced a programme known as the Norwalk Agreement that aimed at eliminating differences between IFRS and US GAAP. In 2012 the SEC announced that it expected separate US GAAP to continue for the foreseeable future but sought to encourage further work to align the two standards.

IFRS is sometimes described as principles-based, as opposed to a rules-based approach in US GAAP; so in US GAAP there is more instruction in the application of standards to specific examples and industries.

==Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting==

The Conceptual Framework serves as a tool for the IASB to develop standards. It does not override the requirements of individual IFRSs. Some companies may use the Framework as a reference for selecting their accounting policies in the absence of specific IFRS requirements.

===Objective of financial statements===

The Conceptual Framework states that the primary purpose of financial information is to be useful to existing and potential investors, lenders and other creditors when making decisions about the financing of the entity and exercising rights to vote on, or otherwise influence, management&#x27;s actions that affect the use of the entity&#x27;s economic resources.

Users base their expectations of returns on their assessment of:
*The amount, timing and uncertainty of future net cash inflows to the entity;
*Management&#x27;s stewardship of the entity&#x27;s resources.

===Qualitative characteristics of financial information ===

The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting defines the fundamental qualitative characteristics of financial information to be:
* Relevance; and 
* Faithful representation

The Framework also describes the following enhancing 
qualitative characteristics:
* Comparability
* Verifiability
* Timeliness
* Understandability

===Elements of financial statements===

The Conceptual Framework defines the elements of financial statements to be:

* Asset: A present economic resource controlled by the entity as a result of past events which are expected to generate future economic benefits.
* Liability: A present obligation of the entity to transfer an economic resource as a result of past events.
* Equity: The residual interest in the assets of the entity after deducting all its liabilities.
* Income: increases in economic benefit during an accounting period in the form of inflows or enhancements of assets, or decrease of liabilities that result in increases in equity. However, it does not include the contributions made by the equity participants (for example owners, partners or shareholders).
* Expenses: decreases in assets, or increases in liabilities, that result in decreases in equity. However, these do not include the distributions made to the equity participants.
* Other changes in economic resources and claims: Contributions from holders of equity and distributions to them.

===Recognition of elements of financial statements===

An item is recognized in the financial statements when:
* it is probable that future economic benefit will flow to or from an entity.
* the resource can be reliably measured

In some cases specific standards add additional conditions before recognition is possible or prohibit recognition altogether.

An example is the recognition of internally generated brands, mastheads, publishing titles, customer lists and items similar in substance, for which recognition is prohibited by IAS 38. In addition research and development expenses can only be recognised as an intangible asset if they cross the threshold of being classified as &#x27;development cost&#x27;.

Whilst the standard on provisions, IAS 37, prohibits the recognition of a provision for contingent liabilities, this prohibition is not applicable to the accounting for contingent liabilities in a business combination. In that case the acquirer shall recognise a contingent liability even if it is not probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required.

===Concepts of capital and capital maintenance===

Concepts of capital maintenance are important as only income earned in excess of amounts needed to maintain capital may be regarded as profit. The Conceptual Framework describes the following concepts of capital maintenance:
*Financial capital maintenance. Under this concept a profit is earned only if the financial amount of the net assets at the end of the period exceeds the financial (or money) amount of net assets at the beginning of the period, after excluding any distributions to, and contributions from owners during the period. Financial capital maintenance can be measured in either nominal monetary units or units of constant purchasing power; 
*Physical capital maintenance. Under this concept a profit is earned only if the physical productive capacity (or operating capacity) of the entity (or the resources or funds needed to achieve that capacity) at the end of the period exceeds the physical productive capacity at the beginning of period, after excluding any distributions to, and contributions from owners during the period.

Most entities adopt a financial concept of capital maintenance. However, the Conceptual Framework does not prescribe any model of capital maintenance.

==Requirements==

===Presentation of financial statements===
IFRS financial statements consist of:
* a statement of financial position (balance sheet)
* a statement of comprehensive income. This may be presented as a single statement or with a separate statement of profit and loss and a statement of other comprehensive income
* a statement of changes in equity
* a statement of cash flows
* notes, including a summary of the significant accounting policies.

Comparative information is required for the prior reporting period.

===General features===

The following are the general features in IFRS:
* Fair presentation and compliance with IFRS: Fair presentation requires the faithful representation of the effects of the transactions, other events and conditions in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, income and expenses set out in the Framework of IFRS. 
*Going concern: Financial statements are present on a going concern basis unless management either intends to liquidate the entity or to cease trading, or has no realistic alternative but to do so.
*Accrual basis of accounting: An entity shall recognise items as assets, liabilities, equity, income and expenses when they satisfy the definition and recognition criteria for those elements in the Framework of IFRS.
*Materiality and aggregation: Every material class of similar items has to be presented separately. Items that are of a dissimilar nature or function shall be presented separately unless they are immaterial.
*Offsetting: Offsetting is generally forbidden in IFRS. However certain standards require offsetting when specific conditions are satisfied (such as in case of the accounting for defined benefit liabilities in IAS 19 and the net presentation of deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets in IAS 12).
* Frequency of reporting: IFRS requires that at least annually a complete set of financial statements is presented. However listed companies generally also publish interim financial statements (for which the accounting is fully IFRS compliant) for which the presentation is in accordance with IAS 34 &quot;Interim Financing Reporting&quot;. 
* Comparative information: IFRS requires entities to present comparative information in respect of the preceding period for all amounts reported in the current period&#x27;s financial statements. In addition comparative information shall also be provided for narrative and descriptive information if it is relevant to understanding the current period&#x27;s financial statements. The standard IAS 1 also requires an additional statement of financial position (also called a third balance sheet) when an entity applies an accounting policy retrospectively or makes a retrospective restatement of items in its financial statements, or when it reclassifies items in its financial statements. This for example occurred with the adoption of the revised standard IAS 19 (as of 1 January 2013) or when the new consolidation standards IFRS 10-11-12 were adopted (as of 1 January 2013 or 2014 for companies in the European Union).
* Consistency of presentation: IFRS requires that the presentation and classification of items in the financial statements is retained from one period to the next unless: 

===Cash flow statements===

Cash flow statements in IFRS are presented as follows:

* Operating cash flows: the principal revenue-producing activities of the entity and are generally calculated by applying the indirect method, whereby profit or loss is adjusted for the effects of transaction of a non-cash nature, any deferrals or accruals of past or future cash receipts or payments, and items of income or expense associated with investing or financing cash flows.
* Investing cash flows: the acquisition and disposal of long-term assets and other investments not included in cash equivalents. These represent the extent to which expenditures have been made for resources intended to generate future income and cash flows. Only expenditures that result in a recognised asset in the statement of financial position are eligible for classification as investing activities.
* Financing cash flows: activities that result in changes in the size and composition of the contributed equity and borrowings of the entity. These are important because they are useful in predicting claims on future cash flows by providers of capital to the entity.

==Criticisms==

In 2012, staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a report setting out observations on a potential adoption of IFRS in the United States. This included the following criticisms:

*that it would be expensive for companies to move to compliance with IFRS;
*that the IASB had reliance on funding from large accounting firms which might jeopardise its actual or perceived independence;
*that the process of convergence of IFRS with US GAAP had not made progress in some areas;
*that the valuation of inventory under Last In First Out (LIFO) remains common in the United States, where it has some tax advantages, but would be prohibited under IFRS;
*that IFRS is not comprehensive in its coverage.

IASB staff have responded to these observations and concluded that there were no insurmountable obstacles for the adoption of IFRS by the United States.

In 2013 IASB member Philippe Danjou listed ten common criticisms of IFRS. He sought to counter these, describing them as misconceptions
*IFRS practise a generalized &quot;fair value&quot;
*IFRS are intended to reflect the global financial value of the company
*IFRS deny the concept of accounting conservatism
*IFRS give prominence to economic reality over legal form 
*Directors can not make heads or tails of IFRS financial statements
*IFRS financial statements do not reflect the business model
*Financial instruments are stated at &quot;full fair value&quot;, thereby maximizing earnings volatility. The &quot;fair value&quot; is always defined as &quot;market value&quot; even when markets are illiquid. 
*The treatment of business combinations is irrational. 
*IFRSs create accounting volatility that does not reflect the economic reality.

Charles Lee, professor of accounting at Stanford Graduate School of Business, has also criticised the use of fair values in financial reporting.

In 2019, H David Sherman and S David Young criticised the current state of financial reporting under IFRS and US GAAP:-
*Convergence of reporting standards has stalled. IFRS is not consistently applied; 
*Alternative methods of revenue recognition make it difficult to interpret reported results; 
*Many companies are using unofficial measures, for example earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (EBITDA), whether to get around a deficiency in the format in accounting standards or potentially to mislead users;
*Companies can control decisions on expenditure to manage results.

== Differences between IFRS and GAAP ==
There are two frameworks that investors and accountants recognize on a global scale: International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). They both serve to ensure transparency and consistency in financial statements. However, they take a vastly different approach to recognizing revenues, reporting leases, and recording inventory. IFRS is followed in over 140 countries, and the system is more principle-based as it gives businesses flexibility in applying standards. GAAP on the other hand, is used exclusively in the United States and is governed by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). This system is rule-based and much stricter, and it provides industry-specific guidelines. These differences don’t just affect accountants, they also impact how businesses operate and how investors interpret financial performance.

Take two companies for example, one in the U.S. and one in Europe, both selling software subscriptions. Even though they operate the same way, they report their revenues differently, this is because of the divide between IFRS and GAAP. Both companies follow a five-step model under IFRS 15 and GAAP (ASC 606), but GAAP includes extra layers of industry-specific guidance for sectors such as real estate, software, and financial services. This means that a software company in the U.S. might have detailed, step-by-step rules enforcing revenue from subscriptions. In contrast, international companies using IFRS have more flexibility in applying general principles. For companies operating both frameworks, this can lead to confusion when reporting revenue across different financial statements.

=== Lease accounting ===
Lease accounting is another crucial part representing the different approaches that IFRS and GAAP take. For IFRS 16, every lease must be recorded on the balance sheet and classified as a right-to-use asset with a corresponding liability. However, GAAP (ASC842) maintains two types of leases: one on the balance sheet and operating leases, which are generally not recorded on the balance sheet. While this approach allows U.S. companies to hide some lease obligations, critics like H. David Sherman and S. David Young argue that it complicates financial comparisons, especially for global investors trying to assess companies’ liabilities.

=== Inventory valuation ===
Another divergence is inventory valuation. IFRS and GAAP differ in their models, Last In First Out (LIFO) and First In First Out (FIFO). This is primarily a difference in accounting-based calculations, which can significantly impact results during fluctuating inventory costs. IFRS adopts the FIFO method, while GAAP utilizes the LIFO method. The LIFO method can provide tax savings during periods of inflation since it results in lower reported profits. However, the inconsistency between the two strategies might cause inconvenience for companies trying to use a standardized rule to value themselves, as using different calculation methods may not always be an apples-to-apples comparison.

=== Economic opportunities ===
For businesses, the divergence in the two methods isn&#x27;t just differences in number or technical detail, as they also have real-world consequences. Multinational corporations adjusting in both IFRS and GAAP jurisdictions must maintain separate financial reports, showing the inconvenience in the process. For investors, transparency and accuracy in the decision-making process might be disrupted by discrepancies in revenue timing, asset valuation, and lease obligations to get a clear picture of financial health. Despite ongoing efforts to harmonize the two systems, significant gaps remain, and full convergence may never happen. For now, understanding these variations is crucial, not just for accountants but for anyone making investment decisions in a global economy.

==Economic effects==
Many researchers have studied the effects of IFRS adoption, but results are unclear. For example, one study used data from 26 countries to study the economic consequences of mandatory IFRS adoption. It showed that, on average, even though market liquidity increases around the time IFRS is introduced, it is unclear whether IFRS mandate adoption is the sole reason for observed market effects. Firms&#x27; reporting incentives, law enforcement, and increased comparability of financial reports can also explain the effects.
The adoption of IFRS in the European Union is a special case because it is an element of wider reforms aiming to consolidate the economies of member countries. One study reports positive market effects for companies adopting IFRS, but these positive effects occurred even before the transition took place. Another study looked at the development of the stock market in Poland; it found positive effects associated with Poland joining the EU but no specific effect attributable to its adoption of IFRS. Interestingly, member states maintain a large degree of independence in setting national accounting standards for companies that prefer to stay local.

==See also==
* List of International Financial Reporting Standards
* Chinese accounting standards
* Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Canada)
* Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (France)
* Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (UK)
* Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)
* Indian Accounting Standards
* International Public Sector Accounting Standards
* Nepal Financial Reporting Standards
* Philosophy of accounting

==References==
==Further reading==
* International Accounting Standards Board (2007): &quot;International Financial Reporting Standards 2007 (including International Accounting Standards (IAS(tm)) and Interpretations as of 1 January 2007)&quot;, LexisNexis, 
* Original texts of IAS/IFRS, SIC and IFRIC adopted by the Commission of the European Communities and published in Official Journal of the European Union https://web.archive.org/web/20061020223959/http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/accounting/ias_en.htm#adopted-commission
* Case studies of IFRS implementation in Brazil , Germany , India, Jamaica , Kenya , Pakistan, South Africa and Turkey. Prepared by the United Nations Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting (ISAR).
* Wiley Guide to Fair Value Under IFRS , John Wiley &amp; Sons.
* Perramon, J., &amp; Amat, O. (2006). IFRS introduction and its effect on listed companies in Spain. Economics Working Papers 975, Department of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra. &quot;Available at SSRN 1002516&quot;.

==External links==
* IFRS Foundation
* International Accounting Standards Board
** The International Accounting Standards Board – (Archive) Free access to all IFRS standards, news and status of projects in progress
* PwC IFRS page with news and downloadable documents
* The latest IFRS news and resources from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW)
* Initial publication of the International Accounting Standards in the Official Journal of the European Union PB L 261 13-10-2003
* Directorate Internal Market of the European Union on the implementation of the IAS in the European Union
* Deloitte: An Overview of International Financial Reporting Standards
* The American Institute of CPAs (AICPA) in partnership with its marketing and technology subsidiary, CPA2Biz, has developed the IFRS.com web site.
* RSM Richter IFRS page with news and downloadable documents related to IFRS Conversions in Canada
*U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Proposal for First-Time Application of International Financial Reporting Standards by Foreign private issuers registered with the SEC
* IFRS for SMEs Presented by Michael Wells, Director of the IFRS Education Initiative at the IASC Foundation
* Pricewaterhousecoopers&#x27;s map of countries that apply IFRS 
* EY IFRS page with insights on IFRS Standards
* U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS comparisons from RSM US</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="0" end="43" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="61" end="65" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="IFRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779838" start="71" end="90" title="accounting standard" label="accounting standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970856" start="106" end="121" title="IFRS Foundation" label="IFRS Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142430" start="130" end="170" title="International Accounting Standards Board" label="International Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q192907" start="298" end="318" title="financial statements" label="financial statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="639" end="648" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="U.S. GAAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258876" start="679" end="723" title="International Accounting Standards Committee" label="International Accounting Standards Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142430" start="1035" end="1075" title="International Accounting Standards Board" label="International Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1500" end="1514" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="1830" end="1883" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2146" end="2155" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2157" end="2163" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2165" end="2171" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="2173" end="2178" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2184" end="2198" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q217172" start="2200" end="2213" title="Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf" label="GCC countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2215" end="2224" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2226" end="2231" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2233" end="2239" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="2241" end="2249" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2251" end="2259" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2261" end="2272" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2274" end="2280" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="2282" end="2291" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2293" end="2305" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="2307" end="2318" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="2320" end="2326" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2332" end="2338" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3063" end="3077" title="The World Bank" label="The World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601925" start="3080" end="3119" title="International Federation of Accountants" label="International Federation of Accountants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297652" start="3121" end="3132" title="Ray J. Ball" label="Ray J. Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="4131" end="4141" title="common-law" label="common-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="4260" end="4303" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="4362" end="4397" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="Securities Exchange Committee (SEC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="4606" end="4642" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001279" start="4715" end="4732" title="Norwalk Agreement" label="Norwalk Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="6616" end="6621" title="Asset" label="Asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="6762" end="6771" title="Liability (financial accounting)" label="Liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="6871" end="6877" title="Equity (finance)" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="6968" end="6974" title="Income" label="Income"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516686" start="7276" end="7283" title="Expense" label="Expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q187062" start="7987" end="7996" title="Nameplate (publishing)" label="mastheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q46834" start="10027" end="10058" title="statement of financial position" label="statement of financial position"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="10079" end="10112" title="statement of comprehensive income" label="statement of comprehensive income"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="10177" end="10205" title="income statement" label="statement of profit and loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186451" start="10256" end="10286" title="statement of changes in equity" label="statement of changes in equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q460184" start="10291" end="10314" title="statement of cash flows" label="statement of cash flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q565043" start="10832" end="10845" title="Going concern" label="Going concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q832927" start="11030" end="11057" title="Accrual method" label="Accrual basis of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003682" start="11247" end="11258" title="Materiality (auditing)" label="Materiality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079649" start="11455" end="11465" title="Offset (law)" label="Offsetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="16943" end="16986" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="16998" end="17043" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416161" start="17472" end="17508" title="Financial Accounting Standards Board" label="Financial Accounting Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358064" start="18031" end="18038" title="IFRS 15" label="IFRS 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844838" start="18678" end="18685" title="IFRS 16" label="IFRS 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265942" start="19319" end="19336" title="FIFO and LIFO accounting" label="Last In First Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q515636" start="19348" end="19366" title="First In First Out" label="First In First Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575857" start="21956" end="22007" title="List of International Financial Reporting Standards" label="List of International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100693" start="22010" end="22038" title="Chinese accounting standards" label="Chinese accounting standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981751" start="22041" end="22090" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Canada)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080435" start="22093" end="22142" title="French generally accepted accounting principles" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (France)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981746" start="22145" end="22190" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (UK)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (UK)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650978" start="22193" end="22249" title="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)" label="Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019786" start="22252" end="22279" title="Indian Accounting Standards" label="Indian Accounting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666835" start="22282" end="22330" title="International Public Sector Accounting Standards" label="International Public Sector Accounting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321926" start="22333" end="22368" title="Nepal Financial Reporting Standards" label="Nepal Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186255" start="22371" end="22395" title="Philosophy of accounting" label="Philosophy of accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479654" start="23228" end="23249" title="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons" label="John Wiley &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801356" start="24855" end="24861" title="RSM US" label="RSM US"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87310" wikidata="Q1571978" url="?curid=87310" title="Supercavitation">
<text>Supercavitation is the use of a cavitation bubble to reduce skin friction drag on a submerged object and enable high speeds. Applications include torpedoes and propellers, but in theory, the technique could be extended to an entire underwater vessel.

==Physical principle==

Cavitation is the formation of vapour bubbles in liquid caused by flow around an object. Bubbles form when water accelerates around sharp corners and the pressure drops below the vapour pressure. Pressure increases upon deceleration, and the water generally reabsorbs the vapour; however, vapour bubbles can implode and apply small concentrated impulses that may damage surfaces like ship propellers and pump impellers.

The potential for vapour bubbles to form in a liquid is given by the nondimensional cavitation number. It equals local pressure minus vapour pressure, divided by dynamic pressure. At increasing depths (or pressures in piping), the potential for cavitation is lower because the difference between local pressure and vapour pressure is greater.

A supercavitating object is a high-speed submerged object that is designed to initiate a cavitation bubble at its nose. The bubble extends (either naturally or augmented with internally generated gas) past the aft end of the object and prevents contact between the sides of the object and the liquid. This separation substantially reduces the skin friction drag on the supercavitating object.

A key feature of the supercavitating object is the nose, which typically has a sharp edge around its perimeter to form the cavitation bubble. The nose may be articulated and shaped as a flat disk or cone. The shape of the supercavitating object is generally slender so the cavitation bubble encompasses the object. If the bubble is not long enough to encompass the object, especially at slower speeds, the bubble can be enlarged and extended by injecting high-pressure gas near the object&#x27;s nose.

The very high speed required for supercavitation can be temporarily reached by underwater-fired projectiles and projectiles entering water. For sustained supercavitation, rocket propulsion is used, and the high-pressure rocket gas can be routed to the nose to enhance the cavitation bubble. In principle, supercavitating objects can be maneuvered using various methods, including the following:
* Drag fins that project through the bubble into the surrounding liquid
* A tilted object nose
* Gas injected asymmetrically near the nose to distort the cavity&#x27;s geometry
* Vectoring rocket thrust through gimbaling for a single nozzle
* Differential thrust from multiple nozzles

==Applications==
The Russian Navy developed the VA-111 Shkval supercavitation torpedo, which uses rocket propulsion and exceeds the speed of conventional torpedoes by at least a factor of five. NII-24 began development in 1960 under the code name &quot;Шквал&quot; (Squall). The VA-111 Shkval has been in service (exclusively in the Russian Navy) since 1977 with mass production starting in 1978. Several models were developed, with the most successful, the M-5, completed by 1972. From 1972 to 1977, over 300 test launches were conducted (95% of them on Issyk Kul lake).

In 2006, German weapons manufacturer Diehl BGT Defence announced their own supercavitating torpedo, the Barracuda, now officially named &quot;&quot; (). According to Diehl, it reaches speeds greater than .

In 1994, the United States Navy began development of the Rapid Airborne Mine Clearance System (RAMICS), a sea mine clearance system invented by C Tech Defense Corporation. The system is based on a supercavitating projectile stable in both air and water. RAMICS projectiles have been produced in diameters of , , and . The projectile&#x27;s terminal ballistic design enables the explosive destruction of sea mines as deep as with a single round. In 2000 at Aberdeen Proving Ground, RAMICS projectiles fired from a hovering Sea Cobra gunship successfully destroyed a range of live underwater mines. As of March 2009, Northrop Grumman completed the initial phase of RAMICS testing for introduction into the fleet.

Iran claimed to have successfully tested its first supercavitation torpedo, the Hoot (Whale), on 2–3 April 2006. Some sources have speculated it is based on the Russian VA-111 Shkval supercavitation torpedo, which travels at the same speed. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov denied supplying Iran with the technology.

In 2004, DARPA announced the Underwater Express program, a research and evaluation program to demonstrate the use of supercavitation for a high-speed underwater craft application. The US Navy&#x27;s ultimate goal is a new class of underwater craft for littoral missions that can transport small groups of navy personnel or specialized military cargo at speeds up to 100 knots. DARPA awarded contracts to Northrop Grumman and General Dynamics Electric Boat in late 2006. In 2009, DARPA announced progress on a new class of submarine:

A prototype ship named the &quot;Ghost&quot;, uses supercavitation to propel itself atop two struts with sharpened edges. It was designed for stealth operations by Gregory Sancoff of Juliet Marine Systems. The vessel rides smoothly in choppy water and has reached speeds of 29 knots.

The Chinese Navy and US Navy are reportedly working on their own supercavitating submarines using technical information obtained on the Russian VA-111 Shkval supercavitation torpedo.

A supercavitating propeller uses supercavitation to reduce water skin friction and increase propeller speed. The design is used in military applications, high-performance racing boats, and model racing boats. It operates fully submerged with wedge-shaped blades to force cavitation on the entire forward face, starting at the leading edge. Since the cavity collapses well behind the blade, the supercavitating propeller avoids spalling damage caused by cavitation, which is a problem with conventional propellers.

Supercavitating ammunition is used with German and Russian underwater firearms, and other similar weapons.

==Alleged incidents==
The &quot;Kursk&quot; submarine disaster was initially thought to have been caused by a faulty Shkval supercavitating torpedo, though later evidence points to a faulty 65-76 torpedo.

==See also==
* Supercavitating torpedo
* &quot;Shkval&quot; supercavitating torpedo
* APS amphibious rifle
* SPP-1 underwater pistol
* Supercavitating propeller

==References==
==Further reading==
* Office of Naval Research (2004, June 14). Mechanics and energy conversion: high-speed (supercavitating) undersea weaponry (D&amp;I). Retrieved April 12, 2006, from Office of Naval Research Home Page
* Savchenko Y. N. (n.d.). CAV 2001 - Fourth Annual Symposium on Cavitation - California Institute of Technology Retrieved April 9, 2006, archived at Wayback Machine
* Hargrove, J. (2003). Supercavitation and aerospace technology in the development of high-speed underwater vehicles. In &quot;42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit&quot;. Texas A&amp;M University.
* Kirschner et al. (2001, October) Supercavitation research and development. &quot;Undersea Defense Technologies&quot;
* Miller, D. (1995). Supercavitation: going to war in a bubble. &quot;Jane&#x27;s Intelligence Review&quot;. Retrieved Apr 14, 2006, from Defence &amp; Security Intelligence &amp; Analysis | Jane&#x27;s 360
* Graham-Rowe, &amp; Duncan. (2000). Faster than a speeding bullet. &quot;NewScientist&quot;, 167(2248), 26–30.
* Tulin, M. P. (1963). Supercavitating flows - small perturbation theory. Laurel, Md, Hydronautics Inc.
* Niam J W (Dec 2014), Numerical Simulation Of Supercavitation

==External links==
* Supercavitation Research Group at the University of Minnesota
* Diehl BGT Defence&#x27;s &quot;Barracuda&quot; - a German supercavitating Torpedo
* DARPA Underwater Express Program
* Global Security.org on Supercavitation
* How to Build a Supercavitating Weapon, Scientific American</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1571978" start="0" end="15" title="Supercavitation" label="Supercavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="32" end="49" title="Cavitation" label="cavitation bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="74" end="78" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="112" end="123" title="List of vehicle speed records#Watercraft" label="high speeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="146" end="153" title="torpedo" label="torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="160" end="169" title="propeller" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q201666" start="276" end="286" title="Cavitation" label="Cavitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="455" end="470" title="vapour pressure" label="vapour pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737262" start="781" end="798" title="cavitation number" label="cavitation number"/>
<link wikidata="Q949674" start="859" end="875" title="dynamic pressure" label="dynamic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q22570371" start="1251" end="1254" title="aft" label="aft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16856760" start="1384" end="1402" title="skin friction drag" label="skin friction drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q465283" start="2640" end="2652" title="Russian Navy" label="Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q603126" start="2667" end="2680" title="VA-111 Shkval" label="VA-111 Shkval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641784" start="2681" end="2704" title="List of supercavitating torpedoes" label="supercavitation torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42191" start="3174" end="3188" title="Issyk Kul" label="Issyk Kul lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3201" end="3207" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q464834" start="3229" end="3246" title="Diehl BGT Defence" label="Diehl BGT Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458089" start="3267" end="3290" title="Superkavitierender Unterwasserlaufkörper" label="supercavitating torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="3412" end="3430" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="3505" end="3513" title="Naval mine" label="sea mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="3514" end="3523" title="Demining" label="clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="3855" end="3878" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q219629" start="3921" end="3930" title="Bell AH-1 Cobra" label="Sea Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="4014" end="4030" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="4111" end="4115" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916180" start="4191" end="4195" title="Hoot (torpedo)" label="Hoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q603126" start="4280" end="4293" title="VA-111 Shkval" label="VA-111 Shkval"/>
<link wikidata="Q58217" start="4377" end="4390" title="Sergey Lavrov" label="Sergey Lavrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="4444" end="4449" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653224" start="4687" end="4695" title="littoral (military)" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325893" start="4860" end="4890" title="General Dynamics Electric Boat" label="General Dynamics Electric Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513420" start="5002" end="5007" title="Juliet Marine Systems Ghost" label="Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5133" end="5148" title="Gregory Sancoff" label="Gregory Sancoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5152" end="5173" title="Juliet Marine Systems" label="Juliet Marine Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q755179" start="5258" end="5270" title="Chinese Navy" label="Chinese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="5275" end="5282" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="5335" end="5344" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025245" start="5440" end="5465" title="supercavitating propeller" label="supercavitating propeller"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5503" end="5516" title="Parasitic drag#Skin friction" label="skin friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q878123" start="5609" end="5615" title="racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q35872" start="5616" end="5620" title="boat" label="boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024411" start="5865" end="5870" title="spall" label="spall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563881" start="5993" end="5999" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch P11" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q296296" start="6004" end="6011" title="APS underwater rifle" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622819" start="6012" end="6031" title="Underwater firearm" label="underwater firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136114" start="6087" end="6123" title="Kursk submarine disaster" label="&amp;quot;Kursk&amp;quot; submarine disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q457919" start="6251" end="6264" title="Type 65 torpedo" label="65-76 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641784" start="6282" end="6305" title="Supercavitating torpedo" label="Supercavitating torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q603126" start="6308" end="6350" title="VA-111 Shkval" label="&amp;quot;Shkval&amp;quot; supercavitating torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q296296" start="6353" end="6373" title="APS amphibious rifle" label="APS amphibious rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632324" start="6376" end="6399" title="SPP-1 underwater pistol" label="SPP-1 underwater pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025245" start="6402" end="6427" title="Supercavitating propeller" label="Supercavitating propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773728" start="7479" end="7491" title="Marshall P. Tulin" label="Tulin, M. P."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87311" wikidata="Q1849318" url="?curid=87311" title="Mountain America Stadium">
<text>Mountain America Stadium is an outdoor college football stadium in Tempe, Arizona, located on the campus of Arizona State University (ASU). It is the home of the Arizona State Sun Devils football team of the Big 12 Conference. The stadium opened in 1958. The stadium&#x27;s seating capacity as of 2018 is 53,599, reduced from a peak of 74,865 in 1989. 

The stadium is officially named Home of the ASU Sun Devils. It was named Sun Devil Stadium until 2023. The natural grass playing surface within the stadium was named Frank Kush Field in 1996 in honor of the former coach of the team. The stadium underwent a five-year, $304-million renovation that was completed in August 2019. 

The stadium has hosted two annual college football bowl games: the Fiesta Bowl from 1971 to 2006, and the Cactus Bowl from 2006 to 2015. The stadium was the home of the Phoenix/Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League (NFL) from 1988 through the 2005 season, when the Cardinals moved into their own stadium in Glendale. It was the only major football stadium in the Phoenix metropolitan area until the opening of State Farm Stadium.

==Construction and upgrades==
Built in 1958, the stadium&#x27;s original capacity was 30,000. The first major renovation, in 1976, substantially raised the capacity to 57,722. Seating was added to the south end zone, along with press and sky boxes. A year later, in 1977, the upper tier was completed to bring seating to 70,311. In 1988, 1,700 more seats were added. During that time the Carson Student Athlete Center was added to the south end. The building is the home of the ASU Athletic Department.

In 2007, engineers realized the stadium&#x27;s concrete base was buckling due to rusting of structural steel supporting the foundation. Stadium designers had failed to account for the need to waterproof the structure when it was built, assuming that a stadium in the desert would not need hydrophobic concrete. However, they did not take into account that cleaning/maintenance crews for ASU (and later, the Cardinals) would use pressure washers with chemicals, to clean the seats and rows of the stadium after every game and event. The 1958 designers had also not foreseen the stadium, designed for limited Saturdays and college events per year in what was then a small market, would become the home of an NFL team, a major college bowl game and multiple concerts by the early 2000s as the Valley&#x27;s growth exploded over the ensuing 50 years. This exposed the stadium to more water and overall structural wear than the designers had envisioned. Engineers estimated $45 million in repairs would be needed to maintain the stadium beyond 2010.

Legislation allowed the Arizona Board of Regents to set up a district on ASU property to collect revenue from local businesses. Money from the fee would fund renovation of ASU&#x27;s athletic facilities, including the stadium. It was estimated the fund would accumulate enough money to begin planning renovations within 2–5 years (2012–2015).

In April 2012, Sun Devil Athletics unveiled an estimated $300-million plan to renovate Sun Devil Stadium that reduced stadium capacity to the 55,000–60,000 seat range, as well as adding field turf and fabric roof shading. An initial plan to add a roof was later scrapped to control costs. In October 2013, Sun Devil Athletics announced the removal of approximately 5,700 north endzone upper-deck seats to reduce the stadium capacity to 65,870 for the 2014 season. The Cactus Bowl, which had been played in Sun Devil Stadium, was moved to nearby Chase Field in 2016 so the renovations could take place.

The renovations were originally intended to consist of three phases that would take place between football seasons, thus removing the need for the team to play one or more years at a temporary home venue. Initial plans called for the entire project to be completed in time for the 2017 season, but modifications to the renovation schedule postponed the completion date to 2019. Designers for the renovation were HNTB Corp. and Gould Evans. The construction work was handled jointley by Hunt Construction Group and Sundt Construction, Inc.
* Phase 1 (2015): Sections of the upper deck were removed. The bleachers behind the south end zone were replaced with a steel and concrete structure.
* Phase 2 (2016): The west side of the lower bowl and loge level was demolished and rebuilt. Construction began on an athletic facility at the north end of the stadium.
* Phase 3 (2017): Completion of the athletic facility and installation of a new video board above the north end zone.
* Phase 4 (2018): The east side of the lower bowl was rebuilt.
* Phase 5 (2019): Club areas were completed.

The new scoreboard was the eighth largest in college football at the time of its installation, slightly wider than that of Arizona Stadium, the home of the rival University of Arizona Wildcats football team. The Coca-Cola Sun Deck, a small standing-only concert venue, is located on the north side of the stadium. The 365 ASU Community Union was created for non-football events, including concerts, movie nights, yoga, and community events.

On August 2, 2023, the university announced that Mountain America Credit Union had secured a 15-year naming rights deal for the stadium, which would be renamed &quot;Mountain America Stadium, Home of the ASU Sun Devils&quot;.

==College football==
The first game played at the stadium was on October 4, 1958. Arizona State defeated West Texas State 16–13.

On September 21, 1996, the playing surface was named &quot;Frank Kush Field&quot; in honor of notable former ASU football coach Frank Kush. That night ASU shut out #1 Nebraska 19–0. Kush became head coach in the same year Sun Devil Stadium opened; reflecting the Sun Devils&#x27; rise to prominence under his watch, the stadium&#x27;s capacity more than doubled during his 21-year tenure. The largest crowd ever seated for a college football game at the stadium was 80,470 for the 1999 Fiesta Bowl, where the Tennessee Volunteers beat the Florida State Seminoles, 23–16 on January 4, 1999, to win the National Championship.

Sun Devil Stadium hosted the Fiesta Bowl from 1971 to 2006. During the 1998 and 2002 seasons, the Fiesta Bowl doubled as the BCS National Championship Game.

The Cactus Bowl (formerly called the Buffalo Wild Wings, Insight and Copper Bowl) moved to Sun Devil Stadium from Chase Field in 2006, after the Fiesta Bowl relocated to the newly opened State Farm Stadium in Glendale.

==Professional football==
The first professional football game played in the stadium was a National Football League (NFL) preseason game between the New York Jets and the Minnesota Vikings in 1975. The NFL returned to the stadium in 1987 when the Green Bay Packers played the Denver Broncos in a preseason game.

Sun Devil Stadium was the home stadium of the Arizona Wranglers/Outlaws of the USFL from 1983 to 1985.

The facility became an NFL stadium in 1988 when the St. Louis Cardinals moved west to Arizona and became the Phoenix Cardinals, renamed the Arizona Cardinals in 1994. The Cardinals&#x27; first regular season game in the stadium was a 17–14 loss to the Dallas Cowboys in a &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; game on September 12, 1988. The Cardinals won their next home game, defeating the defending Super Bowl champion Washington Redskins 30–21. The Cardinals intended to only play in Sun Devil Stadium temporarily until a new stadium could be built in Phoenix. However, the savings and loan crisis derailed plans for a permanent home, and the Cardinals remained in Tempe for 18 years. In the latter part of that time, the Cardinals began chafing at being merely a tenant in a college-owned stadium; they felt it denied them access to revenue streams that other NFL teams took for granted. The 18 seasons the Cardinals spent at ASU are by far the longest a professional football team has been a tenant in a college stadium since the formation of the American Football League in 1960.

The stadium hosted Super Bowl XXX in 1996 as the Cowboys won their fifth Vince Lombardi Trophy, defeating the Pittsburgh Steelers, 27–17 in front of 76,347 spectators.

On October 27, 2003, the &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; game between the San Diego Chargers and Miami Dolphins was moved to Sun Devil Stadium because the Cedar Fire in the San Diego area forced the teams to vacate Qualcomm Stadium, which was being used as an evacuation site. Tickets for the game were free and the capacity crowd saw the Dolphins win 26–10. It was the first &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; game in the stadium in four years.

The Cardinals ended their tenancy at Sun Devil Stadium with a 27–21 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles on Christmas Eve 2005. In 18 seasons, the Cardinals compiled a 64–80 (.444) record at the facility, their best home record being 5–3 which they achieved four times: 1994, 1996, 1998, and 2004.

Whenever the Cardinals struggled, Sun Devil Stadium was frequently one of the quietest stadiums in the league. Cardinals home games often did not sell out in time for them to be aired locally, in compliance with NFL blackout policy at the time. The few fans who did show up for games were most often rooting for the visiting team, creating what amounted to &quot;home games&quot; on the road for many opposing teams, a situation most prevalent with the fans of the Dallas Cowboys, who were in the same division with the Cardinals (the NFC East, an artifact of their former St. Louis home) until the Cardinals moved to the NFC West in the 2002 season and often &quot;de facto&quot; had a home-field advantage for their yearly road game in Tempe. A percentage of the state&#x27;s residents only live there during the winter and live elsewhere for the rest of the year, and many of Arizona&#x27;s permanent residents either grew up in other states or have roots outside the state. In 2005, for instance, all home games (except for the 49ers game which was held at Estadio Azteca in Mexico City) failed to sell out and could not be broadcast on local television. 

The stadium was subject to the Arizona Board of Regents and Tempe&#x27;s guidelines regarding alcohol sales, as the stadium could not sell beer outside of the skyboxes and occasional test sells in certain stadium sections, and it remained a long-term source of friction between the school and the Cardinals, including disputes over alcohol revenue and advertising as sales were relaxed.

In 2006, the Cardinals moved from Sun Devil Stadium to Cardinals Stadium in another Phoenix suburb, Glendale, located on the opposite side of the metro area from Tempe (although the Cardinals&#x27; training facility is in Tempe). The new stadium also hosts the Fiesta Bowl, and hosted the first stand-alone BCS National Championship Game in January 2007.

The stadium was also home to a new professional football team, the Arizona Hotshots. The team began play in February 2019 and was a part of the Alliance of American Football, but the league folded in April 2019.

==Papal appearance==
Pope John Paul II visited Phoenix on September 14, 1987, as a part of his whirlwind tour of the United States. In Tempe, he held Mass for 75,000 at Sun Devil Stadium, which had all images and textual mentions of the Sun Devil mascot and nickname removed or covered for the occasion.

==In popular cultures==
Sun Devil Stadium has been the setting for a number of films:

*1976: &quot;A Star is Born&quot;, with Barbra Streisand and Kris Kristofferson
*1980: &quot;Used Cars&quot;
*1982: The Rolling Stones&#x27; &quot;Let&#x27;s Spend the Night Together&quot; (December 13, 1981)
*1987: The Coen Brothers&#x27; &quot;Raising Arizona&quot;
*1988: U2&#x27;s rockumentary &quot;Rattle and Hum&quot; (December 19–20, 1987)
*1996: Cameron Crowe&#x27;s &quot;Jerry Maguire&quot;.

On television, the stadium was featured on the finale episode of &quot;The Amazing Race 4&quot; (2003), and in &quot;The U&quot; on ESPN&#x27;s &quot;30 for 30&quot; series (2009).

==See also==
* List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums

==References==
Informational notes
Citations
==External links==
* Ballparks.com: Sun Devil Stadium
* Stadiums of Pro Football: Sun Devil Stadium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1849318" start="0" end="24" title="Mountain America Stadium" label="Mountain America Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="39" end="55" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="56" end="63" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="67" end="81" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="108" end="132" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791426" start="162" end="195" title="Arizona State Sun Devils football" label="Arizona State Sun Devils football"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="208" end="225" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16685058" start="274" end="290" title="seating capacity" label="seating capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849318" start="386" end="412" title="Mountain America Stadium" label="Home of the ASU Sun Devils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849318" start="427" end="444" title="Mountain America Stadium" label="Sun Devil Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849318" start="520" end="536" title="Mountain America Stadium" label="Frank Kush Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091238" start="561" end="573" title="Frank Kush" label="former coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="734" end="743" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411753" start="750" end="761" title="Fiesta Bowl" label="Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151565" start="789" end="800" title="Cactus Bowl" label="Cactus Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="852" end="877" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Phoenix/Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="885" end="909" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584643" start="921" end="925" title="1988 Phoenix Cardinals season" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603959" start="938" end="949" title="2005 Arizona Cardinals season" label="2005 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="1002" end="1010" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290452" start="1058" end="1083" title="Phoenix metropolitan area" label="Phoenix metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="1105" end="1123" title="State Farm Stadium" label="State Farm Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503744" start="1604" end="1627" title="Arizona State University Athletics" label="ASU Athletic Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="1822" end="1832" title="waterproofing" label="waterproof"/>
<link wikidata="Q16878307" start="1919" end="1939" title="hydrophobic concrete" label="hydrophobic concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400805" start="2058" end="2074" title="Pressure washing" label="pressure washers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290452" start="2416" end="2426" title="Phoenix metropolitan area" label="the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068011" start="3565" end="3576" title="Chase Field" label="Chase Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635344" start="4035" end="4045" title="HNTB" label="HNTB Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q5943935" start="4109" end="4132" title="Hunt Construction Group" label="Hunt Construction Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q947065" start="4831" end="4846" title="Arizona Stadium" label="Arizona Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791461" start="4870" end="4914" title="Arizona Wildcats football" label="University of Arizona Wildcats football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924862" start="5199" end="5228" title="Mountain America Credit Union" label="Mountain America Credit Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986651" start="5482" end="5498" title="West Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="West Texas State"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091238" start="5635" end="5645" title="Frank Kush" label="Frank Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594706" start="5988" end="6004" title="1999 Fiesta Bowl" label="1999 Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134647" start="6016" end="6036" title="Tennessee Volunteers" label="Tennessee Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q944639" start="6046" end="6069" title="Florida State Seminoles" label="Florida State Seminoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411753" start="6161" end="6172" title="Fiesta Bowl" label="Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593821" start="6203" end="6207" title="1998 NCAA Division I-A football season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600303" start="6212" end="6223" title="2002 NCAA Division I-A football season" label="2002 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q744040" start="6257" end="6287" title="BCS National Championship Game" label="BCS National Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151565" start="6294" end="6305" title="Cactus Bowl" label="Cactus Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068011" start="6404" end="6415" title="Chase Field" label="Chase Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="6477" end="6495" title="State Farm Stadium" label="State Farm Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6601" end="6625" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="6659" end="6672" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="6681" end="6698" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="6757" end="6774" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="6786" end="6800" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570093" start="6869" end="6886" title="Arizona Wranglers" label="Arizona Wranglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358643" start="6887" end="6894" title="Arizona Outlaws" label="Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639877" start="6902" end="6906" title="USFL" label="USFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938063" start="6979" end="6998" title="St. Louis Cardinals (NFL)" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="7067" end="7084" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="7179" end="7193" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="7205" end="7226" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q474760" start="7325" end="7335" title="Super Bowl XXII" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="7345" end="7364" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="7501" end="7524" title="savings and loan crisis" label="savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="7976" end="8000" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065229" start="8030" end="8044" title="Super Bowl XXX" label="Super Bowl XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526532" start="8084" end="8105" title="Vince Lombardi Trophy" label="Vince Lombardi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="8121" end="8140" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="8211" end="8232" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="8256" end="8274" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="8279" end="8293" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056682" start="8337" end="8347" title="Cedar Fire (2003)" label="Cedar Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="8355" end="8364" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="8397" end="8413" title="Qualcomm Stadium" label="Qualcomm Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q551800" start="8459" end="8466" title="Ticket (admission)" label="Tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="8564" end="8585" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="8713" end="8732" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="8736" end="8749" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017052" start="9139" end="9158" title="National Football League television blackout policies" label="NFL blackout policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="9392" end="9406" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q594428" start="9462" end="9470" title="NFC East" label="NFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q747915" start="9549" end="9557" title="NFC West" label="NFC West"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035944" start="9720" end="9748" title="Snowbird (people)" label="live there during the winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320454" start="9988" end="10002" title="Estadio Azteca" label="Estadio Azteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="10006" end="10017" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="10531" end="10548" title="State Farm Stadium" label="Cardinals Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="10576" end="10584" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411753" start="10737" end="10748" title="Fiesta Bowl" label="Fiesta Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q744040" start="10783" end="10813" title="BCS National Championship Game" label="BCS National Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074938" start="10899" end="10915" title="Arizona Hotshots" label="Arizona Hotshots"/>
<link wikidata="Q55074848" start="10976" end="11005" title="Alliance of American Football" label="Alliance of American Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="11066" end="11083" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q117330" start="11438" end="11442" title="1976 in film" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q300568" start="11450" end="11464" title="A Star Is Born (1976 film)" label="A Star is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="11477" end="11493" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q208681" start="11498" end="11516" title="Kris Kristofferson" label="Kris Kristofferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q753308" start="11518" end="11522" title="1980 in film" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363927" start="11530" end="11539" title="Used Cars" label="Used Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q303492" start="11547" end="11551" title="1982 in film" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="11553" end="11571" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739043" start="11584" end="11619" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Spend the Night Together (film)" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Spend the Night Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q754013" start="11647" end="11651" title="1987 in film" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="11657" end="11670" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q670439" start="11683" end="11698" title="Raising Arizona" label="Raising Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q753348" start="11706" end="11710" title="1988 in film" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="11712" end="11714" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q430525" start="11722" end="11734" title="rockumentary" label="rockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q478327" start="11741" end="11755" title="Rattle and Hum" label="Rattle and Hum"/>
<link wikidata="Q735708" start="11786" end="11790" title="1996 in film" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="11792" end="11805" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q329131" start="11819" end="11832" title="Jerry Maguire" label="Jerry Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q974517" start="11912" end="11930" title="The Amazing Race 4" label="The Amazing Race 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771034" start="11958" end="11963" title="The U (film)" label="The U"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="11973" end="11977" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030809" start="11991" end="12000" title="30 for 30" label="30 for 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981271" start="12038" end="12083" title="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums" label="List of NCAA Division I FBS football stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87312" wikidata="Q1257886" url="?curid=87312" title="Alberich">
<text>In German heroic legend, Alberich () is a dwarf. He features most prominently in the poems &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot; and &quot;Ortnit&quot;. He also features in the Old Norse collection of German legends called the Thidreksaga under the name Alfrikr. His name consists of the elements &quot;alb&quot; (&quot;elf&quot;) and &quot;ric&quot; &quot;power&quot; or &quot;ruler&quot;, It is equivalent to the Old French &quot;Alberon&quot; or &quot;Auberon&quot;, from which the English Oberon is derived. and is the source of the Norman French derivation &quot;Aubry&quot;.

The name was later used for a character in Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera cycle &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;.

==Mythology==
Alberich plays a prominent role in the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, where he is the guardian of the Nibelung&#x27;s treasure and has the strength of twelve men. Siegfried overpowers him using his cloak of invisibility (Tarnkappe), after which the dwarf serves the hero. Siegfried later pulls his beard in mock combat when he arrives unannounced to claim the treasure.
Ortnit seeks to woo the daughter of the heathen king Machorel, Alberich reveals his paternity to Ortnit and aids him in his quest, playing tricks on the heathen king and even impersonating Mohammed. When Ortnit sets out on his final fatal adventure against a plague of dragons, Alberich takes back the magic ring and warns Ortnit not to go on his quest.

In the &quot;Thidrekssaga&quot;, Alfrikr makes the swords Eckisax and Nagelringr, giving this last sword to Thidrek.

References to Alberich outside of heroic poetry are rare.

==Wagner==
In Wagner&#x27;s opera cycle &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;, Alberich is the chief of the Nibelungen race of dwarves and the main antagonist driving events. In &quot;Das Rheingold&quot;, the first opera in the cycle, he gains the power to forge the ring after renouncing love and stealing the gold of the river Rhein, of which the ring is made. His brother, the smith Mime, creates the Tarnhelm for Alberich. News of the gold robbery and ring of power incites gods and giants alike to action. The giants Fafner and Fasolt demand the ring in payment for building Valhalla, and carry off Freia as a hostage. In &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot; (the fourth opera in Wagner&#x27;s cycle), Hagen, the murderer of the hero Siegfried, is the half-human half-dwarf son of Alberich by Grimhilde, a human woman. This detail of Hagen&#x27;s origin is Wagner&#x27;s invention, not taken from the myth or epic poems, in which Hagen is an ordinary human being with human parents.

Wagner&#x27;s Alberich is a composite character, mostly based on Alberich from the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;, but also on Andvari from Norse mythology. He has been widely described, most notably by Theodor Adorno, as a negative Jewish stereotype, with his race expressed through &quot;distorted&quot; music and &quot;muttering&quot; speech; other critics, however, disagree with this assessment.

Alberich shows up in &quot;Rheingold,&quot; not in &quot;Walküre,&quot; then again in &quot;Siegfried,&quot; and finally in &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot; (while Hagen is sleeping, commanding Hagen to regain the Ring). At the end of the opera, Alberich along with the three Rhine maidens are the only key characters in &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot; that remain alive. Wotan seems to die at the end of &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot; when Valhalla goes up in flames, Fasolt from &quot;Rheingold&quot; dies in &quot;Rheingold,&quot; Sieglinde and Siegmund from &quot;Walküre&quot; die in &quot;Walküre&quot; (Sieglinde is at least dead by the time &quot;Siegfried&quot; begins, some 15–20 years later), Mime (from &quot;Rheingold&quot; and &quot;Siegfried&quot;) dies in &quot;Siegfried&quot;, Gunther and Hagen from &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot; both die at the end of it, and Siegfried (from &quot;Siegfried&quot; and &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot;) and Brunhilde (from &quot;Walküre&quot;, &quot;Siegfried&quot;, and &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot;) both die in &quot;Götterdämmerung&quot;.

== Legacy ==
In World War I, the German retreat to fortified positions in the Hindenburg Line, which was officially named after Siegfried despite its common name, was named Operation Alberich.

During WWII, Germany developed anechoic tiles, which were nicknamed Alberich.

In Genevieve Cogman’s &quot;Invisible Library&quot; fantasy book series, Alberich is the primary antagonist to the main character, the librarian Irene. He is a powerful and mysterious figure whose actions and motives create significant challenges for Irene and her mission to retrieve rare books from alternate worlds

==See also==
* Oberon (the French translation of Alberich used for the name of the &quot;King of Fairies&quot; in French and English texts)
* Elegast/Elbegast/Alegast— elf guest, elf spirit (Dutch, German, and Scandinavian texts, respectively)

==Notes==
==References==
* Bulfinch, Thomas. 1834. &quot;Bulfinch&#x27;s Mythology.&quot; Reprinted by New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1970, p. 354–356, 903. .
* Guerber, Helene A. 1895. &quot;Myths of Northern Lands - Index.&quot; p. 218, p. 295 index. File retrieved 7/15/2007.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q378935" start="3" end="23" title="Continental Germanic mythology" label="German heroic legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257886" start="25" end="33" title="Alberich" label="Alberich"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="42" end="47" title="Dwarf (mythology)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="97" end="111" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789855" start="128" end="134" title="Ortnit" label="Ortnit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="166" end="175" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q195789" start="216" end="227" title="Thidreksaga" label="Thidreksaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="309" end="312" title="elf" label="elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="404" end="414" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="482" end="488" title="Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="526" end="539" title="Norman language" label="Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901879" start="557" end="562" title="Aubry" label="Aubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="614" end="628" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="636" end="641" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="654" end="677" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="860" end="869" title="Sigurd" label="Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419514" start="895" end="916" title="cloak of invisibility" label="cloak of invisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="1256" end="1264" title="Mohammed" label="Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224130" start="1530" end="1537" title="Dietrich von Bern" label="Thidrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="1613" end="1619" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="1645" end="1668" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093934" start="1705" end="1713" title="Nibelung" label="Nibelung"/>
<link wikidata="Q327717" start="1781" end="1794" title="Das Rheingold" label="Das Rheingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686415" start="2001" end="2009" title="Tarnhelm" label="Tarnhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="2119" end="2125" title="Fafnir" label="Fafner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611492" start="2130" end="2136" title="Fasolt" label="Fasolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="2177" end="2185" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="2201" end="2206" title="Freyja" label="Freia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272029" start="2230" end="2245" title="Götterdämmerung" label="Götterdämmerung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568447" start="2295" end="2300" title="Hagen (legend)" label="Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q333146" start="2327" end="2336" title="Siegfried (opera)" label="Siegfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156750" start="2605" end="2624" title="composite character" label="composite character"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="2700" end="2707" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="2713" end="2728" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="2776" end="2790" title="Theodor Adorno" label="Theodor Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="2797" end="2805" title="anti-Semitism" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="2806" end="2809" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4074" end="4085" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q311721" start="4136" end="4151" title="Hindenburg Line" label="Hindenburg Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025061" start="4283" end="4296" title="anechoic tile" label="anechoic tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26703330" start="4334" end="4350" title="Genevieve Cogman" label="Genevieve Cogman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182436" start="4466" end="4475" title="librarian" label="librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139234" start="4665" end="4671" title="Oberon" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q121843129" start="4792" end="4799" title="Elegast" label="Elegast"/>
<link wikidata="Q943991" start="4922" end="4938" title="Thomas Bulfinch" label="Bulfinch, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628031" start="5053" end="5071" title="H.A. Guerber" label="Guerber, Helene A."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87313" wikidata="Q1328328" url="?curid=87313" title="Tyrfing">
<text>Tyrfing, also rendered as Tirfing or Tyrving, was a magic sword in Norse mythology, which features in the Tyrfing Cycle, which includes a poem from the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; called &quot;Hervararkviða&quot;, and the Hervarar saga. The name is also used in the saga to denote the Goths.

== Description ==
As described in its legends, Tyrfing wasthe keenest of all blades; every time it was drawn a light shone from it like a ray of the sun. It could never be held unsheathed without being the death of a man, and it had always to be sheathed with blood still warm upon it. There was no living thing, neither man nor beast, that could live to see another day if it were wounded by Tyrfing, whether the wound were big or little; never had it failed in a stroke or been stayed before it plunged into the earth, and the man who bore it in battle would always be victorious, if blows were struck with it. Certain stories seem to imply that Tyrfing is capable of deicide, as shown when King Heidrek recognizes the god Odin in a disguise and strikes at him, forcing Odin to transform into a hawk to escape the blow.

== The Tyrfing Cycle ==
Svafrlami was the king of Gardariki, and Odin&#x27;s grandson. He managed to trap the dwarfs Dvalinn and Durinn when they had left the rock where they dwelt. Then he forced them to forge a sword with a golden hilt that would never miss a stroke, would never rust and would cut through stone and iron as easily as through clothes.

The dwarfs made the sword, and it shone and gleamed like fire. However, in revenge they cursed it so that it would kill a man every time it was drawn and that it would be the cause of three great evils. They finally cursed it so that it would also kill Svafrlami himself.

When Svafrlami heard the curses he tried to slay Dvalinn, but the dwarf disappeared into the rock and though the sword was driven deep into it, it missed its intended victim.

Svafrlami wielded the sword and achieved many victories with it, until he faced the berserker Arngrim. When he struck at Arngrim, he cut through his opponent&#x27;s shield, burying the sword in the ground. Arngrim then cut off the king&#x27;s hand, took the sword and killed Svafrlami with it, accomplishing the dwarfs&#x27; curse.

Arngrim took Svafrlami&#x27;s daughter as his wife and had a son Angantyr and eleven other brothers. He passed the sword to Angantyr. Later, Angantyr wished to marry Ingeborg, daughter of Yngvi. However, Yngvi said Ingeborg should choose who she would marry, and she chose the Swedish champion Hjalmar. In a rage, Angantyr challenged him to a duel. Angantyr and his brothers were thus all slain at Samsø by Hjalmar and his Norwegian sworn brother Orvar-Odd; but Hjalmar, being wounded by Tyrfing, has only time to sing his death-song before he dies, and asks Orvar-Odd to bring his body to his beloved back at Uppsala. Ingeborg fell down dead at the sight, and so Tyrfing completed its first evil deed.

Angantyr had married another woman (Tófa) between issuing his challenge and his death, and through her had a daughter Hervor. Hervor was brought up as a bond-servant, and inherited her father&#x27;s prowess in combat. Upon learning of her parentage, she armed herself as a shieldmaiden, and travelled to Munarvoe in Samsø in an attempt to recover her father&#x27;s weapon. There she visited her father&#x27;s burial mound and spoke with the ghost of the dead man, who warned her Tyrfing would bring ill-fortune to her descendants. She then counters her father by threatening him with the &quot;curse of annihilation&quot; if he keeps the sword, saying that he and his brothers &quot;shall waste away as in an anthill,&quot; and that it was &quot;not fitting that the dead should hold such a precious weapon.&quot; At this, Angantyr relents and gives Hervor his sword willingly, wishing luck and valor upon her. Hervor used the sword in various adventures, and eventually would marry King Gudmund&#x27;s son, Höfund. Together they had two sons, Heidrek and Angantyr (the second). Hervor gave Heidrek the sword Tyrfing in secret. While Angantyr and Heidrek walked, Heidrek showed Angantyr the sword. Since he had unsheathed it, the curse the dwarfs had put on the sword made Heidrek kill his brother Angantyr. This was the second of Tyrfing&#x27;s three evil deeds.

Heidrek became king of the Goths by slaying the previous king Harold. During a voyage, Heidrek camped at the Carpathians (Harvaða fjöllum, cf. Grimm&#x27;s law). There, he defeated a disguised Odin in a game of riddles. Heidrek was accompanied by a number of thralls, and due to Odin&#x27;s anger that night they entered his tent and slew him in his sleep, the third and final of Tyrfing&#x27;s evil deeds. Heidrek&#x27;s son, also named Angantyr (the third), caught and killed the thralls and reclaimed the magic sword, finally satisfying the dwarfs&#x27; curse.

Angantyr was the next king of the Goths, but his illegitimate half-Hun brother Hlod (or Hlöd, Hlöðr) wanted half of the kingdom. Angantýr refused, and Gizur called Hlod a bastard and his mother a slave-girl. Hlod and 343,200 mounted Huns invaded the Goths (See The Battle of the Goths and Huns), killing Angantyr&#x27;s sister. Angantyr raised an army to face Hlod, but the Huns greatly outnumbered the Goths. The Goths won because Angantyr used Tyrfing to slay Hlod on the battlefield. The bodies of the numerous warriors choked the rivers, causing a flood which filled the valleys with dead men and horses.

==Versions and ambiguities==

There are three known medieval written versions of the so-called &quot;Hervarvar Saga&quot;, the R, U and H versions. The versions themselves are composite of other known and unknown stories from a range of time periods. The above is based on the later H version of the tale, seen in the translation by Nora Kershaw Chadwick and a modern version by Martyn Whittock. For links to source text in English translation and Old Norse and for general commentary see Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks.

The versions differ in terms of names, and various details but most especially Tyrfing&#x27;s curse, which is only lightly alluded to in the oldest version. The identity of the &quot;three evil deeds&quot; is also ambiguous. Christopher Tolkien argues that the evil deeds ought to refer to kinslaying - Heidrek killing his brother Angantyr, Heidrek killing his father in law King Harold, and Angantyr slaying his half brother Hlod. However, this is complicated by the fact that in the oldest R version, Tyrfing was not clearly used to kill Hlod, and was definitely not used to kill Angantyr. Indeed, Heidrek only slew Harold to save his son. Further, in this oldest version Tyrfing did not accomplish the death of Svafrlami. Thus, Tolkien argues that the curse is a later elaboration, noting though the conflict with the &quot;Awakening of Angantyr&quot; in which the sword is clearly described as cursed.

The curse on Tyrfing is comparable to that placed on the ring Andvaranaut in the Völsung Cycle.

== Etymology ==
Scholars have not come to a definitive conclusion as to the origins of the name Tyrfing, but there are several theories. One maintains that it is possibly connected to the Thervingi (or &quot;Tervingi&quot;), a Gothic tribe recorded by Roman sources in the 4th century. Another reads the name as a combination of &quot;Tyr&quot;, Norse god of war, and &quot;fingr&quot;, an Old Norse spelling of the word finger, to literally mean &quot;the finger of the war god.&quot; A third theory instead poses the suffix -&quot;ing&quot; as denoting a sense of ownership, in the vein of other Scandinavian sword names such as Hoeking (&quot;sword owned by Hoekr&quot;) or Hunlafing (&quot;sword owned by Hunlaf&quot;), which would thus render the name &quot;sword of Torfi,&quot; though who &quot;Torfi&quot; is in this context is not clear.

== Influence on modern fantasy ==

The theme of a cursed sword which causes evil deeds whenever drawn was taken up by several modern writers of Fantasy – notably Michael Moorcock&#x27;s &quot;Stormbringer&quot;, the magic sword wielded by the doomed albino emperor Elric of Melniboné. Science fiction author Poul Anderson included Tyrfing in his medieval fantasy novel &quot;The Broken Sword&quot;. In a more lighthearted tone, the theme was also taken up by Lawrence Watt-Evans in &quot;The Misenchanted Sword&quot;. The sword also appears in the novel &quot;The Quickleys and the Keeper of Balance&quot; by M. J. Packham.

==In popular culture==
Tyrfing has been referenced in a variety of modern contexts that reference Norse mythology. Tyrfing has been used as the name of a hot sauce on Hot Ones, the name of a &quot;demon sword&quot; in High School DxD, a holy weapon in Fire Emblem: Genealogy of the Holy War, and a cursed sword in &quot;&quot;.

==See also==
* Fornsigtuna

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1328328" start="0" end="7" title="Tyrfing" label="Tyrfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328328" start="26" end="33" title="Tyrfing" label="Tirfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328328" start="37" end="45" title="Tyrfing" label="Tyrving,"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965846" start="52" end="63" title="magic sword" label="magic sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="67" end="82" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328328" start="106" end="119" title="Tyrfing Cycle" label="Tyrfing Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="158" end="169" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681364" start="189" end="202" title="Hervararkviða" label="Hervararkviða"/>
<link wikidata="Q617881" start="218" end="231" title="Hervarar saga" label="Hervarar saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="281" end="286" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855439" start="959" end="966" title="deicide" label="deicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817116" start="1136" end="1145" title="Svafrlami" label="Svafrlami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415162" start="1162" end="1171" title="Gardariki" label="Gardariki"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1177" end="1181" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="1222" end="1228" title="Dwarf (Norse mythology)" label="dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268297" start="1229" end="1236" title="Dvalinn" label="Dvalinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261767" start="1241" end="1247" title="Durinn" label="Durinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q335303" start="2000" end="2009" title="berserker" label="berserker"/>
<link wikidata="Q545254" start="2010" end="2017" title="Arngrim" label="Arngrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923583" start="2314" end="2322" title="Angantyr" label="Angantyr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2415" end="2442" title="Yngvi and Alf#Hervarar Saga and the Saga of Orvar-Odd" label="Ingeborg, daughter of Yngvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178643" start="2543" end="2550" title="Hjalmar" label="Hjalmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216422" start="2647" end="2652" title="Samsø" label="Samsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275382" start="2696" end="2705" title="Orvar-Odd" label="Orvar-Odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q433032" start="2859" end="2866" title="Gamla Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965697" start="2989" end="2993" title="Tofa (Poetic Edda)" label="Tófa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092686" start="3071" end="3077" title="Hervor" label="Hervor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473687" start="3226" end="3238" title="shieldmaiden" label="shieldmaiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q216422" start="3269" end="3274" title="Samsø" label="Samsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215697" start="4318" end="4325" title="Heidrek" label="Heidrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="4461" end="4477" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="4511" end="4515" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="4529" end="4535" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342610" start="4577" end="4583" title="thrall" label="thrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923583" start="4756" end="4764" title="Angantyr" label="Angantyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923583" start="4883" end="4891" title="Angantyr" label="Angantyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383464" start="4962" end="4966" title="Hlod" label="Hlod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5565949" start="5034" end="5039" title="Gizur" label="Gizur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481116" start="5144" end="5176" title="The Battle of the Goths and Huns" label="The Battle of the Goths and Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q431240" start="5826" end="5847" title="Nora Kershaw Chadwick" label="Nora Kershaw Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="5941" end="5950" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q617881" start="5982" end="6007" title="Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks" label="Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="6235" end="6254" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="Christopher Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="6979" end="6990" title="Andvaranaut" label="Andvaranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202175" start="6998" end="7011" title="Völsung Cycle" label="Völsung Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290818" start="7202" end="7211" title="Thervingi" label="Thervingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172713" start="7349" end="7352" title="Týr" label="Tyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="8024" end="8040" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595538" start="8054" end="8066" title="Stormbringer" label="Stormbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="8112" end="8118" title="albino" label="albino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333353" start="8127" end="8145" title="Elric of Melniboné" label="Elric of Melniboné"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="8170" end="8183" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720276" start="8237" end="8253" title="The Broken Sword" label="The Broken Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095351" start="8321" end="8340" title="Lawrence Watt-Evans" label="Lawrence Watt-Evans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8350" end="8372" title="The Misenchanted Sword" label="The Misenchanted Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055175" start="8654" end="8662" title="Hot Ones" label="Hot Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617849" start="8705" end="8720" title="High School DxD" label="High School DxD"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8739" end="8777" title="Fire Emblem: Genealogy of the Holy War" label="Fire Emblem: Genealogy of the Holy War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470394" start="8831" end="8842" title="Fornsigtuna" label="Fornsigtuna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87315" wikidata="Q224617" url="?curid=87315" title="Platform">
<text>Platform may refer to:
== Arts ==
* Platform, an arts centre at The Bridge, Easterhouse, Glasgow
* &quot;Platform&quot; (1993 film), a 1993 Bollywood action film
* &quot;Platform&quot; (2000 film), a 2000 film by Jia Zhangke
* Platform (art group), an interdisciplinary art group that researches the oil industry
* Platform (Australian art group), an artists group based in Melbourne
* &quot;Platform&quot; (novel), a 2001 novel by Michel Houellebecq

== Physical objects and features ==
* Carbonate platform, a type of sedimentary body
* Cargo platform, a pallet used to ship cargo and heavy machines by forklift or manual lift
* Diving platform, used in diving
* Jumping platform, naturally occurring platforms, or platforms made in an &quot;ad hoc&quot; way for cliff jumping
* Oil platform, a structure built for oil production
* Platform, a component of scaffolding
* Platform (geology), the part of a continental craton that is covered by sedimentary rocks
* Platform (shopping center) in Culver City, Greater Los Angeles, California
* Theatre platform, a standard piece of theatrical scenery
* Platform mound, an earthwork intended to support a structure or activity
* Platform shoe, a kind of shoe with a thick sole
* Railway platform, an area at a railway station to alight from/embark on trains or trams

== Politics ==
* Party platform, a list of principles held by a political party
* Platform (Mali), an alliance of pro-government paramilitary groups in the Mali War
* World Anti-Imperialist Platform, a left-wing political organization opposed to American and NATO imperialism
== Technology ==
* Platform economy, a contemporary business model based upon apps and websites
* Computing platform, a framework on which applications may be run
* Digital platform (infrastructure), a software-based online infrastructure that facilitates user interactions and transactions
* Platform game, a genre of video games
* Car platform, a set of components shared by several vehicle models
* Weapons platform, a system or structure that carries weapons
* Web platform

== Other uses==
* Economic platform, an intermediary in a two-sided market
* Platform (business model), a business model that creates value by facilitating exchanges between two or more interdependent groups
* Platform conodonts, a type of conodonts with highly evolved feeding elements

==See also==
* The Platform (disambiguation)
*Platform 4, a theatre company in Hampshire, England
* Platform economy, economic and social activity facilitated by platforms, typically online sales or technology frameworks 
* Platform release, a gradual film distribution strategy
* Platforming (disambiguation)
* Platformism, a form of anarchist organization that seeks unity from its participants
* &quot;Platforms&quot;, a song by M.I.A. from &quot;AIM&quot; (album)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224617" start="0" end="8" title="Platform" label="Platform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64" end="87" title="Easterhouse#Amenities" label="The Bridge, Easterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202266" start="99" end="131" title="Platform (1993 film)" label="&amp;quot;Platform&amp;quot; (1993 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q197412" start="164" end="196" title="Platform (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;Platform&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202268" start="227" end="247" title="Platform (art group)" label="Platform (art group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967206" start="315" end="346" title="Platform (Australian art group)" label="Platform (Australian art group)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425106" start="386" end="414" title="Platform (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Platform&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="490" end="508" title="Carbonate platform" label="Carbonate platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q505996" start="539" end="553" title="Cargo platform" label="Cargo platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q579772" start="631" end="646" title="Diving platform" label="Diving platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132811" start="665" end="681" title="Jumping platform" label="Jumping platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="781" end="793" title="Oil platform" label="Oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q233320" start="859" end="870" title="scaffolding" label="scaffolding"/>
<link wikidata="Q666258" start="873" end="891" title="Platform (geology)" label="Platform (geology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976664" start="965" end="991" title="Platform (shopping center)" label="Platform (shopping center)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131062" start="1042" end="1058" title="Theatre platform" label="Theatre platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202294" start="1101" end="1115" title="Platform mound" label="Platform mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q582151" start="1176" end="1189" title="Platform shoe" label="Platform shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q325358" start="1226" end="1242" title="Railway platform" label="Railway platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="1332" end="1346" title="Party platform" label="Party platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381569" start="1397" end="1412" title="Platform (Mali)" label="Platform (Mali)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123631784" start="1482" end="1513" title="World Anti-Imperialist Platform" label="World Anti-Imperialist Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q50867887" start="1610" end="1626" title="Platform economy" label="Platform economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="1689" end="1707" title="Computing platform" label="Computing platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q28017710" start="1756" end="1789" title="Digital platform (infrastructure)" label="Digital platform (infrastructure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q828322" start="1884" end="1897" title="Platform game" label="Platform game"/>
<link wikidata="Q632300" start="1924" end="1936" title="Car platform" label="Car platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978115" start="1993" end="2009" title="Weapons platform" label="Weapons platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096284" start="2056" end="2068" title="Web platform" label="Web platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031007" start="2128" end="2144" title="two-sided market" label="two-sided market"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2147" end="2172" title="Business_model#Categorization" label="Platform (business model)"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="2310" end="2318" title="conodont" label="conodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q105125096" start="2373" end="2402" title="The Platform (disambiguation)" label="The Platform (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061885" start="2404" end="2414" title="Platform 4" label="Platform 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q50867887" start="2458" end="2474" title="Platform economy" label="Platform economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491297" start="2582" end="2598" title="Limited theatrical release" label="Platform release"/>
<link wikidata="Q15945549" start="2639" end="2667" title="Platforming (disambiguation)" label="Platforming (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q176339" start="2670" end="2681" title="Platformism" label="Platformism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398860" start="2802" end="2825" title="AIM (album)" label="&amp;quot;AIM&amp;quot; (album)"/>
</links>
</doc>
