<doc id="89585" wikidata="Q200166" url="?curid=89585" title="Kitchener, Ontario">
<text>Kitchener is a city in the Canadian province of Ontario, about west of Toronto. It is one of three cities that make up the Regional Municipality of Waterloo and is the regional seat. Kitchener was known as Berlin until a 1916 referendum changed its name. The city covers an area of 136.86 km2, and had a population of 256,885 at the time of the 2021 Canadian census.

The Regional Municipality of Waterloo has 673,910 people as of year-end 2023, making it the 10th-largest census metropolitan area (CMA) in Canada and the fourth-largest CMA in Ontario. Kitchener and Waterloo are considered &quot;twin cities&quot;, which are often referred to jointly as &quot;Kitchener–Waterloo&quot; (K–W), although they have separate municipal governments.

==History==

===Pre-contact indigenous history and land use===

Indigenous people have long lived in and around what is today Kitchener-Waterloo. During the retreat of the last glacial maximum, the Waterloo Region was isolated by the ice to the north, east, and west and by Lake Maumee III to the south, however once the ice retreated the landscape opened up for nomadic populations to hunt, camp, and thrive; though not many sites from the Paleo-Indian Period (13,000BC to 1000BC) have been documented in the region thus far.

The Archaic Period (8,000BC to 800BC) still primarily consisted of nomadic hunter-gatherer communities spread out across the landscape. Advancements in technologies including less portable stone tools such as axes and adzes, more intricate tools made of animal bone such as fish hooks, gorges, and harpoons, and the entrance of Indigenous copper tools into the archaeological record is characteristic of this time period. More than two dozen archaeological sites from the Archaic Period have been documented in the Waterloo Region alone including campsites, tool manufacturing sites, and cemeteries.

Archaeologist Gary Warrick of Wilfrid Laurier University dates the expansion of the Neutral people to the Kitchener-Waterloo area sometime in the 1300s in what is referred to as the Woodland Period (900BC to 1650AD). A history states that at least two &quot;aboriginal settlements from the 1500s can now be identified near Schneider and Strasburg Creeks&quot; with some artifacts having been found under the city from a thousand years ago. The Iroquoian people grew crops such as corn, beans and squash. The finds include the remains of a First Nations village, estimated to be 500 years old, discovered in 2010 in the Strasburg Creek area of Kitchener. The inhabitants are thought to be ancestors of the Neutral Nation; artifacts found include the remains of longhouses, tools made of bone and of stone and arrowheads. One archaeologist stated that they discovered &quot;artifacts going back as far as 9,000 years&quot;.

In 2020, a site at Fischer-Hallman Road was found to include artifacts from a &quot;Late Woodland Iroquois village&quot; that was inhabited circa 1300 to 1600. Archeologists found some 35,000 objects including stone tools and a 4,000 year old arrowhead.

To date, there are more than 18 Late-Woodland Period village sites documented in the Waterloo Region.

===Early European settlement===
====German company tract====
Kitchener stands on a part of the Haldimand Tract, lands in the Grand River valley purchased in 1784 by the British from the Mississaugas in order to grant it to the Six Nations for their allegiance during the American Revolution. Between 1796 and 1798, the Six Nations sold 38,000 hectares of this land to loyalist Colonel Richard Beasley. The portion of land that Beasley purchased was remote, but of great interest to German Mennonite farming families from Pennsylvania. They wanted to live in an area that would allow them to practice their beliefs without persecution. Eventually, the Mennonites purchased all of Beasley&#x27;s unsold land, creating 160 farm tracts.

Many of the pioneers arriving from Pennsylvania, known as the Pennsylvania Dutch or Pennsilfaanisch-Deitsche (Deutsch; German-speaking mainly from Switzerland and the Palatinate, not modern Dutch), after November 1803 bought land in a 60,000-acre section of Block Two from the German Company, which was established by a group of Mennonites from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The tract included most of Block 2 of the previous Grand River Indian lands. Many of the first farms were least 400 acres in size. The German Company, represented by Daniel Erb and Samuel Bricker, had acquired the land from previous owner Richard Beasley; he had gotten into financial difficulties after buying the land in 1796 from Joseph Brant, who represented the Six Nations. The payment to Beasley, in cash, arrived from Pennsylvania in kegs, carried in a wagon surrounded by armed guards.

The first settlers in the area of what would become the village of Doon (now a suburb of Kitchener) arrived in 1800. They were two Mennonites from Franklin County, Pennsylvania who were also brothers in law, Joseph Schoerg (later called Sherk) and Samuel Betzner Jr. Joseph Schoerg and his wife settled on Lot 11, B.F. Beasley Black, S.R., on the bank of the Grand River opposite Doon, and Betzner and his wife settled on the west bank of the Grand, on a farm near the village of Blair.

The homes built by the next generation of these families still stand as of March 2021, on what is now Pioneer Tower Road in Kitchener and have been listed as historically important; the John Betzner homestead (restored) and the David Schoerg farmstead (not yet restored) were erected circa 1830.

By 1800, the first buildings in Berlin had been built, and over the next decade, several families made the difficult trip north to what was then known as the Sandhills. One of these Mennonite families, arriving in 1807, was the Schneiders, whose restored 1816 home (the oldest building in the city) is now a National Historic Site and museum in the heart of Kitchener. Other families whose names can still be found in local place names were the Bechtels, the Ebys, the Erbs, the Webers, the Cressmans, and the Brubachers. In 1816, the government of Upper Canada designated the settlement the Township of Waterloo.

Much of the land, made up of moraines and swampland interspersed with rivers and streams, was converted to farmland and roads. Wild pigeons, which once swarmed by the tens of thousands, were driven from the area. Apple trees were introduced to the region by John Eby in the 1830s, and several gristmills and sawmills were erected throughout the area, most notably Joseph Schneider&#x27;s 1816 sawmill, John and Abraham Erb&#x27;s grist- and sawmills, Jacob Shantz&#x27;s sawmill, and Eby&#x27;s cider mill. Schneider built Berlin&#x27;s first road, from his home to the corner of King Street and Queen Street (then known as Walper Corner). The settlers raised $1,000 to extend the road from Walper Corner to Huether Corner, where the Huether Brewery was built and the Huether Hotel now stands in the city of Waterloo; a petition to the government for $100 to assist in completing the project was denied.

====Settlement before Ebytown (1804–1806)====

Members of the Eby family, most notably Benjamin Eby, began migrating to the German Company Tract lands in the first decade of the 19th century. The Ebys were an old Swiss Mennonite family with an association with religious non-conformist movements in Europe going back possibly as far as the Middle Ages, and who were early followers of Anabaptism. Jacob Eby, an ancestor of the Ebys who migrated to Upper Canada, was a Mennonite bishop in the Swiss canton of Zürich in 1683. The family first migrated to the Palatinate, then to Pennsylvania, settling in Lancaster County. In Lancaster County, members of the family, such as Peter Eby (1765–1843), continued to act as Mennonite religious leaders. The Ebys became involved in early land settlement of the German Company Tract, with a number arriving between 1804 and 1807 and taking up farming plots.

Two brothers, George and Samuel (&quot;Indian Sam&quot;) Eby, arrived in 1804 and settled on Lot 1 of the German Company Tract, near the area of what would become downtown Kitchener. George Eby&#x27;s farmstead was located one mile southeast from the future Berlin town core. It was later owned by Jacob Yost Shantz, who built a large farmhouse there in 1856 at what became the corner of Maurice and Ottawa Streets. Samuel Eby settled on the northwest part of Lot 1 and soon became a close associate of the Mississaugas who lived in the area, selling whisky to them.

====Ebytown to Berlin (1806–1852)====

Later named the founder of Berlin, Benjamin Eby (made Mennonite preacher in 1809, and bishop in 1812) arrived from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, in 1806, and purchased a large tract of land consisting of much of what would become the village of Berlin, so named in 1833). The settlement was initially called Ebytown, and was at the south-east side of what later became Queen Street. Eby was also responsible for the growth of the Mennonite church in Waterloo County. By 1811, Eby had built a log Mennonite meeting house first used as a school house, but later also housing religious services. A new meeting house, known as Eby&#x27;s Versammlungshaus, near Stirling Avenue, replaced the log house in 1834, while a schoolhouse was built on Frederick Street about the same time.

Benjamin Eby encouraged manufacturers and craftsmen to relocate to Ebytown. Jacob Hoffman came in 1829 or 1830, and started the first furniture factory. John Eby, druggist and chemist, arrived from Pennsylvania in about 1820, and opened a shop to the west of what would later be Eby Street. At the time, settlers commonly formed a building &quot;bee&quot; to help newcomers erect a log home. Immigration from Lancaster County continued heavily in the 1820s because of a severe agricultural depression there. Joseph Schneider, from that area, built a frame house in 1820 on the south side of the future Queen Street after clearing a farm and creating a rough road; a small settlement formed around &quot;Schneider&#x27;s Road&quot;, which became the nucleus of Berlin. The home was renovated over a century later and still stands.

The village centre of Ebytown was established in 1830 by Phineas Varnum, who leased land from Joseph Schneider and opened a blacksmith shop on the site where a hotel would be built many years later, the Walper House. A tavern was also established here at the same time, and a store was opened. At the time, the settlement of Ebytown was still considered to be a hamlet.

Friedrich Gaukel, another prominent early local figure, purchased the Varnum tavern site in the early 1830s, along with other lands around the growing village. In a November 1833 transaction, he purchased lands located along the village&#x27;s main street (later known as King Street) from Joseph Schneider. The deeds of sale for this transaction are the earliest recorded use of the name Berlin to refer to the community.

The 1826–1837 cholera pandemic affected Bridgeport in 1832 and Berlin in 1834. Hamilton, then a significant port of entry for immigrants to Canada, was linked to the 1832 outbreak, which also affected other nearby settlements such as Guelph and Brantford. At Bridgeport, two English families who had recently arrived from Suffolk contracted the disease after passing through Hamilton, and several died after arriving at the community. They also spread it to an already-settled family, the Hemblings, a number of whom also died, including adults. Orphaned children from these families were later adopted by local Mennonites.

The &quot;Smith&#x27;s Canadian Gazetteer&quot; of 1846 describes Berlin as: &quot;... contains about 400 inhabitants, who are principally Germans. A newspaper is printed here, called the &quot;German Canadian&quot; and there is a Lutheran meeting house. Post Office, post twice a-week. Professions and Trades.—One physician and surgeon, one lawyer, three stores, one brewery, one printing office, two taverns, one pump maker, two blacksmiths.&quot; The Township of Waterloo (smaller than Waterloo County) consisted primarily of Pennsylvanian Mennonites and immigrants directly from Germany who had brought money with them. At the time, many did not speak English. There were eight grist and twenty saw mills in the township. In 1841, the township population count was 4,424.

The first cemetery in the city was the one next to Pioneer Tower in Doon; the first recorded burial at that location was in 1806. The cemetery at First Mennonite church is not as old, but contains the graves of some notable citizens, including Bishop Benjamin Eby, who died in 1853, Joseph Schneider, and Rev. Joseph Cramer, founder of the House of Friendship social service agency.

====County seat (1853)====
Previously part of the United County of Waterloo, Wellington, and Grey, Waterloo became a separate entity in 1853 with Berlin as county seat. Some contentious debate had existed between Galt and Berlin as to where the seat would be located; one of the requirements for founding was the construction of a courthouse and jail. When local merchant Joseph Gaukel donated a small parcel of land he owned (at the current Queen and Weber Streets), this sealed the deal for Berlin, which was still a small community compared to Galt. The courthouse at the corner of the later Queen Street North and Weber Street and the gaol were built within a few months. The first county council meeting was held in the new facility on 24 January 1853, as the county officially began operations.

The Waterloo County Gaol is the oldest government building in the Region of Waterloo. The Governor&#x27;s House, home of the &quot;gaoler&quot;, in a mid-Victorian Italian Villa style, was added in 1878. Both have been extensively restored and are on the Canadian Register of Historic Places.

===&quot;Busy Berlin&quot; (late 19th century)===
====Arrival of the railways====

The extension of the Grand Trunk Railway from Sarnia to Toronto (and hence through Berlin) in July 1856 was a major boon to the community, helping to improve industrialization in the area. Immigrants from Germany, mostly Lutheran and Catholic, dominated the city after 1850, and developed their own newer German celebrations and influences, such as the Turner societies, gymnastics, and band music. In 1869, Berlin had a population of 3000.

In the late 1880s, the idea of a street railway connection to Waterloo was promoted, resulting in the construction of the Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway in 1888. It was electrified in 1895, making it the first electric railway in Berlin, though not the first in the county, as the Galt and Preston Street Railway had opened with electric operation in 1894. This was followed by the construction of the Preston and Berlin Street Railway in 1904, which connected Berlin to Preston (now a part of Cambridge) to the southeast.

====House of Industry and Refuge====
In 1869, the county government built a very large so-called poorhouse with an attached farm, the House of Industry and Refuge that accommodated some 3,200 people before being closed in 1951; the building was later demolished. It was on Frederick St. in Kitchener, behind the now Frederick Street Mall, and was intended to minimize the number of people begging, living on the streets, or being incarcerated at a time before social-welfare programmes. A 2009 report by the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; explains, &quot;pauperism was considered a moral failing that could be erased through order and hard work&quot;.

A research project by the Laurier School of Social Work has amassed all available data about the house and its residents, digitized it, and made the archive available online. According to Sandy Hoy, a director of research projects, the &quot;inmates&quot; included not only the poor, but also those with disabilities, women, and children. Some were single women who had been servants and became pregnant. Since there were no social services, they were sent to the House. &quot;We saw a lot of young, single mothers in the records,&quot; said Laura Coakley, a research co-ordinator. The archives also indicate that in addition to food and shelter for &quot;inmates&quot;, in return for labour in the house and on the attached farm, the house also donated food, clothing, and money for train tickets to enable the poor to reach family that might be able to support them. Two cemeteries for the poor also were nearby, including &quot;inmates&quot; of the house who had died.

====Civic institutions====

On 9 June 1912, Berlin was designated a city. At this time, the City Hall was in the two-story building at King and Frederick Streets that had also been used as the Berlin town hall, completed in 1869 by builder Jacob Y. Shantz. During its tenure, the structure was also used as a library, theatre, post/telegraph office, market, and jail. That building was demolished in 1924 and replaced by a new structure behind it, designed by architects William Schmalz and Bernal Jones, featuring a classical-revival style and a large civic square in front. Demolished in 1973, and replaced by an office tower and the Market Square shopping mall, the old City Hall&#x27;s clock tower was later (1995) erected in Victoria Park. The building was not replaced by the current Kitchener City Hall on King Street until 1993; the architect for the latter was Bruce Kuwabara. During the interim years, the city had occupied leased premises on Frederick Street.

Kitchener was in many cases within Ontario the earliest adopter, or one of the earliest adopters, of many municipal institutions which later became commonplace. These institutions included library boards, planning boards, and conservation authorities. Known collectively as the agencies, boards, and commissions (or ABCs), these special-purpose bodies became a characteristic element of Canadian governance. The ABCs movement in Kitchener began in the 1890s with the passage of the 1894 &quot;Public Parks Act&quot; transferring management of the town&#x27;s parkland from a committee of the town council to a parks board, an initiative which ultimately led to the creation of Victoria Park. A prominent supporter of this movement was John Richard Eden, who would later become mayor of the town in 1899. The parks board was followed in 1899 by a water commission, whose creation was heavily supported by local industrialists following a devastating fire at a local factory in 1896, as well as due to the need by many industries for a reliable water supply. The town&#x27;s local gas plant and electric utility was similarly municipalized in 1903, resulting in the creation of the Berlin Light Commission.

Facing a mounting sewage problem, especially as a result of effluent from the town&#x27;s industrial tanneries, local leaders in Berlin campaigned at a provincial level to be allowed to create a sewage commission, for which there was no provision in provincial legislation. Ultimately, a private bill was passed, allowing Berlin to create the first sewage commission in Canada in 1904. The Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway was soon also taken over and municipalized. Kitchener was the first city in Ontario to get hydroelectric power in long-distance transmission lines from Niagara Falls, on October 11, 1910. The growing roster of public utilities managed by the Light Commission led to its reorganization into the Kitchener Public Utilities Commission in 1924, which operated as the municipal gas, electric, and light utility, as well as the local street railway operator.

====Berlin-to-Kitchener name change====

Berlin&#x27;s character had been predominantly German since Waterloo Township&#x27;s settlement by Pennsylvania Dutch pioneers in the early 19th century, and its urban growth and industrialization was bolstered in large part by Germans and other peoples from Central and Eastern Europe, who brought with them skills, tools, and machinery, as well as diverse religious and social customs. The outbreak of the First World War pitted the British Empire (and by extension, Canada) against the German, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman empires, and led to a wave of suspicion, exclusion, and discriminatory measures against people whose ethnic origins were associated with these states. Thousands of Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, and Bulgarians were forcibly placed into internment camps by the Dominion government under the &quot;War Measures Act&quot;, which was passed in August 1914. Internees had their property confiscated and many of them were subjected to forced labour. Tens of thousands of others were subjected to government surveillance.

In Berlin, anti-German sentiment slowly escalated throughout the war, beginning with the vandalizing of the statue of Kaiser Wilhelm I in Victoria Park in 1914. Despite pronouncements of loyalty and commitment to the war effort, the city&#x27;s German community was subjected to physical violence and attacks on property by soldiers of the 118th Battalion of the Canadian Expeditionary Force. In a set of referendums in 1916, Berlin was renamed to Kitchener, after Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener, a British field marshal. The first referendum vote in May, to change the name from Berlin, was characterized by the historian Adam Crerar as being influenced by voter intimidation, with soldiers of the 118th Battalion keeping potential name change opponents away from the polls; the referendum passed by a narrow margin. A second referendum in June, to choose the new name, saw the name &quot;Kitchener&quot; chosen with only 346 votes. In September, the city of 19,000 people was renamed.

===German culture===
Of the cities that are now part of Waterloo Region, Berlin, now Kitchener, has the strongest German heritage because of the high levels of settlement in this area by German-speaking immigrants.

While those from Pennsylvania were the most numerous until about 1840, a few Germans from Europe began arriving in 1819, including Fredrick Gaukel, a hotel keeper, being one of the first. He built what later became the Walper House in Berlin. Two streets in present-day Kitchener, Frederick and Gaukel Streets, are named after him. Other German-speaking immigrants from Europe arrived during the 1830s to 1850s, bringing with them their language, religion, and cultural traditions. The German community became industrial and political leaders, and created a German-Canadian society unlike any other found in Canada at the time. They established German public schools and German-language churches.

Both the immigrants from Germany and the Mennonites from Pennsylvania spoke German, though with different dialects such as Low German or the incorrectly called Pennsylvania Dutch, actually Pennsilfaanisch &quot;Deitsch&quot; (German, not modern Dutch). (This dialect is different from Standard German with a simplified grammatical structure, some differences in vocabulary and pronunciation and a greater influence of English.) The combination of various types of German-speaking groups was a notable factor in the history of Waterloo County. The two groups spoke similar dialects and were able to understand each other quite easily and there was no apparent conflict between the Germans from Europe and those who came from Pennsylvania.

Some sources estimate that roughly 50,000 Germans directly from Europe settled in and around Waterloo County, between the 1830s and 1850s. Unlike the predominantly Mennonite settlers from Pennsylvania, the majority of Germans from Europe were of other denominations: most in the first groups were Catholic and those who arrived later were primarily Lutheran.

In 1862, German-speaking groups held the &quot;Sängerfest&quot;, or &quot;Singer Festival&quot; concert event in Berlin that attracted an estimated 10,000 people and continued for several years. Eleven years later,
the more than 2000 Germans in Berlin, Ontario, started a new event, &quot;Friedensfest&quot;, commemorating Prussian victory in the Franco-Prussian war. This annual celebration continued until the start of World War I. In 1897, they raised funds to erect a large monument, with a bronze bust of Kaiser Wilhelm I, in Victoria Park. The monument was destroyed by townspeople just after the start of World War I. A statue of Queen Victoria was erected in the park in 1911.

By 1871, Berlin, Ontario, was a bilingual town with German being the dominant language spoken. More than one visitor commented on the necessity of speaking German in Berlin.

Immigration from continental Germany slowed by 1880. First and second-generation descendants now comprised most of the local German population, and while they were proud of their German roots, most considered themselves loyal British subjects. The 1911 Census indicates that of the 15,196 residents in Berlin, Ontario, about 70% were identified as ethnic German but only 8.3% had been born in Germany. By the beginning of the First World War in 1914, Berlin and Waterloo County were still considered to be predominantly German by people across Canada. This would prove to have a profound impact on local citizens during the war years. During the first few months of the war, services and activities at Lutheran churches in Waterloo County continued. As anti-German sentiment increased throughout Waterloo County, many of the churches decided to stop holding services in German.

The governor general of Canada, the Duke of Connaught, while visiting Berlin, Ontario, in May 1914, discussed the importance of Canadians of German ethnicity (regardless of their origin) in a speech: &quot;It is of great interest to me that many of the citizens of Berlin are of German descent. I well know the admirable qualities – the thoroughness, the tenacity, and the loyalty of the great Teutonic Race, to which I am so closely related. I am sure that these inherited qualities will go far in the making of good Canadians and loyal citizens of the British Empire&quot;.

In 1897, a large bronze bust of Kaiser Wilhelm I, made by Reinhold Begas and shipped from Germany, was installed at Victoria Park, Kitchener to honour the region&#x27;s prominent German-Canadian population. It was removed and thrown into the lake by vandals in August 1914 at the beginning of the First World War. The bust was recovered from the lake and moved to the nearby Concordia club, but it was stolen again February 15, 1916, marched through the streets by a mob, made up largely of soldiers from the 118th Battalion, and has never been seen again. The 118th Battalion is rumoured to have melted down the bust to make napkin rings given to its members. A monument with a plaque outlining the story of the original bust was erected in 1996 in the location of the original bust and its stand.

As the incidents with the bust suggest, there was certainly some anti-German sentiment in Canada. Some immigrants from Germany who considered themselves Canadians but were not yet citizens, were detained in internment camps. There were some cultural sanctions on German communities in Canada, and that included Berlin. However, by 1919 most of the population of what would become Kitchener, Waterloo and Elmira were &quot;Canadian&quot;; over 95 percent had been born in Ontario. Those of the Mennonite religion were pacifists so they could not enlist, and the few who had immigrated from Germany (not born in Canada) could not morally fight against a country that was a significant part of their heritage. The anti-German sentiment was the primary reason for the Berlin to Kitchener name change in 1916. News reports indicate that &quot;A Lutheran minister was pulled out of his house ... he was dragged through the streets. German clubs were ransacked through the course of the war. It was just a really nasty time period.&quot; Someone stole the bust of Kaiser Wilhelm from Victoria Park; soldiers vandalized German stores and ransacked Berlin&#x27;s ethnic clubs. History professor Mark Humphries summarized the situation:

A document in the Archives of Canada makes the following comment: &quot;Although ludicrous to modern eyes, the whole issue of a name for Berlin highlights the effects that fear, hatred and nationalism can have upon a society in the face of war.&quot;

The Waterloo Pioneer Memorial Tower built in 1926 commemorates the settlement by the Pennsylvania &#x27;Dutch&#x27; (actually Pennsilfaanisch &quot;Deitsch&quot;, or German) of the Grand River area of Waterloo County.
The Kitchener–Waterloo Oktoberfest is a remembrance of the region&#x27;s German heritage. The event includes beer halls and German entertainment. The second largest Oktoberfest in the world, the event is based on the original German Oktoberfest and is billed as &quot;Canada&#x27;s Greatest Bavarian Festival&quot;. It attracts an average of 700,000 people to the county. During the 2016 Oktoberfest parade, an estimated 150,000 people lined the streets along the route. Granted, some do not consider Oktoberfest to be indicative of German culture in general. &quot;The fact is, Oktoberfest in Germany is a very localized festival. It really is a Munich festival. ... [Oktoberfest in Kitchener] celebrates only a &#x27;tiny aspect&#x27; of German culture [Bavarian]&quot;, according to German studies professor James Skidmore of the University of Waterloo.

===Suburban development (20th century)===

The interwar and postwar periods saw a wave of suburban development around the city. One prominent example of this was the Westmount neighbourhood. Modelled after the affluent Montreal suburb of the same name, it was developed on the forested hills to the north of the Schneider farmstead on lands that were subdivided from it. Kitchener&#x27;s Westmount took a number of its street names from the model subdivision in Montreal, such as Belmont Avenue. It was the brainchild of a local rubber magnate, Talmon Henry Rieder, who was heavily connected to Montreal business interests and who oversaw the 1912 construction of the Dominion Tire Plant on nearby Strange Street. Rieder was inspired by the turn-of-the-century City Beautiful movement, which was focused in large part on construction of monumental civic architecture and urban beautification; it is often associated with Beaux-Arts architecture in North America.

Rieder&#x27;s own interpretation of the movement&#x27;s philosophy followed a variation of the influential landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted&#x27;s &quot;Suburb Beautiful&quot;, with Rieder proclaiming Westmount the &quot;Development Beautiful&quot;. It reflected an alienation from industrial cities and dense urban centres, driven by a variety of factors. These included concerns around the health impact of air pollution and desire for &quot;country air&quot;; the ability for people to commute longer distances being enabled by motor vehicles; the availability of large, cheap plots of development land; an increasing emphasis on the &quot;restricted residential subdivision&quot; and restrictive covenants barring industrial and commercial development in exclusive residential neighbourhoods (an antecedent to modern zoning); and a desire by Berlin-turned-Kitchener&#x27;s ethnically German business class, in the wake of the city&#x27;s turmoil over its German identity during the First World War, to distance themselves from its 19th century past and the downtown area associated with it in favour of a built environment similar to wealthy Anglo-Canadians in other Canadian cities, such as Montreal and Winnipeg. The fortunes of Rieder and other rubber industrialists were linked to the rise of the automobile industry in Canada, and indirectly to the growth of automobile-linked suburbs. Lands formerly in the rural Waterloo Township were annexed to the city, ensuring suburban access to municipal services. Westmount&#x27;s planners distinguished the suburb from Kitchener&#x27;s urban core in fundamental ways, such as the adoption of wandering, curvilinear roads combined with a more traditionally urban grid pattern. Many streets were originally intended to be wide boulevards, with some, such as Union Boulevard, planned to be as wide as . Winding streets and picturesque vistas were a significant part of advertising for the subdivision.

==Economy==

Kitchener&#x27;s economic heritage is rooted in manufacturing. Industrial artifacts are in public places throughout the city as a celebration of its manufacturing history. While the local economy&#x27;s reliance on manufacturing has decreased, in 2012, 20.36% of the labour force was employed in the manufacturing sector.

The city is home to four municipal business parks: the Bridgeport Business Park, Grand River West Business Park, Huron Business Park and Lancaster Corporate Centre. The largest, the Huron Business Park, is home to a number of industries, from seat manufacturers to furniture components. Some of the notable companies headquartered in Kitchener include: Waterloo Brewing Company, D2L, Vidyard, and ApplyBoard.

Kitchener&#x27;s economy has diversified to include new high-value economic clusters. In addition to Kitchener&#x27;s internationally recognized finance and insurance and manufacturing clusters, digital media and health science clusters are emerging within the city.

Beginning in 2004, the City of Kitchener launched several initiatives to re-energize the downtown core. These initiatives included heavy investment, on behalf of the city and its partners, and the creation of a Downtown Kitchener Action Plan.

The modern incarnation of its historic farmers’ market, opened in 2004. The Kitchener Market is one of the oldest consistently operating markets in Canada. The Kitchener Market features local producers, international cuisine, artisans, and craftspeople.

In 2009, the City of Kitchener began a project to reconstruct and revitalize the main street in Kitchener&#x27;s downtown core, King Street. In the reconstruction of King Street, several features were added to make the street more friendly to pedestrians. New lighting was added to the street, sidewalks were widened, and curbs were lowered. Movable bollards were installed to add flexibility to the streetscape, accommodating main street events and festivals. In 2010, the redesigned King Street was awarded the International Community Places Award for its flexible design intended to draw people into the downtown core. In 2009, Tree Canada recognized King Street as a &quot;green street&quot;. The redesigned King Street features several environmentally sustainable elements such as new street trees, bike racks, planter beds that collect and filter storm water, street furnishing made primarily from recycled materials, and an improved waste management system. The street was reconstructed using recycled roadway and paving stones. In September 2012, the City of Toronto government used Kitchener&#x27;s King Street as a model for Celebrate Yonge – a month-long event which reduced Yonge Street to two lanes, widening sidewalks to improve the commercial street for businesses and pedestrians.

The groundbreaking ceremony for the University of Waterloo School of Pharmacy and downtown health sciences campus took place on 15 March 2006, and the facility opened in spring 2009. The building is on King Street near Victoria Street, on the site of the old Epton plant, across the street from the Kaufman Lofts (formerly the Kaufman shoe factory). McMaster University later opened a satellite campus for its Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine next to the University of Waterloo&#x27;s School of Pharmacy. The Health Sciences Campus has been central to the emergence of Kitchener&#x27;s health science cluster.

In 2007, Cadan Inc., a Toronto-based real estate development company, bought what had been the Lang Tannery for $10 million. Supported by the local government, Cadan repurposed the building for use by commercial firms. Since its refurbishment, the Tannery has become a hub for digital media companies, both large and small. Desire2Learn, an e-learning company, in the Tannery as the company expanded. In 2011, Communitech moved into the Tannery. Home to over 800 companies, Communitech is a hub for innovative high-tech companies in the fields of information technology, digital media, biomedical, aerospace, environmental technology and advanced manufacturing. Also in 2011, high-tech giant Google Inc. became a tenant of the Tannery, furthering its reputation as a home for leading high-tech companies. The Kitchener office is a large hub for the development for Google&#x27;s Gmail application. In 2016, the University of Waterloo-sponsored startup hub Velocity Garage relocated to the building, bringing over 100 additional startup companies into the Tannery.

The Province of Ontario built a new provincial courthouse in downtown Kitchener, on the block bordered by Frederick, Duke, Scott and Weber streets. The new courthouse was expected to create new jobs, mainly for the courthouse, but also for other businesses, especially law offices. The new courthouse construction began in 2010.

In the downtown area, several factories have been transformed into upscale lofts and residences. In September 2010, construction began on the ‘City Centre’ redevelopment project in downtown Kitchener. This redevelopment project will include condominium units, new retail spaces, private and public parking, a gallery, and a boutique hotel. The former Arrow shirt factory has been converted into a luxury, high-rise apartment building, featuring loft condominiums.

In 2012, Desire2Learn, in downtown Kitchener, received $80 million in venture capitalist funding from OMERS Ventures and New Enterprise Associates.

The downtown area was in a boom phase by late 2017, with $1.2 billion in building permits for 20 new developments expected by the end of February 2019. That would add 1,000 apartments and 1,800 condominium units. The City indicated that the development would be a &quot;mixture of high-density residential buildings with ground-floor retail, and office buildings with ground-floor retail&quot;. Since the Ion rapid transit (light rail) system, operated by Grand River Transit, was approved in 2009, &quot;the region has issued $2.4 billion in building permits within the LRT corridor&quot;.

==Demographics==

In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Kitchener had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

At the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Kitchener - Cambridge - Waterloo CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

=== Ethnicity ===
According to the 2021 Census, Kitchener is approximately 66.4% White, 31.7% visible minorities, and 1.9% Aboriginal. Visible minorities include: 9.9% South Asian, 6.9% Black, 3.1% Latin American, 3.7% Southeast Asian, 1.8% Chinese, 2.4% Arab, 1.3% West Asian, and 1.1% Filipino.

The most common ethnicities in Kitchener as per the 2021 census are German (17.7%), English (15.9%), Irish (13.7%), Scottish (13%), Canadian (11.5%), French (6.1%), East Indian (5.6%), Polish (4.5%), Dutch (3.7%), British (3.5%), Italian (3%), Portuguese (2.4%), Chinese (2.2%), and Ukrainian (2.2%).

=== Religion ===
According to the 2021 census, religious groups in Kitchener included:

According to the 2021 census, 51.7% of the population identify as Christian, with the largest denomination of Christianity being Catholics (22.3%), followed by Orthodox (4.3%), Lutherans (3%), Anglican (2.4%), United Church (2.3%), Pentecostal (1.6%), Presbyterian (1.4%), Baptist (1.4%), and other denominations. Others identify as Muslim (7.5%), Hindu (3.8%), Sikh (2.6%), Buddhist (1.2%), Judaism (0.2%), Indigenous Spirituality (&lt;0.1%), other religious affiliation (0.9%), and 32.1% of the population reported being Irreligious.

==Government==

Kitchener is governed by a council of ten councillors, representing wards (or
districts), and a mayor. Council is responsible for policy and decision making, monitoring the operation and performance of the city, analyzing and approving budgets and determining spending priorities. The residents of each ward vote for one person to be their city councillor; their voice and representative on city council. Municipal elections are held every four years in late October.

Kitchener was part of Waterloo County until 1973 when amalgamation created the Regional Municipality of Waterloo. The region handles many services, including fire, police, waste management, community health, transit, recreation, planning, roads and social services.

Kitchener residents elect four councillors at large to sit with the mayor on the Regional council.

The mayor of Kitchener is Berry Vrbanovic, who was elected to his first term in October 2014. See Kitchener City Council for a complete list of councillors.

In 1976, residents of Kitchener voted almost 2:1 in favour of a ward system. The first municipal election held under the ward system occurred in 1978. In 2010, the city underwent a ward boundary review. A consultant proposed boundaries for a 10-ward system for the 2010 municipal election, adding 4 additional councillors and wards to replace the previous 6-ward system.

The Member of Provincial Parliament (MPP) for Kitchener Centre is Aislinn Clancy. Other MPPs include Mike Harris Jr. (Kitchener-Conestoga) and Catherine Fife (Kitchener–Waterloo) who both represent small portions of the city in addition to adjacent areas. The federal Members of Parliament (MPs) are as follows: Mike Morrice (Kitchener Centre), Tim Louis (Kitchener-Conestoga), Valerie Bradford (Kitchener South—Hespeler) and The Hon. Bardish Chagger (Waterloo).

==Geography and climate==

===Geography===
Kitchener is located in Southwestern Ontario, in the Saint Lawrence Lowlands. This geological and climatic region has wet-climate soils and deciduous forests. Situated in the Grand River Valley, the area is generally above in elevation.

Kitchener is the largest city in the Grand River watershed and the Haldimand Tract. Just to the west of the city is Baden Hill, in Wilmot Township. This glacial kame remnant formation is the highest elevation for many miles. The other dominant glacial feature is the Waterloo Moraine, which snakes its way through the region, and holds a significant quantity of artesian wells, from which the city derives most of its drinking water. The settlement&#x27;s first name, Sandhills, is an accurate description of the higher points of the moraine.

===Climate===
Kitchener has a humid continental climate of the warm summer subtype (&quot;Dfb&quot; under the Köppen climate classification); large seasonal differences are seen, usually warm and humid summers and cold to occasionally very cold winters. Winter-like conditions generally last from mid-December until mid-March, while summer temperatures generally occur from mid-May to close to the end of September.

March 2012 went down in the history books for Kitchener – between 16 and 22 March, temperatures ranged from to —7 record highs in a row. 19 March high of is one of the highest winter temperatures ever recorded, while 22 March high of is the highest for March in this area.

Temperatures during the year can exceed in the summer and drop below in the winter several times a year, but prolonged periods of extreme temperatures are rare. The frost-free period for Kitchener averages about 147 frost-free days a year, a much lower number than cities on the Great Lakes due its inland location and higher elevation. Snowfall averages per year.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Kitchener was on August 6 and 7, 1918, and again on July 27, 1941. The coldest temperature ever recorded was on February 16, 2015.

==Education==
Kitchener has several public high schools, with Kitchener–Waterloo Collegiate and Vocational School, founded in 1855, being the oldest. It is located on King Street in the northern area of the city, not far from the boundary of Waterloo. In the 1950s and 1960s several new high schools were constructed, including Eastwood Collegiate Institute in 1956 in what was then southeastern Kitchener, Forest Heights C.I. in 1964 in the western Forest Heights neighbourhood, Grand River C.I. in 1967 in the northeastern Heritage Park/Grand River Village area, and Cameron Heights C.I. in 1967 in the southern Downtown core. In 2006, Huron Heights Secondary School opened in southwestern Kitchener. It opened with a limited enrollment of only 9th and 10th grade students, and has since expanded to full capacity in the 2008–2009 school year.

The oldest Catholic high school in the city is St. Mary&#x27;s High School, which opened in 1907 as a girls-only Catholic school. It was transformed into a co-ed institution in 1990 after the closure of the neighbouring St. Jerome&#x27;s High School, which had been a boys-only Catholic school. The same year, a second Catholic high school, Resurrection Catholic Secondary School, opened in the west of the city, replacing St. Jerome&#x27;s, which had operated from 1864 to 1990. In 2002, St. Mary&#x27;s moved from its downtown location to a new one in the city&#x27;s southwest. The former St. Jerome&#x27;s building now houses the Lyle S. Hallman Faculty of Social Work at Wilfrid Laurier University. It opened at this location in 2006, bringing 300 faculty, staff, and students to downtown Kitchener. The former St. Mary&#x27;s High School building, meanwhile, has been transformed into both the head office of the Waterloo Catholic District School Board and the Kitchener Downtown Community Centre.

The Doon neighbourhood, once a separate village, is now part of Kitchener. It is home to the primary campus of Conestoga College, one of the foremost non-university educational institutions in the province. For nine consecutive years, Conestoga has earned top overall ranking among Ontario colleges on the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) surveys, which measure graduate employment rates and satisfaction levels, and employer and student satisfaction. It is one of only seven polytechnical institutes in Canada.

The University of Waterloo opened a School of Pharmacy in the downtown area. The City of Kitchener has contributed $30 million from its $110 million Economic Development Investment Fund, established in 2004, to the establishment of the UW Downtown Kitchener School of Pharmacy. Construction began in 2006, and the pharmacy program was launched in January 2008 with 92 students.

The school is expected to graduate about 120 pharmacists annually and will become the home of the Centre for Family Medicine, where new family physicians will be trained, as well as an optometry clinic and the International Pharmacy Graduate Program. Construction on the $147 million facility was largely finished in spring 2009.

The University of Waterloo&#x27;s (UW) Downtown Kitchener Health Sciences Campus is also the site of a satellite campus for McMaster University&#x27;s School of Medicine. The Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine admits 28 students per year to the MD program at the Waterloo Regional Campus. Students complete their clinical placements at hospitals and medical centres in the Waterloo-Wellington Region. McMaster&#x27;s satellite campus also features the Centre for Family Medicine, a family health team, and the University of Waterloo&#x27;s School of Optometry clinic.

Emmanuel Bible College is also in Kitchener, at 100 Fergus Avenue.

==Health care==
Hospital services are provided by Grand River Hospital which includes a Freeport Campus and St. Mary&#x27;s General Hospital, both located in Kitchener, as well as Cambridge Memorial Hospital. All three were highly ranked for safety in a national comparison study in 2017–2018, particularly the two located in Kitchener, but all would benefit from reduced wait times. Long-term care beds are provided at numerous facilities.

Grand River Hospital has a capacity of 574-beds; Freeport Health Centre was merged into GRH in April 1995. That secondary campus provides complex continuing care, rehabilitation, longer-term specialized mental health and other services. Built originally as a tuberculosis sanatorium and home for the terminally ill, Freeport also housesthe palliative care unit. The King St. location is also the home of the Grand River Regional Cancer Centre which opened in 2003. St. Mary&#x27;s General Hospital is a 150-bed adult acute-care facility and includes the Regional Cardiac Care Centre with two cardiovascular operating rooms, an eight-bed cardiovascular intensive care unit and 45 inpatient beds.
 As of late 2018, Cambridge Memorial had 143 beds but was in the midst of a major expansion expected to be completed in 2021; that will add 54 new beds and double the size of the Emergency department.

Family doctors are often in short supply in K-W, and a source of great concern among residents. Recruiting efforts over the previous 15 years certainly achieved some success as of September 2018, but needed to be continued.

Announced January 2006, as a new School of Medicine, the Waterloo Regional Campus of McMaster University was completed in 2009. In 2018, the campus included &quot;a complete on-site clinical skills laboratory with 4 skills rooms and 2 observation rooms, classrooms with video-conferencing capabilities and a state-of-the-art anatomy lab that was built in 2013 with a high definition video system&quot;, according to the university. Its Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine building includes the Centre for Family Medicine and the University of Waterloo School of Optometry and Vision Science.

==Culture==

Kitchener&#x27;s cultural highlights include CAFKA, The Open Ears Festival, IMPACT theatre festival, the Multicultural Festival, the Kitchener Blues Festival and KidsPark, many of which are free to the public. Kitchener is also home to venues such as Homer Watson House &amp; Gallery, Kitchener–Waterloo Art Gallery, THEMUSEUM, JM Drama Alumni and Centre In The Square. Also, the cities recently had two local and regional museums built in the region, one being the Waterloo Region Children Museum and the Doon Heritage Village.

Live music by popular artists can be heard at venues such as Centre In The Square and The Aud. The Kitchener Public Library is another community stalwart. Kitchener is also home to independent music label, Busted Flat Records which features the music of many Kitchener–Waterloo based musicians.

===Kitchener–Waterloo Oktoberfest===

Kitchener–Waterloo&#x27;s Oktoberfest celebration is an annual nine-day event that started in 1969. Based on the original German Oktoberfest, it is billed as &quot;Canada&#x27;s Greatest Bavarian Festival&quot;. It is held every October, starting on the Friday before Canadian Thanksgiving and running until the Saturday after. It is the largest Bavarian festival outside of Germany.

While its best-known draws are the beer-based celebrations, other family and cultural events also fill the week. The best-known is the Oktoberfest Thanksgiving Day Parade held on Thanksgiving Day; as it is the only major parade on Canadian Thanksgiving, it is televised nationally. Another icon of the festival is Miss Oktoberfest. This festival ambassador position is selected by a closed committee of judges from a panel of local applicants; community involvement and personal character are the main selection criteria.

The festival attracts an average of 700,000 people. During the 2016 Oktoberfest parade, an estimated 150,000 lined the streets along the route.

===Kitchener–Waterloo in film and music===
Various locations in Kitchener and Waterloo were used to portray the fictional Ontario town of Wessex in the filming of Canadian television sitcom &quot;Dan for Mayor&quot;, starring &quot;Corner Gas&quot; star Fred Ewanuick.

A local folk group, Destroy All Robots, wrote a tongue-in-cheek song jibing the city of Kitchener, &quot;Battle Hymn of the City of Kitchener, Ontario&quot;.

===Kitchener Blues Festival===

The Kitchener Blues Festival is a four-day festival in downtown Kitchener dedicated to blues music, always held in August on the weekend following the civic holiday. The festival has expanded to four stages and two workshop stages throughout the downtown area, with over 90 performances. It has grown from a one-day event with an attendance of 3,000 to a four-day event with over 150,000 attending. In 2014 the Kitchener Blues Festival celebrated its 14th year.

===Kitchener–Waterloo Multicultural Festival===

This is a two-day event in Victoria Park commencing usually on the first weekend of the summer. Run by the Kitchener-Waterloo Multicultural Centre, the festival features foods, dance and music from around the world. The festival also showcases several vendors that sell artifacts and crafts from around the world. This festival has been ongoing for well over 40 years. Well over 50,000 attend every year.

===KOI Music Festival===

KOI Music Festival is a three-day festival held annually in downtown Kitchener each September. The festival was started in 2010 and has since expanded to include a free concert on Friday and a full day of performance Saturday and Sunday. KOI features more than 100 rock bands every year, with a large focus on local, independent musicians. Notable past performers include Every Time I Die, Ubiquitous Synergy Seeker, Chiodos, Walk Off The Earth, Four Year Strong, Protest the Hero, Mad Caddies, Monster Truck, Gob, Treble Charger, Cute Is What We Aim For, The Planet Smashers, Bayside, and several hundred more.

===Kultrun World Music Festival===
Kultrún is an annual festival of world music, food, culture, and art that takes place in Victoria Park each July. Music from various cultures is performed on two stages, and the rest of the park is covered with vendors selling their goods. A key part of the festival is the large number of food stands selling foods from all different ethnic backgrounds.

===LGBT culture===
The Kitchener-Waterloo region is home to tri-Pride and the Rainbow Reels Queer and Trans Film Festival. Unlike most LGBT pride events, tri-Pride does not currently organize a parade, but instead is centred on an afternoon music festival on the final weekend.

==Recreation==
The Kitchener–Waterloo Symphony was located in Kitchener, which performed over 222 concerts annually to an audience of over 90,000, both in the concert hall and across Waterloo Region. The KWS was the largest employer of artists and cultural workers and the most significant cultural asset for Waterloo Region.

Kitchener&#x27;s oldest outdoor park is Victoria Park, in the heart of downtown Kitchener. Numerous events and festivities are held in this park.

A cast-bronze statue of Queen Victoria is in Victoria Park, along with a cannon. The statue was unveiled in May 1911, on Victoria Day (the Queen&#x27;s birthday) in the tenth year after her death. The Princess of Wales Chapter of the Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire raised the $6,000 needed for the monument.
Rockway Gardens are adjacent to the Rockway golf course and occupy a long narrow strip of land alongside King Street as it rushes down to meet the Conestoga Parkway and become Highway 8. It is a popular site for wedding photos in the summer.

Kitchener has an extensive community trail system. The trails, which are controlled and run by the city, are hundreds of kilometres in length. Due to Kitchener&#x27;s close proximity to the Grand River, several community trails and paths border the river&#x27;s shores. This convenient access to the Grand River has drawn tourists to the city. However, Kitchener&#x27;s trails and especially natural areas remain underfunded by city council and as a result, many are not adequately maintained.

In 2011, a bike park at the newly constructed McLennan Park, in the city&#x27;s south end, was hailed as one of the best city-run bike parks in Southern Ontario by BMX and mountain biking enthusiasts. The bike park offers a four-cross (4X) section, a pump track section, a jump park, and a free-ride course. McLennan Park also features an accessible play area, a splash pad, basketball courts, beach volleyball courts, a leash-free dog area, and a toboggan hill.

Chicopee Ski Club is also within the city limits.

==Transport==

===Highways and expressways===
Kitchener was very proactive and visionary about its transportation network in the 1960s, with the province undertaking at that time construction of the Conestoga Parkway from the western boundary (just past Homer Watson Boulevard) across the south side of the city and looping north along the Grand River to Northfield Drive in Waterloo.
Subsequent upgrades took the Conestoga west beyond Trussler Road and north towards St Jacobs, with eight lanes through its middle stretch.

The Conestoga Parkway bears the provincial highway designations of Highways 7, 8 and 85. King Street becomes Hwy 8 where it meets the Parkway in the south and leads down to the 401, but Old King Street survives as the street-route through Freeport to the Preston area of Cambridge. Up until construction of the Conestoga, Highland Road through Baden had been the primary highway to Stratford. Victoria Street was then and remains the primary highway to Guelph but this is slated to be bypassed with an entirely new highway beginning at the Wellington Street exit and running roughly north of and parallel to the old route.

There are two interchanges with Highway 401 on Kitchener&#x27;s southern border. In addition to the primary link where Hwy 8 merges into the Hwy 401, there is another interchange on the west side with Homer Watson Boulevard.

In order to reduce the congestion on Highway 8, a new interchange has been proposed on Highway 401 at Trussler Road, which would serve the rapidly growing west side of Kitchener. Although this proposal is supported by the Region of Waterloo, the Ontario Ministry of Transportation has no plans to proceed with an interchange at Trussler Road.

===City streets===
Unlike most southern Ontario cities whose streets follow a strict British grid survey pattern, Kitchener&#x27;s streets are laid out in a complex radial pattern on the Continental models most familiar to the German settlers.

There is good historical reason for this. Kitchener was one of the few places in Ontario where the settlers arrived in advance of government surveyors. The Mennonites who had banded together as the German Company to purchase the township from Richard Beasley simply divided their vast parcel of land by the number of shareholder households and then drew random lots to confer title on individual farms. There was no grid survey done—no lines, no concessions, no right-of-way corridors for roads. When it came time to punch roads through the wilderness, the farmers modelled the road network on what was familiar to them, which was the pattern of villages in Switzerland and southern Germany.

This is a Continental Radial pattern and the result was major streets extended through diagonals cutting across the grid of smaller streets and converging at multiple-point intersections which, as the communities became more prosperous and if the automobile had not displaced the horse, might someday have become roundabouts decorated with circular gardens, fountains or statuary in the style of European cities. Five-point intersections created by converging diagonals are legion in the older areas.

In 2004, roundabouts were introduced to the Region of Waterloo. Besides improving traffic flow, they will help the region lower pollution from emissions created by idling vehicles. In 2006, the first two were installed along Ira Needles Boulevard in Kitchener. Some people argue roundabouts are ideal for intersections in this region because of the aforementioned historical growth along Continental radial patterns versus the British grid systems, but all installs have been at T and cross intersections making the point irrelevant.

A controversial plan would extend River Road through an area known as Hidden Valley, but the pressure of traffic and the absence of any other full east–west arterials between Fairway Road and the Highway 401 is forcing this development ahead.

===Public transport===

====Early history====


The earliest recorded urban public transport in Kitchener was a horse-drawn streetcar service along King Street, the Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway, which began operating in 1888. The system was electrified in 1895. The Preston and Berlin Street Railway, an interurban service connecting Kitchener to Preston (now a part of Cambridge), began operation in 1904. It used a stretch of Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway tracks to access downtown Kitchener. In 1906, the Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway was municipalized and came under the management of the Berlin Light and Power Commission, which was renamed the Berlin Public Utilities Commission. It was later renamed the Kitchener and Waterloo Street Railway following the city&#x27;s official name change, with the commission also being renamed to the Kitchener Public Utilities Commission (PUC).

In 1923, the successor of the Preston and Berlin Street Railway, the Grand River Railway, built a new mainline which bypassed downtown Kitchener. Its new transfer point to the municipal streetcar system was Kitchener Junction station at what was then the south end of the city, which was also the site of the PUC&#x27;s streetcar depot. Starting in 1939, buses began being used for crosstown bus services which intersected with the streetcar line. In 1947, the PUC replaced the street railway system with a trolleybus system. The streetcar rails were removed from King Street in the 1950s. In 1973, local bus services were transferred from the PUC to a newly created entity, Kitchener Transit. Shortly after this, trolleybus service was discontinued and the system was switched entirely to diesel buses. A new bus garage, located in the area of the former village of Strasburg, was opened in the mid-1970s. The new bus system was reorganized around a downtown bus terminal which was located on Duke Street. This was later replaced in 1988 by the Charles Street Terminal, which itself was closed in 2019 following the launch of Ion light rail service.

====Grand River Transit====


In 2000, Kitchener Transit was merged with Cambridge Transit and put under the management of the Region of Waterloo, becoming known as Grand River Transit (GRT). GRT began reorganizing its expanded network, which now serves the three cities of Kitchener, Waterloo, and Cambridge as a unified regional transit system. In 2003, the Region of Waterloo received a federal grant to fund its Central Transit Corridor Express plan, which built on earlier proposals dating as far back as the 1970s for a regional express transit corridor connecting Kitchener, Waterloo, and Cambridge. Its initial implementation, in 2005, was a single-route, limited-stop express bus service branded as &quot;iXpress&quot;, along with the implementation of technologies like transit signal priority (TSP) which were new to the region at the time. Major iXpress stations in Kitchener were , Fairview (now Fairway station), and the Charles Street Terminal. New iXpress routes were added in the years that followed, with the original route being rebranded as the 200 iXpress. After the launch of Ion light rail service in 2019, GRT bus routes were reorganized to connect with it, using the light rail system as a &quot;spine&quot; much like the earlier streetcar and trolleybus systems of the 20th century.

, there are a total of 54 GRT bus routes throughout the Region of Waterloo; 48 are local and 6 are part of the iXpress system. A number of GRT routes connect Kitchener to the neighbouring cities of Waterloo and Cambridge. Travel on GRT to the township of Woolwich requires a transfer at Conestoga station in Waterloo, and travel to the township of Wilmot requires a transfer at the Boardwalk mall, which straddles the municipal border between Kitchener and Waterloo. GRT, in partnership with Metrolinx, is working on a microtransit pilot project that would connect Kitchener with the community of Breslau, which is across the Grand River in eastern Woolwich township; the project&#x27;s planned launch date is in 2021.

====Light rail====


Long-term planning around the Central Transit Corridor led to many interconnected initiatives being bundled into a staged rapid transit plan. In June 2011, the Waterloo Region council approved the Stage 1 plan for a single-line light rail transit (LRT) system between the existing bus terminals at Conestoga Mall in north Waterloo and Fairview Park Mall in south Kitchener, with adapted bus rapid transit (aBRT) connecting through to downtown Galt in Cambridge. Stage 2, which is still in planning, would replace the aBRT route with an extension of the light rail line.

Construction of the light rail system began in August 2014 and Stage 1 service was expected to begin in 2017. Most of the rails had been installed by the end of 2016, and the
maintenance facility and all underground utility work had been completed. The start date of service was postponed to early 2018, however, because of delays in the manufacture and delivery of the vehicles by Bombardier Transportation; by 24 February 2017, only a single light rail vehicle had arrived for testing. The start of service was then further delayed to December 2018. After an accelerated testing schedule, the service opened to the public on 21 June 2019.

, Ion light rail serves Kitchener and Waterloo exclusively, while the Ion Bus service connects Kitchener to Cambridge. From downtown Kitchener, a single-seat Ion train ride is available as far north as Conestoga station in north Waterloo, and as far south as Fairway station in south Kitchener; from the latter, a transfer is necessary to reach Cambridge using the Ion Bus, 206 Coronation iXpress, or local bus routes.

====Intercity transit====
Via Rail intercity passenger rail service is available at Kitchener station. Via Rail trains pass through Kitchener eastbound on their way to Toronto&#x27;s Union Station and westbound on their way to London and .

Kitchener is also served by GO Transit buses and trains, the latter operating as the GO Kitchener line. GO Transit bus service to Kitchener began on 31 October 2009, with a route stopping at Kitchener&#x27;s Charles Street Terminal on the way from Waterloo to Mississauga. This was followed on 19 December 2011 by the extension of GO train service to Kitchener from its previous terminus at . GO bus service consists of the 25 Waterloo–Mississauga and 30 Kitchener routes. Both routes connect Kitchener with points east; the former to Mississauga&#x27;s Square One Bus Terminal via Sportsworld (in southeast Kitchener), Cambridge, Aberfoyle, and Milton, and the latter as a limited-stop express to with some stops in northern Mississauga. GO train service also travels east, terminating at Toronto&#x27;s Union Station.
A new bus service was launched on April 9, 2022, by FlixBus to link Kitchener and Toronto via a more direct route.

===Railways===

Kitchener&#x27;s primary railway corridor is the CN/GO Guelph Subdivision. It runs approximately east–west through the northern section of downtown Kitchener. It was originally laid out and constructed in 1856 by the Grand Trunk Railway (GTR), and after the GTR&#x27;s acquisition of the Great Western Railway, the mainline through Kitchener became known informally as the &quot;North Main Line&quot; in contrast with the &quot;South Main Line&quot; through Brantford, both connecting London and Toronto. Coming from the east, the Waterloo Spur diverges from the mainline and heads north through Waterloo and ultimately to Elmira. The spur was formerly owned by CN, but is now owned by the Region of Waterloo.

Kitchener station lies a short distance west along the track from the junction with the Waterloo Spur. The current station building dates from 1897 and is a heritage structure which is owned by Via Rail, Canada&#x27;s national passenger railway. Both Via Rail &quot;Corridor&quot; service and GO Transit Kitchener line service are available at the station, the latter of which has its western terminus at the station. Via Rail service consists of two trains per day in each direction along the Toronto–London–Sarnia route; one westbound train terminates at Sarnia while another terminates at London, while both eastbound trains terminate at Toronto Union Station. GO train service was originally extended to Kitchener in 2011 from its previous western terminus at Georgetown. GO service began with two trains per direction per weekday, but since its inception train frequency has gradually increased and as of early 2020 it stands at 8 eastbound and 7 westbound trains per weekday, with no weekend service. In 2017, Metrolinx (the parent agency of GO Transit) constructed a purpose-built train layover facility on Shirley Avenue to supplement its existing adapted layover facility, which was at capacity.

While Kitchener benefits from increasingly frequent commuter-oriented GO service east to Toronto, intercity Via Rail service to the city has been largely unchanged for years, limiting its connectivity to Southwestern Ontario to the west. In contrast, the South Main Line through Brantford (which is still owned by CN) has faster and more frequent service between Toronto and London than the North Main Line does, along with larger double-tracked sections. In 2017, the Ontario Liberal government proposed a Windsor–Toronto high-speed rail line through Kitchener, which would improve travel times to nearby major cities as well as to the Toronto Pearson International Airport. The proposal, if approved, would provide a 48-minute trip from Kitchener to downtown Toronto. With the election of a new Conservative government, funding for the project was indefinitely paused.

Freight trains in Kitchener are operated by the Canadian National Railway and the Canadian Pacific Railway. These railways serve several customers, many of which are in industrial parks in southern Kitchener.

===Air===

The closest airport to Kitchener is the Region of Waterloo International Airport in nearby Breslau, about 12 km by road from downtown Kitchener. While it is a thriving general-aviation field, it is not heavily served by scheduled airlines. WestJet offers year-round service to Calgary and weekly service to Orlando in the winter. Sunwing Airlines offers seasonal service to Cayo Santa Maria. Most air travellers use Toronto&#x27;s Lester B. Pearson International Airport or John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport. There is a helipad in Kitchener near Google&#x27;s Kitchener offices. In June, 2017 the helipad was temporarily closed due to possible interference from a construction crane on the flight path.

==Media==
==Neighbourhoods==
There are 10 wards, and 53 planning communities or neighbourhoods. There are also 29 neighbourhood associations recognized by the city, which in some cases do not correspond to the names and boundaries of planning communities designated by the city. In some cases the neighbourhood associations cover several neighbourhoods and/or planning communities and the name of one neighbourhood is sometimes used to refer to the entire area.

The Stanley Park Neighbourhood Association, for example, covers much of the eastern and southeastern area of the city including the planning communities of Stanley Park, Heritage Park, Idlewood, and Grand River North and South. Further complicating things is that the first area of development named Stanley Park, which is where Stanley Park school is located and where Stanley Park Conservation Area is located, has been included within the city&#x27;s planning district of Heritage Park, leaving only later-developed areas of Stanley Park plus an adjacent residential neighbourhood to the south, originally referred to as Sunnyside, in the Stanley Park planning neighbourhood. The Forest Heights Neighbourhood Association includes the Forest Hills neighbourhood/planning district to the east of Forest Heights proper.

==Sports==

Major sports events held by Kitchener include:
* 1987 World Junior Figure Skating Championships
* 1997 IIHF Women&#x27;s World Championship (Co-host)
* 2005 World Junior Figure Skating Championships

==Other sports teams and leagues==

* K–W Kodiaks Lacrosse of the Major Series Lacrosse who play at the Waterloo Rec Centre.
* Tri-City Roller Derby, members of the international Women&#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association, play competitive roller derby at venues in Waterloo, Kitchener and New Hamburg.
* District 8 Athletic Association, a secondary school sports association servicing the Catholic and Independent high schools of the Kitchener, Waterloo and Cambridge. A member of Central Western Ontario Secondary Schools Association and Ontario Federation of School Athletic Associations.
* Waterloo Region Minor Football Association, formerly the Twin Cities Minor Tackle Football Association. Commonly known as the &quot;Predators&quot; or &quot;Preds&quot; the WRMFA provides an opportunity for athletes under the age of 19 to play football and to compete at the highest level. The Varsity team holds membership in the Ontario Provincial Football league as of 2020, formerly being of the Ontario Football Conference. Players do not come exclusively from the Twin Cities, but from all across the region, including St. Jacobs, Elmira, Wellesley, Baden, Breslau, Palmerston, New Hamburg, Breslau, St. Clements, Drayton and Maryhill.
* FC Berlin, a soccer club competing at the district, regional and provincial level, with an American counterpart that competes in the United Premier Soccer League and the United Women&#x27;s Soccer.

==Notable people==
===Academia===
*Richard Bader, computational chemist
*James G. Mitchell, computer scientist
*Karl Schweizer, historian, author
*Meena Waseem, Pakistani-Canadian and Muslim advocate for accessible education
*Walter Zinn, nuclear physicist

===Athletics and sports===
*Chelsea Aubry, basketball player
*Don Awrey, ice hockey player
*Nathan Bastian, ice hockey player
*Bobby Bauer, ice hockey player
*Don Beaupre, ice hockey player
*Vivian Berkeley, World Champion blind lawn bowler and 1996 Paralympic silver medalist
*Brian Bradley, ice hockey player
*Christopher Chalmers, freestyle swimmer
*Gary Cowan, golfer
*Steve Dietrich, general manager of the Buffalo Bandits lacrosse team
*Gary Dornhoefer, ice hockey player
*Woody Dumart, ice hockey player, Hall of Fame
*David Edgar, soccer player
*Dana Ellis, pole vaulter
*Wayne Erdman, judoka
*John &quot;Jack&quot; Gibson, Hockey Hall of Fame, soccer player
*George Hainsworth, ice hockey player
*Mike Hoffman, ice hockey player
*Chris Johnson, boxer
*Rylee Foster, goalkeeper, Liverpool F.C. Women 2020–2022
*Kevin Klein, ice hockey player
*Bobby Kuntz, football player
*Beau Landry, gridiron football player
*Lennox Lewis, professional boxer, three-time heavyweight champion
*Steven Lorentz, ice hockey player
*Scott Manning, football player and stunt pilot
*Howie Meeker, ice hockey player and &quot;Hockey Night in Canada&quot; broadcaster
*Jamal Murray, basketball player
*Moe Norman, golfer
*Sarah Pavan, beach volleyball player
*Tanner Pearson, ice hockey player
*Ronnie Pfeffer, football player
*Andrew Poje, Olympic ice dancer
*Mike Poulin, professional lacrosse player
*Pan Qingfu, Kung-Fu master
*Paul Reinhart, ice hockey player
*Jason Reso (aka Christian Cage), professional wrestler
*Steven Rice, ice hockey player
*Jim Sandlak, ice hockey player
*Mark Scheifele, ice hockey player, 7th overall pick to the Winnipeg Jets in 2011 NHL draft
*Brad Schlegel, ice hockey player
*Milt Schmidt, ice hockey player, coach, and general manager, Hockey Hall of Fame
*Frank J. Selke, ice hockey general manager, Hockey Hall of Fame
*Steve Seftel, ice hockey player, author
*Logan Stanley, ice hockey player
*Scott Stevens, Hall of Fame ice hockey player
*Kelly Vanderbeek, alpine skier, CBC personality
*Fitz Vanderpool, former World Boxing Council and World Boxing Association champion
*Tyler Varga, former fullback for the Indianapolis Colts
*Mike West, backstroke swimmer
*Dennis Wideman, ice hockey player
*Aaron Wilson, lacrosse player
*Bennett Wolf, ice hockey player

===Business===
*Carl Pollock, industrialist, Electrohome Ltd
*Bramwell Tillsley, former General of The Salvation Army
*Walter P. Zeller, founder of Zellers; born near the city

===Literature===
*John Robert Colombo, writer
*Ross Macdonald, pseudonym of Kenneth Millar
*Margaret Millar, author
*David Morrell, author, creator of the &quot;Rambo&quot; franchise
*Dave Sim, creator of the comic book &quot;Cerebus the Aardvark&quot;
*Edna Staebler, author
*Matthew Tierney (poet)

===Music, entertainment, and the arts===
*Raffi Armenian, conductor
*Kimberly Barber, mezzo-soprano
*Elise Bauman, actress
*Norman Blake, musician, member of Teenage Fanclub
*Kristin Booth, actress
*A. J. Bridel, musical theater actress
*Mel Brown, blues musician
*Alex Bulmer, theatre artist
*Gail Dahms, actress and singer
*Bob Egan, musician, member of Blue Rodeo
*Liza Fromer, co-host of &quot;The Morning Show&quot;, Global Television Network
*Nick Hector, film editor
*Dale Heslip, documentary and music video director
*Derek Hines, jazz vocalist
*James Hobson, engineer and YouTube video creator
*Allen Kaeja, film director and choreographer
*Kathryn Ladano, bass clarinetist and composer
*Lisa LaFlamme, television news anchor, CTV Television Network
*Glenn Lewis, neo soul singer-songwriter
*Paul MacLeod, singer-songwriter
*Master T, television and radio personality, MuchMusic
*Lois Maxwell, actress
*Danny Michel, musician
*Pavan Moondi, film and television director
*Diane Nyland, actress, director, and choreographer
*Jeremy Ratchford, actor
*Steve Strongman, blues guitarist
*Rob Szabo, music producer and performer
*Tasha the Amazon, hip hop musician
*Homer Watson, landscape artist
*Dawud Wharnsby, singer-songwriter, poet, and performer
*JJ Wilde, rock singer
*Chris Williams (director), director and animator

===Politics===
*Louis Orville Breithaupt, 18th Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario (1952–1957)
*David Eby, Premier of British Columbia
*William Lyon Mackenzie King, Canada&#x27;s tenth, and longest-serving, prime minister
*Michael Kraus, minister and entrepreneur
*Judy Wasylycia-Leis, NDP member of the Canadian House of Commons

==See also==

* List of cities in Ontario

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* English, John, and Kenneth McLaughlin. &quot;Kitchener: an illustrated history&quot; (Wilfrid Laurier Univ. Press, 1983).
* Hayes, Geoffrey. “From Berlin to the Trek of the Conestoga: A Revisionist Approach to Waterloo County&#x27;s German Identity.” &quot;Ontario History&quot; 91#2 (Autumn 1999).
* Hayes, Geoffrey. &quot;Waterloo County: An Illustrated History&quot; (Waterloo Historical Society, 1997).
* Lorenzkowski, Barbara. &quot;Sounds of Ethnicity: Listening to German North America, 1850-1914&quot; (Univ. of Manitoba Press, 2010), includes Berlin.
* Lorenzkowski, Barbara. &quot;Languages of Ethnicity: Teaching German in Waterloo County&#x27;s Schools, 1850–1915.&quot; &quot;Histoire sociale/Social history&quot; 41.81 (2008): 1–39. online
* McKegney, Patricia P. &quot;The Kaiser&#x27;s Bust: A study of War-time Propaganda in Berlin, Ontario 1914-1918&quot; (Wellesley: Bamberg Press, 1991).
* Schulze, Mathias, and Lori Heffner. &quot;Speakers of German in Kitchener-Waterloo: Assimilation and Shift.&quot; &quot;Cultural Link: Kanada–Deutschland. Festschrift zum dreißigjährigen Bestehen eines akademischen Austauschs&quot; (2003): 141–158. online
* Tiessen, Paul. &quot;Berlin, Canada. A Self-Portrait of Kitchener, Ontario Before World War One&quot; (St. Jacobs: Sand Hills Books, 1979).
* Rowell, Marg et al. &quot;Welcome to Waterloo. An Illustrated History of Waterloo, Ontario in celebration of its 125th Anniversary 1857-1982&quot; (Waterloo Printing Co. 1982)

==External links==
* 
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="0" end="9" title="Kitchener, Ontario" label="Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="48" end="55" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="71" end="78" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="123" end="156" title="Regional Municipality of Waterloo" label="Regional Municipality of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306755" start="177" end="181" title="Administrative centre" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="206" end="212" title="Kitchener, Ontario" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892500" start="221" end="236" title="Berlin to Kitchener name change" label="1916 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="345" end="365" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053463" start="473" end="497" title="census metropolitan area" label="census metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875787" start="721" end="742" title="Municipal government in Canada" label="municipal governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816665" start="1958" end="1972" title="Neutral people" label="Neutral people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816665" start="2579" end="2593" title="Neutral Nation" label="Neutral Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641286" start="3250" end="3265" title="Haldimand Tract" label="Haldimand Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q950097" start="3341" end="3353" title="Mississaugas" label="Mississaugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="3382" end="3393" title="Iroquois" label="Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3426" end="3445" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="3523" end="3531" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324043" start="3540" end="3555" title="Richard Beasley (politician)" label="Richard Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="3644" end="3653" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="3676" end="3688" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="3951" end="3969" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="4234" end="4264" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17369454" start="4829" end="4833" title="Doon, Ontario" label="Doon"/>
<link wikidata="Q494121" start="4909" end="4938" title="Franklin County, Pennsylvania" label="Franklin County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286891" start="5787" end="5811" title="Schneider Haus" label="whose restored 1816 home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568567" start="5855" end="5877" title="National Historic Sites of Canada" label="National Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="6191" end="6198" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42326" start="6289" end="6301" title="Rock Pigeon" label="Wild pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="6455" end="6464" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="6470" end="6478" title="saw mill" label="sawmills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668846" start="6573" end="6584" title="Abraham Erb" label="Abraham Erb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107858" start="6930" end="6943" title="Huether Hotel" label="Huether Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25703766" start="7154" end="7166" title="Benjamin Eby" label="Benjamin Eby"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="7280" end="7285" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="7286" end="7295" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="7407" end="7418" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="7452" end="7462" title="Anabaptism" label="Anabaptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="7575" end="7581" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="7620" end="7634" title="Palatinate (region)" label="the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="7644" end="7656" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="7670" end="7686" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119481" start="8264" end="8281" title="Jacob Yost Shantz" label="Jacob Yost Shantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q950097" start="8473" end="8485" title="Mississaugas" label="Mississaugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25703766" start="8608" end="8620" title="Benjamin Eby" label="Benjamin Eby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="10546" end="10552" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q106452034" start="10555" end="10571" title="Friedrich Gaukel" label="Friedrich Gaukel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646343" start="10983" end="11009" title="1826–1837 cholera pandemic" label="1826–1837 cholera pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133116" start="11058" end="11066" title="Hamilton, Ontario" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="11301" end="11308" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192888" start="11788" end="11819" title="Der Deutsche Canadier" label="the &amp;quot;German Canadian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="12921" end="12932" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137809" start="13096" end="13106" title="courthouse" label="courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978759" start="13217" end="13229" title="Weber Street" label="Weber Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073415" start="13404" end="13408" title="Waterloo County Gaol" label="gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456275" start="13822" end="13858" title="Canadian Register of Historic Places" label="Canadian Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645718" start="13965" end="13984" title="Grand Trunk Railway" label="Grand Trunk Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542364" start="14297" end="14313" title="Turners" label="Turner societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="14419" end="14433" title="street railway" label="street railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418059" start="14508" end="14542" title="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway" label="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q388201" start="14600" end="14616" title="electric railway" label="electric railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561291" start="14671" end="14702" title="Galt and Preston Street Railway" label="Galt and Preston Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28946849" start="14792" end="14825" title="Preston and Berlin Street Railway" label="Preston and Berlin Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241810" start="14861" end="14868" title="Preston, Ontario" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929784" start="15011" end="15020" title="poorhouse" label="poorhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="15428" end="15440" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119481" start="16774" end="16789" title="Jacob Yost Shantz" label="Jacob Y. Shantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605936" start="17170" end="17197" title="Market Square Shopping Centre (Kitchener)" label="Market Square shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418041" start="17324" end="17343" title="Kitchener City Hall" label="Kitchener City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977810" start="17404" end="17418" title="Bruce Kuwabara" label="Bruce Kuwabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926912" start="18183" end="18196" title="Victoria Park, Kitchener" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18167872" start="18241" end="18258" title="John Richard Eden" label="John Richard Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q473003" start="18630" end="18643" title="municipalization" label="municipalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="18813" end="18822" title="tannery" label="tanneries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418059" start="19102" end="19136" title="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway" label="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418051" start="19431" end="19468" title="Kitchener Public Utilities Commission" label="Kitchener Public Utilities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="19731" end="19749" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="19891" end="19898" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="19903" end="19917" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20040" end="20055" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="20067" end="20081" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="20121" end="20127" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="20129" end="20145" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20151" end="20158" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="20323" end="20333" title="Ukrainian people" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="20344" end="20349" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="20355" end="20365" title="Bulgarian people" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258628" start="20452" end="20468" title="War Measures Act" label="War Measures Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="20585" end="20598" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="20683" end="20704" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="20790" end="20806" title="Kaiser Wilhelm I" label="Kaiser Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547661" start="21012" end="21027" title="118th (North Waterloo) Battalion, CEF" label="118th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915952" start="21035" end="21063" title="Canadian Expeditionary Force" label="Canadian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892500" start="21068" end="21096" title="Berlin to Kitchener name change" label="a set of referendums in 1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q216129" start="21137" end="21174" title="Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener" label="Herbert Kitchener, 1st Earl Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="21186" end="21199" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21337" end="21355" title="Electoral fraud#Intimidation" label="voter intimidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="22741" end="22759" title="Pennsylvania Dutch" label="Pennsylvania Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="22866" end="22881" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="24027" end="24046" title="Franco-Prussian war" label="Franco-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q160558" start="25456" end="25473" title="Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn" label="Duke of Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="25548" end="25577" title="Canadians of German ethnicity" label="Canadians of German ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="26029" end="26045" title="Kaiser Wilhelm I" label="Kaiser Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q603105" start="26055" end="26069" title="Reinhold Begas" label="Reinhold Begas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926912" start="26113" end="26137" title="Victoria Park, Kitchener" label="Victoria Park, Kitchener"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="26176" end="26191" title="Canadians of German ethnicity" label="German-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26294" end="26309" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547661" start="26506" end="26521" title="118th (North Waterloo) Battalion, CEF" label="118th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092833" start="26862" end="26883" title="anti-German sentiment" label="anti-German sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892500" start="27561" end="27592" title="Berlin to Kitchener name change" label="Berlin to Kitchener name change"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093225" start="28281" end="28312" title="Waterloo Pioneer Memorial Tower" label="Waterloo Pioneer Memorial Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542855" start="28458" end="28469" title="Grand River (Ontario)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418034" start="28499" end="28529" title="Kitchener–Waterloo Oktoberfest" label="Kitchener–Waterloo Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="28721" end="28727" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="28728" end="28739" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="28786" end="28793" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="29328" end="29350" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q139497" start="29559" end="29604" title="Westmount, Quebec" label="the affluent Montreal suburb of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875137" start="30021" end="30040" title="Dominion Tire Plant" label="Dominion Tire Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="30114" end="30137" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="30274" end="30297" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="30444" end="30465" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="Frederick Law Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="31014" end="31035" title="restrictive covenants" label="restrictive covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="31147" end="31153" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q54114" start="32103" end="32112" title="boulevard" label="boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965887" start="32967" end="32991" title="Waterloo Brewing Company" label="Waterloo Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264469" start="32993" end="32996" title="D2L" label="D2L"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928214" start="32998" end="33005" title="Vidyard" label="Vidyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q107241954" start="33011" end="33021" title="ApplyBoard" label="ApplyBoard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33503" end="33533" title="Downtown Kitchener Action Plan" label="Downtown Kitchener Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631520" start="33919" end="33930" title="Waterloo Regional Road 15" label="King Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148389" start="34133" end="34149" title="Bollard" label="Movable bollards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936341" start="34850" end="34876" title="City of Toronto government" label="City of Toronto government"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725" start="34977" end="34989" title="Yonge Street" label="Yonge Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896597" start="35125" end="35166" title="University of Waterloo School of Pharmacy" label="University of Waterloo School of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="35439" end="35458" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830454" start="35499" end="35537" title="Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine" label="Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264469" start="36030" end="36042" title="Desire2Learn" label="Desire2Learn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36116" end="36127" title="Communitech" label="Communitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="36398" end="36409" title="Google Inc." label="Google Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="36617" end="36639" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347600" start="37668" end="37682" title="OMERS" label="OMERS Ventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083173" start="37687" end="37712" title="New Enterprise Associates" label="New Enterprise Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387750" start="38120" end="38137" title="Ion rapid transit" label="Ion rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459117" start="38171" end="38190" title="Grand River Transit" label="Grand River Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="38332" end="38357" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="38371" end="38388" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053463" start="38574" end="38598" title="census metropolitan area" label="census metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048112" start="38933" end="38951" title="Visible minority" label="visible minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="38962" end="38972" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566030" start="39007" end="39018" title="South Asian Canadian" label="South Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q365539" start="39025" end="39030" title="Black Canadians" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202245" start="39037" end="39051" title="Latin American Canadian" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q118875906" start="39058" end="39073" title="Southeast Asian Canadians" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207351" start="39080" end="39087" title="Chinese Canadian" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783159" start="39094" end="39098" title="Arab Canadian" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414449" start="39105" end="39115" title="West Asian Canadians" label="West Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448582" start="39126" end="39134" title="Filipino Canadian" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="39473" end="39484" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="39621" end="39649" title="Denominations of Christianity" label="denomination of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205551" start="39656" end="39665" title="Catholic Church in Canada" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004714" start="39687" end="39695" title="Eastern Orthodoxy in North America" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877911" start="39704" end="39713" title="Lutheran Church – Canada" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q540782" start="39720" end="39728" title="Anglican Church of Canada" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q198745" start="39737" end="39750" title="United Church of Canada" label="United Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q524075" start="39759" end="39770" title="Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586082" start="39779" end="39791" title="Presbyterian Church in Canada" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857722" start="39800" end="39807" title="Baptists in Canada" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="40148" end="40153" title="Ward (politics)" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974224" start="40571" end="40586" title="Waterloo County, Ontario" label="Waterloo County"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="40628" end="40661" title="Waterloo Regional Municipality, Ontario" label="Regional Municipality of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378455" start="40942" end="40957" title="Berry Vrbanovic" label="Berry Vrbanovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418040" start="41014" end="41036" title="Kitchener City Council" label="Kitchener City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q123598492" start="41512" end="41526" title="Aislinn Clancy" label="Aislinn Clancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55081087" start="41547" end="41562" title="Mike Harris Jr." label="Mike Harris Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5052672" start="41589" end="41603" title="Catherine Fife" label="Catherine Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q108619065" start="41758" end="41770" title="Mike Morrice" label="Mike Morrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197575" start="41772" end="41788" title="Kitchener Centre (federal electoral district)" label="Kitchener Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q73210893" start="41791" end="41800" title="Tim Louis (Ontario politician)" label="Tim Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197577" start="41802" end="41821" title="Kitchener—Conestoga (federal electoral district)" label="Kitchener-Conestoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q108635673" start="41824" end="41840" title="Valerie Bradford" label="Valerie Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979185" start="41842" end="41866" title="Kitchener South—Hespeler (federal electoral district)" label="Kitchener South—Hespeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21402871" start="41872" end="41896" title="Bardish Chagger" label="The Hon. Bardish Chagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566686" start="41898" end="41906" title="Waterloo (federal electoral district)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="41977" end="41997" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q17137745" start="42006" end="42029" title="Saint Lawrence Lowlands" label="Saint Lawrence Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542855" start="42228" end="42239" title="Grand River (Ontario)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641286" start="42258" end="42273" title="Haldimand Tract" label="Haldimand Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q4840756" start="42307" end="42317" title="Baden Hill" label="Baden Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116651" start="42322" end="42337" title="Wilmot, Ontario" label="Wilmot Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q663753" start="42352" end="42356" title="kame" label="kame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974260" start="42458" end="42474" title="Waterloo Moraine" label="Waterloo Moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="42553" end="42567" title="artesian wells" label="artesian wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="42765" end="42790" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="42845" end="42874" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418027" start="44027" end="44078" title="Kitchener–Waterloo Collegiate and Vocational School" label="Kitchener–Waterloo Collegiate and Vocational School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331017" start="44293" end="44322" title="Eastwood Collegiate Institute" label="Eastwood Collegiate Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468901" start="44372" end="44391" title="Forest Heights Collegiate Institute" label="Forest Heights C.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q5595040" start="44445" end="44461" title="Grand River Collegiate Institute" label="Grand River C.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q5026263" start="44534" end="44554" title="Cameron Heights Collegiate Institute" label="Cameron Heights C.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q14875201" start="44603" end="44633" title="Huron Heights Secondary School (Kitchener)" label="Huron Heights Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590315" start="44859" end="44886" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s High School (Kitchener)" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="44968" end="44973" title="co-ed" label="co-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316531" start="45153" end="45191" title="Resurrection Catholic Secondary School" label="Resurrection Catholic Secondary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166701" start="45488" end="45514" title="Wilfrid Laurier University" label="Wilfrid Laurier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974216" start="45731" end="45770" title="Waterloo Catholic District School Board" label="Waterloo Catholic District School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q17369454" start="45821" end="45825" title="Doon, Ontario" label="Doon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159523" start="45928" end="45945" title="Conestoga College" label="Conestoga College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="46292" end="46316" title="institute of technology" label="polytechnical institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="46333" end="46355" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="47163" end="47182" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830454" start="47214" end="47252" title="Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine" label="Michael G. DeGroote School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="47416" end="47442" title="Waterloo Region" label="Waterloo-Wellington Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896596" start="47553" end="47602" title="University of Waterloo School of Optometry" label="University of Waterloo&amp;#x27;s School of Optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373150" start="47612" end="47634" title="Emmanuel Bible College" label="Emmanuel Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595048" start="47730" end="47750" title="Grand River Hospital" label="Grand River Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590299" start="47788" end="47820" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s General Hospital" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595048" start="48171" end="48193" title="Grand River Hospital" label="Freeport Health Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="49329" end="49348" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896596" start="49776" end="49837" title="University of Waterloo School of Optometry and Vision Science" label="University of Waterloo School of Optometry and Vision Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670237" start="50170" end="50179" title="THEMUSEUM" label="THEMUSEUM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062273" start="50201" end="50221" title="Centre In The Square" label="Centre In The Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297146" start="50359" end="50380" title="Doon Heritage Village" label="Doon Heritage Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418047" start="50469" end="50476" title="Kitchener Memorial Auditorium Complex" label="The Aud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418049" start="50482" end="50506" title="Kitchener Public Library" label="Kitchener Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002107" start="50589" end="50608" title="Busted Flat Records" label="Busted Flat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="50743" end="50754" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="50904" end="50911" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672785" start="50994" end="51006" title="Thanksgiving (Canada)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="51137" end="51141" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214637" start="51966" end="51979" title="Dan for Mayor" label="Dan for Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276079" start="52002" end="52012" title="Corner Gas" label="Corner Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183034" start="52024" end="52037" title="Fred Ewanuick" label="Fred Ewanuick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="52318" end="52323" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382240" start="53547" end="53563" title="Every Time I Die" label="Every Time I Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876548" start="53565" end="53590" title="Ubiquitous Synergy Seeker" label="Ubiquitous Synergy Seeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q302533" start="53592" end="53599" title="Chiodos" label="Chiodos"/>
<link wikidata="Q373962" start="53601" end="53619" title="Walk Off The Earth" label="Walk Off The Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q186318" start="53621" end="53637" title="Four Year Strong" label="Four Year Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q172347" start="53639" end="53655" title="Protest the Hero" label="Protest the Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735689" start="53657" end="53668" title="Mad Caddies" label="Mad Caddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052816" start="53670" end="53683" title="Monster Truck (band)" label="Monster Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533479" start="53685" end="53688" title="Gob (band)" label="Gob"/>
<link wikidata="Q839454" start="53690" end="53704" title="Treble Charger" label="Treble Charger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146412" start="53706" end="53729" title="Cute Is What We Aim For" label="Cute Is What We Aim For"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478705" start="53731" end="53750" title="The Planet Smashers" label="The Planet Smashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q812627" start="53752" end="53759" title="Bayside (band)" label="Bayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056240" start="54239" end="54248" title="tri-Pride" label="tri-Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q85795690" start="54257" end="54300" title="Rainbow Reels Queer and Trans Film Festival" label="Rainbow Reels Queer and Trans Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q51406" start="54314" end="54324" title="LGBT pride" label="LGBT pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418036" start="54477" end="54504" title="Kitchener–Waterloo Symphony" label="Kitchener–Waterloo Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="54641" end="54656" title="Waterloo Region" label="Waterloo Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926912" start="54825" end="54838" title="Victoria Park, Kitchener" label="Victoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="54956" end="54970" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006810" start="55166" end="55211" title="Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire" label="Imperial Order of the Daughters of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542855" start="55688" end="55699" title="Grand River (Ontario)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033752" start="56137" end="56153" title="Southern Ontario" label="Southern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192643" start="56157" end="56160" title="Freestyle BMX" label="BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="56165" end="56180" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q860062" start="56217" end="56232" title="Four-cross" label="four-cross (4X)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192643" start="56244" end="56254" title="Freestyle BMX" label="pump track"/>
<link wikidata="Q971386" start="56266" end="56275" title="Dirt jumping" label="jump park"/>
<link wikidata="Q456455" start="56283" end="56292" title="Flatland BMX" label="free-ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096491" start="56457" end="56474" title="Chicopee Ski Club" label="Chicopee Ski Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159533" start="56707" end="56724" title="Conestoga Parkway" label="Conestoga Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495261" start="56976" end="56985" title="St. Jacobs, Ontario" label="St Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443958" start="57109" end="57110" title="Highway 7 (Ontario)" label="7"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443968" start="57112" end="57113" title="Highway 8 (Ontario)" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503169" start="57118" end="57120" title="Highway 85 (Ontario)" label="85"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028279" start="57304" end="57313" title="Cambridge, Ontario" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q798907" start="57377" end="57382" title="Baden, Ontario" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q740756" start="57415" end="57424" title="Stratford, Ontario" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q504114" start="57486" end="57492" title="Guelph" label="Guelph"/>
<link wikidata="Q449996" start="57689" end="57700" title="Highway 401 (Ontario)" label="Highway 401"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="59478" end="59489" title="roundabouts" label="roundabouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="59676" end="59687" title="roundabouts" label="roundabouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="60558" end="60579" title="horsecar" label="horse-drawn streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418059" start="60611" end="60645" title="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway" label="Berlin and Waterloo Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="60693" end="60704" title="electrification" label="electrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q28946849" start="60718" end="60751" title="Preston and Berlin Street Railway" label="Preston and Berlin Street Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="60756" end="60766" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241810" start="60799" end="60806" title="Preston, Ontario" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q473003" start="61004" end="61017" title="municipalization" label="municipalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418051" start="61305" end="61342" title="Kitchener Public Utilities Commission" label="Kitchener Public Utilities Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595054" start="61420" end="61439" title="Grand River Railway" label="Grand River Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238851" start="61453" end="61461" title="main line (railway)" label="mainline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418059" start="61558" end="61584" title="Kitchener Junction station" label="Kitchener Junction station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801716" start="61671" end="61686" title="car barn" label="streetcar depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="61858" end="61868" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459117" start="62026" end="62043" title="Kitchener Transit" label="Kitchener Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191753" start="62161" end="62171" title="bus garage" label="bus garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q200166" start="62218" end="62227" title="Strasburg, Ontario" label="Strasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082607" start="62397" end="62420" title="Charles Street Terminal" label="Charles Street Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459117" start="62576" end="62593" title="Cambridge Transit" label="Cambridge Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459117" start="62668" end="62687" title="Grand River Transit" label="Grand River Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="63180" end="63191" title="express bus" label="express bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q293831" start="63283" end="63306" title="Bus priority signal" label="transit signal priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162911" start="63412" end="63427" title="Fairway station" label="Fairway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116337" start="64068" end="64076" title="Woolwich, Ontario" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163089" start="64100" end="64117" title="Conestoga station" label="Conestoga station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116651" start="64161" end="64167" title="Wilmot, Ontario" label="Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="64305" end="64314" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q48778884" start="64332" end="64344" title="microtransit" label="microtransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961852" start="64410" end="64417" title="Breslau, Ontario" label="Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="64676" end="64689" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="64782" end="64800" title="light rail transit" label="light rail transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159532" start="64852" end="64866" title="Conestoga Mall (Waterloo, Ontario)" label="Conestoga Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430848" start="64889" end="64907" title="Fairview Park Mall" label="Fairview Park Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="64941" end="64958" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="65507" end="65532" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163089" start="65969" end="65986" title="Conestoga station" label="Conestoga station"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162911" start="66026" end="66041" title="Fairway station" label="Fairway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="66213" end="66221" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022147" start="66222" end="66246" title="Intercity rail" label="intercity passenger rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096696" start="66271" end="66288" title="Kitchener station" label="Kitchener station"/>
<link wikidata="Q511316" start="66370" end="66383" title="Union Station (Toronto)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449564" start="66414" end="66420" title="London station (Ontario)" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="66456" end="66466" title="GO Transit" label="GO Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239126" start="66516" end="66530" title="Kitchener line" label="Kitchener line"/>
<link wikidata="Q50816" start="66688" end="66699" title="Mississauga" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582034" start="66982" end="67005" title="Square One Bus Terminal" label="Square One Bus Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248950" start="67059" end="67068" title="Aberfoyle, Ontario" label="Aberfoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q425057" start="67074" end="67080" title="Milton, Ontario" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097258" start="67102" end="67114" title="limited-stop" label="limited-stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q511316" start="67233" end="67246" title="Union Station (Toronto)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881378" start="67300" end="67307" title="FlixBus" label="FlixBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="67429" end="67431" title="CN Rail" label="CN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="67432" end="67434" title="GO Transit" label="GO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239126" start="67435" end="67453" title="Guelph Subdivision" label="Guelph Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645718" start="67597" end="67616" title="Grand Trunk Railway" label="Grand Trunk Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600205" start="67668" end="67689" title="Great Western Railway (Ontario)" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34180" start="67838" end="67847" title="Brantford, Ontario" label="Brantford"/>
<link wikidata="Q92561" start="67865" end="67871" title="London, Ontario" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="67876" end="67883" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q105063027" start="67911" end="67924" title="Waterloo Spur" label="Waterloo Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q639408" start="67976" end="67984" title="Waterloo, Ontario" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366792" start="68003" end="68009" title="Elmira, Ontario" label="Elmira"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="68070" end="68088" title="Region of Waterloo" label="Region of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096696" start="68091" end="68108" title="Kitchener station" label="Kitchener station"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="68285" end="68293" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172933" start="68351" end="68371" title="Québec City–Windsor Corridor (Via Rail)" label="&amp;quot;Corridor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357727" start="68384" end="68394" title="GO Transit" label="GO Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239126" start="68395" end="68409" title="Kitchener line" label="Kitchener line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097681" start="68648" end="68654" title="Sarnia station" label="Sarnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449564" start="68683" end="68689" title="London station (Ontario)" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q511316" start="68732" end="68753" title="Toronto Union Station" label="Toronto Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103735" start="68855" end="68865" title="Georgetown, Ontario" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307451" start="69107" end="69116" title="Metrolinx" label="Metrolinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502890" start="69501" end="69521" title="Southwestern Ontario" label="Southwestern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="69820" end="69835" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="69934" end="69971" title="Toronto Pearson International Airport" label="Toronto Pearson International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="70094" end="70106" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="70217" end="70242" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="70251" end="70275" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912835" start="70430" end="70470" title="Region of Waterloo International Airport" label="Region of Waterloo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="70558" end="70574" title="general aviation" label="general-aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059770" start="70630" end="70637" title="WestJet" label="WestJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="70667" end="70674" title="Calgary" label="Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q929859" start="70697" end="70704" title="Orlando International Airport" label="Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198402" start="70720" end="70736" title="Sunwing Airlines" label="Sunwing Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943426" start="70764" end="70780" title="Cayo Santa Maria" label="Cayo Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242066" start="70821" end="70860" title="Pearson International Airport" label="Lester B. Pearson International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431444" start="70864" end="70908" title="John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport" label="John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q534159" start="70921" end="70928" title="helipad" label="helipad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510593" start="72450" end="72496" title="1987 World Junior Figure Skating Championships" label="1987 World Junior Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316308" start="72499" end="72540" title="1997 IIHF Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="1997 IIHF Women&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605140" start="72553" end="72599" title="2005 World Junior Figure Skating Championships" label="2005 World Junior Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418032" start="72639" end="72650" title="Kitchener–Waterloo Kodiaks" label="K–W Kodiaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109120" start="72667" end="72688" title="Major Series Lacrosse" label="Major Series Lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839682" start="72728" end="72749" title="Tri-City Roller Derby" label="Tri-City Roller Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543683" start="72780" end="72821" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080" start="72840" end="72852" title="roller derby" label="roller derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961966" start="72905" end="72936" title="District 8 Athletic Association" label="District 8 Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062028" start="73082" end="73135" title="Central Western Ontario Secondary Schools Association" label="Central Western Ontario Secondary Schools Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094663" start="73140" end="73190" title="Ontario Federation of School Athletic Associations" label="Ontario Federation of School Athletic Associations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73194" end="73236" title="Waterloo Region Minor Football Association" label="Waterloo Region Minor Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q113461676" start="73838" end="73847" title="FC Berlin (Canada/United States)" label="FC Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071136" start="73971" end="73999" title="United Premier Soccer League" label="United Premier Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025842" start="74008" end="74034" title="United Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer" label="United Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430487" start="74072" end="74085" title="Richard Bader" label="Richard Bader"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134378" start="74110" end="74127" title="James G. Mitchell" label="James G. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q104774181" start="74149" end="74163" title="Karl Schweizer" label="Karl Schweizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q113143041" start="74184" end="74196" title="Meena Waseem" label="Meena Waseem"/>
<link wikidata="Q712154" start="74263" end="74274" title="Walter Zinn" label="Walter Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962229" start="74323" end="74336" title="Chelsea Aubry" label="Chelsea Aubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035717" start="74357" end="74366" title="Don Awrey" label="Don Awrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60706036" start="74387" end="74401" title="Nathan Bastian" label="Nathan Bastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q324631" start="74422" end="74433" title="Bobby Bauer" label="Bobby Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908522" start="74454" end="74465" title="Don Beaupre" label="Don Beaupre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937676" start="74486" end="74501" title="Vivian Berkeley" label="Vivian Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q911936" start="74573" end="74586" title="Brian Bradley (ice hockey, born 1965)" label="Brian Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112082" start="74607" end="74627" title="Christopher Chalmers" label="Christopher Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524902" start="74648" end="74658" title="Gary Cowan" label="Gary Cowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612389" start="74668" end="74682" title="Steve Dietrich" label="Steve Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q641355" start="74707" end="74722" title="Buffalo Bandits" label="Buffalo Bandits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494834" start="74738" end="74753" title="Gary Dornhoefer" label="Gary Dornhoefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327890" start="74774" end="74786" title="Woody Dumart" label="Woody Dumart"/>
<link wikidata="Q902611" start="74821" end="74832" title="David Edgar (footballer)" label="David Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214716" start="74849" end="74859" title="Dana Ellis" label="Dana Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976212" start="74875" end="74887" title="Wayne Erdman" label="Wayne Erdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112701" start="74897" end="74925" title="Jack Gibson (ice hockey b. 1880)" label="John &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot; Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354292" start="74963" end="74980" title="George Hainsworth" label="George Hainsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313365" start="75001" end="75013" title="Mike Hoffman (ice hockey, born 1989)" label="Mike Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077381" start="75034" end="75047" title="Chris Johnson (boxer)" label="Chris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q97763039" start="75056" end="75068" title="Rylee Foster" label="Rylee Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q588085" start="75082" end="75102" title="Liverpool F.C. Women" label="Liverpool F.C. Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q353770" start="75114" end="75125" title="Kevin Klein" label="Kevin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935265" start="75146" end="75157" title="Bobby Kuntz" label="Bobby Kuntz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207061" start="75176" end="75187" title="Beau Landry" label="Beau Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q295328" start="75215" end="75227" title="Lennox Lewis" label="Lennox Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105104970" start="75282" end="75296" title="Steven Lorentz" label="Steven Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436762" start="75317" end="75330" title="Scott Manning" label="Scott Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q941067" start="75365" end="75377" title="Howie Meeker" label="Howie Meeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808977" start="75407" end="75429" title="Hockey Night in Canada" label="Hockey Night in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711111" start="75449" end="75461" title="Jamal Murray" label="Jamal Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071767" start="75482" end="75492" title="Moe Norman" label="Moe Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469069" start="75502" end="75513" title="Sarah Pavan" label="Sarah Pavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515234" start="75540" end="75554" title="Tanner Pearson" label="Tanner Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55106273" start="75575" end="75589" title="Ronnie Pfeffer" label="Ronnie Pfeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q506762" start="75608" end="75619" title="Andrew Poje" label="Andrew Poje"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640693" start="75641" end="75652" title="Mike Poulin" label="Mike Poulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129678" start="75684" end="75694" title="Pan Qingfu" label="Pan Qingfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q430806" start="75712" end="75725" title="Paul Reinhart" label="Paul Reinhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="75746" end="75756" title="Christian (wrestler)" label="Jason Reso"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="75779" end="75800" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378624" start="75802" end="75813" title="Steven Rice" label="Steven Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q930275" start="75834" end="75845" title="Jim Sandlak" label="Jim Sandlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q982252" start="75866" end="75880" title="Mark Scheifele" label="Mark Scheifele"/>
<link wikidata="Q876604" start="75958" end="75971" title="Brad Schlegel" label="Brad Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355449" start="75992" end="76004" title="Milt Schmidt" label="Milt Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q330334" start="76074" end="76088" title="Frank J. Selke" label="Frank J. Selke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262784" start="76139" end="76151" title="Steve Seftel" label="Steve Seftel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24804710" start="76180" end="76193" title="Logan Stanley" label="Logan Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q281303" start="76214" end="76227" title="Scott Stevens" label="Scott Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q449295" start="76261" end="76277" title="Kelly Vanderbeek" label="Kelly Vanderbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455564" start="76310" end="76325" title="Fitz Vanderpool" label="Fitz Vanderpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q724450" start="76334" end="76354" title="World Boxing Council" label="World Boxing Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q725676" start="76359" end="76383" title="World Boxing Association" label="World Boxing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934532" start="76394" end="76405" title="Tyler Varga" label="Tyler Varga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="76431" end="76449" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857467" start="76451" end="76460" title="Mike West (swimmer)" label="Mike West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189597" start="76482" end="76496" title="Dennis Wideman" label="Dennis Wideman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662549" start="76517" end="76529" title="Aaron Wilson (lacrosse)" label="Aaron Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889756" start="76548" end="76560" title="Bennett Wolf" label="Bennett Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040651" start="76597" end="76609" title="Carl Pollock" label="Carl Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358034" start="76626" end="76637" title="Electrohome" label="Electrohome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022196" start="76643" end="76660" title="Bramwell Tillsley" label="Bramwell Tillsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q847768" start="76669" end="76698" title="General of The Salvation Army" label="General of The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965771" start="76700" end="76716" title="Walter P. Zeller" label="Walter P. Zeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q845330" start="76729" end="76736" title="Zellers" label="Zellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255094" start="76776" end="76795" title="John Robert Colombo" label="John Robert Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q318297" start="76805" end="76819" title="Ross Macdonald" label="Ross Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q318297" start="76834" end="76848" title="Kenneth Millar" label="Kenneth Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q268829" start="76850" end="76865" title="Margaret Millar" label="Margaret Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q444065" start="76875" end="76888" title="David Morrell" label="David Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621266" start="76919" end="76924" title="Rambo (franchise)" label="Rambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173345" start="76942" end="76950" title="Dave Sim" label="Dave Sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q162238" start="76984" end="77004" title="Cerebus the Aardvark" label="Cerebus the Aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q536381" start="77012" end="77025" title="Edna Staebler" label="Edna Staebler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791324" start="77035" end="77057" title="Matthew Tierney (poet)" label="Matthew Tierney (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417368" start="77101" end="77115" title="Raffi Armenian" label="Raffi Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409898" start="77128" end="77143" title="Kimberly Barber" label="Kimberly Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866122" start="77160" end="77172" title="Elise Bauman" label="Elise Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051979" start="77183" end="77195" title="Norman Blake (Scottish musician)" label="Norman Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515611" start="77217" end="77232" title="Teenage Fanclub" label="Teenage Fanclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q447165" start="77234" end="77247" title="Kristin Booth" label="Kristin Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40586086" start="77258" end="77270" title="A. J. Bridel" label="A. J. Bridel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918885" start="77297" end="77306" title="Mel Brown (guitarist)" label="Mel Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q98197981" start="77324" end="77335" title="Alex Bulmer" label="Alex Bulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125647832" start="77353" end="77363" title="Gail Dahms" label="Gail Dahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q576359" start="77385" end="77393" title="Bob Egan" label="Bob Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q576359" start="77415" end="77425" title="Blue Rodeo" label="Blue Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660384" start="77427" end="77438" title="Liza Fromer" label="Liza Fromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752296" start="77457" end="77473" title="The Morning Show (Canadian TV series)" label="The Morning Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142327" start="77481" end="77506" title="Global Television Network" label="Global Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027284" start="77508" end="77519" title="Nick Hector" label="Nick Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q131455894" start="77534" end="77545" title="Dale Heslip" label="Dale Heslip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262035" start="77585" end="77596" title="Derek Hines" label="Derek Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q101506709" start="77613" end="77625" title="The Hacksmith" label="James Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="77640" end="77647" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731733" start="77663" end="77674" title="Allen Kaeja" label="Allen Kaeja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377080" start="77709" end="77723" title="Kathryn Ladano" label="Kathryn Ladano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242417" start="77756" end="77769" title="Lisa LaFlamme" label="Lisa LaFlamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q767221" start="77795" end="77817" title="CTV Television Network" label="CTV Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568951" start="77819" end="77830" title="Glenn Lewis" label="Glenn Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="77832" end="77840" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537644" start="77860" end="77872" title="Paul MacLeod" label="Paul MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785099" start="77893" end="77901" title="Master T" label="Master T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857828" start="77937" end="77946" title="MuchMusic" label="MuchMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q232860" start="77948" end="77960" title="Lois Maxwell" label="Lois Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220625" start="77971" end="77983" title="Danny Michel" label="Danny Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103819166" start="77995" end="78007" title="Pavan Moondi" label="Pavan Moondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271539" start="78039" end="78051" title="Diane Nyland" label="Diane Nyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338682" start="78091" end="78107" title="Jeremy Ratchford" label="Jeremy Ratchford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614062" start="78116" end="78131" title="Steve Strongman" label="Steve Strongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196289" start="78150" end="78159" title="Rob Szabo" label="Rob Szabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634723" start="78191" end="78207" title="Tasha the Amazon" label="Tasha the Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786446" start="78227" end="78239" title="Homer Watson" label="Homer Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242719" start="78259" end="78273" title="Dawud Wharnsby" label="Dawud Wharnsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q97940064" start="78315" end="78323" title="JJ Wilde" label="JJ Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077862" start="78338" end="78363" title="Chris Williams (director)" label="Chris Williams (director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687919" start="78404" end="78428" title="Louis Orville Breithaupt" label="Louis Orville Breithaupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233252" start="78479" end="78488" title="David Eby" label="David Eby"/>
<link wikidata="Q128633" start="78519" end="78546" title="William Lyon Mackenzie King" label="William Lyon Mackenzie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q378054" start="78606" end="78619" title="Michael Kraus (minister)" label="Michael Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188049" start="78648" end="78667" title="Judy Wasylycia-Leis" label="Judy Wasylycia-Leis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130765" start="78669" end="78672" title="New Democratic Party (Canada)" label="NDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210741" start="78730" end="78755" title="List of cities in Ontario" label="List of cities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89586" wikidata="Q1343874" url="?curid=89586" title="Japanese grammar">
<text>Japanese is an agglutinative, synthetic, mora-timed language with simple phonotactics, a pure vowel system, phonemic vowel and consonant length, and a lexically significant pitch-accent. Word order is normally subject–object–verb with particles marking the grammatical function of words, and sentence structure is topic–comment. Its phrases are exclusively head-final and compound sentences are exclusively left-branching. Sentence-final particles are used to add emotional or emphatic impact, or make questions. Nouns have no grammatical number or gender, and there are no articles. Verbs are conjugated, primarily for tense and voice, but not person. Japanese adjectives are also conjugated. Japanese has a complex system of honorifics with verb forms and vocabulary to indicate the relative status of the speaker, the listener, and persons mentioned.

In language typology, it has many features different from most European languages.

==Distinctive aspects of modern Japanese sentence structure==

===Word order: head-final and left-branching===
The modern theory of constituent order (&quot;word order&quot;), usually attributed to Joseph Harold Greenberg, identifies several kinds of phrases. Each one has a head and possibly a modifier. The head of a phrase either precedes its modifier (head-initial) or follows it (head-final). Some of these phrase types, with the head marked in boldface, are:
*genitive phrase, i.e., noun modified by another noun (&quot;the cover of the book&quot;, &quot;the book&#x27;s cover&quot;);
*noun governed by an adposition (&quot;on the table&quot;, &quot;underneath the table&quot;);
*comparison (&quot;[X is] bigger than Y&quot;, i.e., &quot;compared to Y, X is big&quot;).
*noun modified by an adjective (&quot;black cat&quot;).

Some languages are inconsistent in constituent order, having a mixture of head-initial phrase types and head-final phrase types. Looking at the preceding list, English for example is mostly head-initial, but nouns follow the adjectives which modify them. Moreover, genitive phrases can be either head-initial or head-final in English. By contrast, the Japanese language is consistently head-final:
*genitive phrase:

*noun governed by an &quot;adposition&quot;:

*comparison:

*noun modified by an adjective:
Head-finality in Japanese sentence structure carries over to the building of sentences using other sentences. In sentences that have other sentences as constituents, the subordinated sentences (relative clauses, for example), always precede what they refer to, since they are modifiers and what they modify has the syntactic status of phrasal head. Translating the phrase &quot;the man who was walking down the street&quot; into Japanese word order would be &quot;street down walking was man&quot;.

Head-finality prevails also when sentences are coordinated instead of subordinated. In the world&#x27;s languages, it is common to avoid repetition between coordinated clauses by optionally deleting a constituent common to the two parts, as in &quot;Bob bought his mother some flowers and his father a tie&quot;, where the second &quot;bought&quot; is omitted. In Japanese, such &quot;gapping&quot; must proceed in the reverse order: &quot;Bob mother for some flowers and father for tie bought&quot;. The reason for this is that in Japanese, sentences (other than occasional inverted sentences or sentences containing afterthoughts) always end in a verb (or other predicative words like adjectival verbs, adjectival nouns, auxiliary verbs)—the only exceptions being a few sentence-ending particles such as , , and . The particle turns a statement into a question, while the others express the speaker&#x27;s attitude towards the statement.

===Word class system===
Japanese has five major lexical word classes:
* verbal nouns (correspond to English gerunds like &#x27;studying&#x27;, &#x27;jumping&#x27;, which denote activities)
* (names vary, also called -adjectives or &quot;nominal adjectives&quot;)
* verbs
* (so-called -adjectives)
More broadly, there are two classes: uninflectable (nouns, including verbal nouns and adjectival nouns) and inflectable (verbs, with adjectives as defective verbs). To be precise, a verbal noun is simply a noun to which the light verb can be appended, while an adjectival noun is like a noun but uses instead of when acting attributively. Adjectives (-adjectives) inflect identically to the negative form of verbs, which end in . Compare → and → .

Some scholars, such as Eleanor Harz Jorden, refer to adjectives instead as adjectivals, since they are grammatically distinct from adjectives: they can predicate a sentence. That is, is glossed as &quot;hot&quot; when modifying a noun phrase, as in , but as &quot;&quot;is&quot; hot&quot; when predicating, as in .

The two inflected classes, verb and adjective, are historically considered closed classes, meaning they do not readily gain new members—but see the following paragraphs. Instead, new and borrowed verbs and adjectives are typically conjugated periphrastically as verbal noun + (e.g. ) and adjectival noun + . This differs from Indo-European languages, where verbs and adjectives are open classes, though analogous &quot;do&quot; constructions exist, including English &quot;do a favor&quot;, &quot;do the twist&quot; or French &quot;faire un footing&quot; (do a &quot;footing&quot;, go for a jog), and periphrastic constructions are common for other senses, like &quot;try climbing&quot; (verbal noun) or &quot;try parkour&quot; (noun). Other languages where verbs are a closed class include Basque: very few Basque verbs (albeits very common ones) have synthetic conjugation, all the others are only formed periphrastically. Conversely, pronouns are closed classes in Western languages but open classes in Japanese and some other East Asian languages.

In a few cases historically, and much more commonly recently, new verbs are created by appending the suffix to a noun or using it to replace the end of a word. This is most often, but not exclusively, done with borrowed words, and results in a word written in a mixture of katakana (stem) and hiragana (inflectional ending), which is otherwise very rare. This is typically casual, with the most well-established example being (circa 1920), from , with other common examples including , from , and from . In cases where the borrowed word already ends with or even contains a or , this may be rebracketed as a verb ending and changed to a , as in , from ; , from ; and , from . New verbs coined in this fashion are uniformly group 1 verbs and, at least in the Tokyo accent, consistently are stressed immediately before the final る.

New adjectives are extremely rare; one example is , from adjectival noun , and a more casual recent example is , by contraction of . By contrast, in Old Japanese adjectives (precursors of present -adjectives ending in , formerly a different word class) were open, as reflected in words like , from the adjective , and , from the noun (with sound change). Japanese adjectives are unusual in being closed class but quite numerous – about 700 adjectives – while most languages with closed class adjectives have very few. Some believe this is due to a grammatical change of inflection from an aspect system to a tense system, with adjectives predating the change.

The conjugation of -adjectives has similarities to the conjugation of verbs, unlike Western languages where inflection of adjectives, where it exists, is more likely to have similarities to the declension of nouns. Verbs and adjectives being closely related is unusual from the perspective of English, but is a common case across languages generally, and one may consider Japanese adjectives as a kind of stative verb.

Japanese vocabulary has a large layer of Chinese loanwords, nearly all of which go back more than one thousand years, yet virtually none of them are verbs or &quot;-adjectives&quot; – they are all nouns, of which some are verbal nouns () and some are adjectival nouns (). In addition to the basic verbal noun + form, verbal nouns with a single-character root often experienced sound changes, such as → (rendaku) → , as in , and some cases where the stem underwent sound change, as in , from .

Verbal nouns are uncontroversially nouns, having only minor syntactic differences to distinguish them from pure nouns like &#x27;mountain&#x27;. There are some minor distinctions within verbal nouns, most notably that some primarily conjugate as (with a particle), more like nouns, while others primarily conjugate as , and others are common either way. For example, is much more common than , while is much more common than . Adjectival nouns have more syntactic differences versus pure nouns, and traditionally were considered more separate, but they, too, are ultimately a subcategory of nouns.

There are a few minor word classes that are related to adjectival nouns, namely the adjectives and adjectives. Of these, adjectives are fossils of earlier forms of adjectives (the adjectives of Old Japanese), and are typically classed separately, while adjectives are a parallel class (formerly adjectives in Late Old Japanese), but are typically classed with adjectives.

====Different classifications====
The first structured description of the Japanese was in , an 1831 grammar by . It was based on earlier Dutch grammars such as Shizuki Tadao&#x27;s and . The words &quot;hinshi&quot; and &quot;shihin&quot; also came about from these early late-Edo and early-Meiji grammars. Since then, there have been multiple conflicting classifications of the parts of speech of Japanese.
The term assumed different meanings, such as a verb form ( or ) that precedes a noun, or as a proposed alternative to , because Japanese &quot;adjectives&quot; are verb-like in nature, unlike European adjectives. As shown in the table, Matsushita Daizaburō (1924) used &quot;keiyōshi&quot; explicitly for the Eurocentric idea of adjectives as words that precede nouns, while reserving &quot;keiyō dōshi&quot; for Japanese &quot;adjectives&quot; as verb-like words (although later in 1928, he swapped out &quot;keiyōshi&quot; for to avoid confusion, on the model of as words that precede verbs). Ochiai Naobumi (1895) defined &quot;keiyō dōshi&quot; not as a grammatical category, but as a semantic one with meanings similar to those of stative verbs (, ). It was not until &#x27;s usage in 1905 that &quot;keiyō dōshi&quot; came to be refer to adjectival words whose ended with or (in modern Japanese, they end with ).

The of today has followed &#x27;s model outlined in his 1943 grammar, , compiled for the . It recognizes 10 parts of speech as shown in the table.

Among historical classifications, the grammarian notably compared his own terminology to the terminologies translated from and modeled after European ones at the time. In particular, he rejected the equation of what were dubbed in Japanese to the concept of &quot;adjectives&quot; in European grammars, although he revised his systems over the years, which ended up conforming to the popular usage of the term &quot;keiyōshi&quot;. According to Matsushita (1930):
===Japanese as a topic-prominent language===
In discourse pragmatics, the term &quot;topic&quot; refers to what a section of discourse is about. At the beginning of a section of discourse, the topic is usually unknown, in which case it is usually necessary to explicitly mention it. As the discourse carries on, the topic need not be the grammatical subject of each new sentence.

Starting with Middle Japanese, the grammar evolved so as to explicitly distinguish topics from nontopics. This is done by two distinct particles (short words which do not change form). Consider the following pair of sentences:

In the first sentence is not a discourse topic—not yet; in the second sentence it is a discourse topic. In linguistics (specifically, in discourse pragmatics) a sentence such as the second one (with ) is termed a presentational sentence because its function in the discourse is to present &quot;dog&quot; as a topic, to &quot;broach it for discussion&quot;. Once a referent has been established as the topic of the current monolog or dialog, then in (formal) modern Japanese its marking will change from to .

To better explain the difference, the first sentence can be translated to &quot;There&#x27;s a dog eating a sandwich&quot;, while the second sentence can be translated to &quot;You know the dog? It&#x27;s eating a sandwich&quot;; these renderings reflect a discourse fragment in which &quot;the dog&quot; is being established as the topic of an extended discussion. The first sentence answers the question &quot;What is going on?,&quot; whereas the second sentence answers the question &quot;What is the dog doing?&quot;

===Liberal omission of the subject of a sentence===
The grammatical subject is commonly omitted in Japanese, as in

Subjects are mentioned when a topic is introduced, or in situations where an ambiguity might result from their omission. The preceding example sentence would most likely be uttered in the middle of a discourse, where who it is that &quot;went to Japan&quot; will be clear from what has already been said (or written).

==Sentences, phrases and words==
 is composed of , which are in turn composed of , which are its smallest coherent components. Like Chinese and classical Korean, written Japanese does not typically demarcate words with spaces; its agglutinative nature further makes the concept of a &quot;word&quot; rather different from words in English. The reader identifies word divisions by semantic cues and a knowledge of phrase structure. Phrases have a &quot;single&quot; meaning-bearing word, followed by a string of suffixes, auxiliary verbs and particles to modify its meaning and designate its grammatical role.

Some scholars romanize Japanese sentences by inserting spaces only at phrase boundaries (&quot;i.e.&quot;, &quot;&quot;), treating an entire phrase as a single word. This represents an almost purely phonological conception of where one word ends and the next begins. There is some validity in taking this approach: phonologically, the postpositional particles merge with the structural word that precedes them, and within a &quot;phonological&quot; phrase, the pitch can have at most one fall. Usually, however, grammarians adopt a more conventional concept of , one which invokes meaning and sentence structure.

===Phrasal movement===
In Japanese, phrasal constituents can be moved to the beginning or the end of the sentence. Leftward movement of a phrasal constituent is referred to as &quot;scrambling&quot;.

==Word classification==
In linguistics generally, words and affixes are often classified into two major word categories: lexical words, those that refer to the world outside of a discourse, and function words—also including fragments of words—which help to build the sentence in accordance with the grammar rules of the language. Lexical words include nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and sometimes prepositions and postpositions, while grammatical words or word parts include everything else. The native tradition in Japanese grammar scholarship seems to concur in this view of classification. This native Japanese tradition uses the terminology , for words having lexical meaning, and , for words having a grammatical function.

Classical Japanese had some auxiliary verbs (i.e., they were independent words) which have become grammaticized in modern Japanese as inflectional suffixes, such as the past tense suffix (which might have developed as a contraction of ).

Traditional scholarship proposes a system of word classes differing somewhat from the above-mentioned. The &quot;independent&quot; words have the following categories.
: , word classes which have inflections
:: , verbs
:: , -type adjectives
:: , -type adjectives
: or , word classes which do not have inflections
:: , nouns
:: , pronouns
:: , adverbs
:: , conjunctions
:: , interjections
:: , prenominals

Ancillary words also divide into a nonconjugable class, containing and , and a conjugable class consisting of . There is not wide agreement among linguists as to the English translations of the above terms.

=== Controversy over the characterization of adjectival nouns ===
Uehara (1998) observes that Japanese grammarians have disagreed as to the criteria that make some words inflectional and others not, in particular, the adjectival nouns – or -adjectives. (It is not disputed that nouns like &#x27;book&#x27; are non-inflectional and that verbs and -adjectives are inflectional.) The claim that adjectival nouns are inflectional rests on the claim that the element , regarded as a copula by proponents of non-inflectional adjectival nouns, is really a suffix—an inflection. That is, is a one-word sentence, not a two-word sentence, . However, numerous constructions show that is less bound to the roots of nouns and adjectival nouns than and are to the roots of -adjectives and verbs, respectively.

:(1) Reduplication for emphasis
::
:: (the adjectival inflection cannot be left off)
:: (the verbal inflection cannot be left off)
:(2) Questions. In Japanese, questions are formed by adding the particle (or in colloquial speech, just by changing the intonation of the sentence).
::
:: ( cannot be left off)
:: ( cannot be left off)
:(3) Several epistemic modality predicates, e.g., 
::
:: ( cannot be left off)
:: ( cannot be left off)

On the basis of such constructions, Uehara finds that the copula is not suffixal and that adjectival nouns pattern with nouns in being non-inflectional.

Similarly, Eleanor Jorden considers this class of words a kind of nominal, not adjective, and refers to them as -nominals in her textbook &quot;&quot;.

==Nouns==

Japanese has no grammatical gender, number, or articles; though the demonstrative , is often translatable as &quot;the&quot;. Thus, linguists agree that Japanese nouns are noninflecting: can be translated as &quot;cat&quot;, &quot;cats&quot;, &quot;a cat&quot;, &quot;the cat&quot;, &quot;some cats&quot; and so forth, depending on context. However, as part of the extensive pair of grammatical systems that Japanese possesses for &quot;honorification&quot; (making discourse deferential to the addressee or even to a third party) and politeness, nouns too can be modified. Nouns take politeness prefixes (which have not been regarded as inflections): for native nouns, and for Sino-Japanese nouns. A few examples are given in the following table. In a few cases, there is suppletion, as with the first of the examples given below, &#x27;飯(meal/rice)&#x27;. (Note that while these prefixes are almost always written in hiragana as or , the kanji represents both and in formal writing.)

Lacking number, Japanese does not differentiate between count and mass nouns. A small number of nouns have collectives formed by reduplication (possibly accompanied by voicing and related processes (rendaku)); for example: and . Reduplication is not productive. Words in Japanese referring to more than one of something are collectives, not plurals. , for example, means &quot;a lot of people&quot; or &quot;people in general&quot;; it is never used to mean &quot;two people&quot;. A phrase like would be taken to mean &quot;the people of Edo&quot;, or &quot;the population of Edo&quot;, not &quot;two people from Edo&quot; or even &quot;a few people from Edo&quot;. Similarly, means &quot;many mountains&quot;.

A limited number of nouns have collective forms that refer to groups of people. Examples include ; ; . One uncommon personal noun, , has a much more common reduplicative collective form: .

The suffixes and are by far the most common collectivizing suffixes. These are, again, not pluralizing suffixes: does not mean &quot;some number of people named Taro&quot;, but instead indicates the group including Taro. Depending on context, might be translated into &quot;Taro and his friends&quot;, &quot;Taro and his siblings&quot;, &quot;Taro and his family&quot;, or any other logical grouping that has Taro as the representative. Some words with collectives have become fixed phrases and (commonly) refer to one person. Specifically, and can be singular, even though and were originally collectivizing in these words; to unambiguously refer to groups of them, an additional collectivizing suffix is added: and , though is somewhat uncommon. is sometimes applied to inanimate objects, and , for example, but this usage is colloquial and indicates a high level of anthropomorphisation and childlikeness, and is not more generally accepted as standard.

===Grammatical case===
Grammatical cases in Japanese are marked by particles placed after the nouns. A distinctive feature of Japanese is the presence of two cases which are roughly equivalent to the nominative case in other languages: one representing the sentence topic, other representing the subject. The most important case markers are the following:

* Nominative – for subject, for the topic
* Genitive – 
* Dative – 
* Accusative – 
* Lative – , used for destination direction (like in &quot;to some place&quot;)
* Ablative – , used for source direction (like in &quot;from some place&quot;)
* Instrumental/Locative – 

===Pronouns===

Although many grammars and textbooks mention , Japanese lacks true pronouns. ( can be considered a subset of nouns.) Strictly speaking, linguistic pronouns do not take modifiers, but Japanese do. For example, is valid in Japanese. Also, unlike true pronouns, Japanese are not closed-class; new are introduced and old ones go out of use relatively quickly.

A large number of referring to people are translated as pronouns in their most common uses. Examples: ; ; ; see also the adjoining table or a longer list. Some of these &quot;personal nouns&quot; such as , or , also have second-person uses: in second-person is an extremely rude &quot;you&quot;, and in second-person is a diminutive &quot;you&quot; used for young boys. and also mean &quot;boyfriend&quot; and &quot;girlfriend&quot; respectively, and this usage of the words is possibly more common than the use as pronouns.

Like other subjects, personal are seldom used and are de-emphasized in Japanese. This is partly because Japanese sentences do not always require explicit subjects, and partly because names or titles are often used where pronouns would appear in a translation:

The possible referents of are sometimes constrained depending on the order of occurrence. The following pair of examples from Bart Mathias illustrates one such constraint.

===Reflexive pronouns===
English has a reflexive form of each personal pronoun (&quot;himself&quot;, &quot;herself&quot;, &quot;itself&quot;, &quot;themselves&quot;, etc.); Japanese, in contrast, has one main reflexive , namely , which can also mean &#x27;I&#x27;. The uses of the reflexive (pro)nouns in the two languages are very different, as demonstrated by the following literal translations (*=impossible, ??=ambiguous):
If the sentence has more than one grammatical or semantic subject, then the target of is the subject of the &quot;primary&quot; or &quot;most prominent action&quot;; thus in the following sentence refers unambiguously to Shizuko (even though Makoto is the grammatical subject) because the primary action is Shizuko&#x27;s reading.

In practice the main action is not always discernible, in which case such sentences are ambiguous. The use of in complex sentences follows non-trivial rules.

There are also equivalents to such as . Other uses of the reflexive pronoun in English are covered by adverbs like which is used in the sense of &quot;by oneself&quot;. For example,

Change in a verb&#x27;s valency is not accomplished by use of reflexive pronouns (in this Japanese is like English but unlike many other European languages). Instead, separate (but usually related) intransitive verbs and transitive verbs are used. There is no longer any productive morphology to derive transitive verbs from intransitive ones, or vice versa.

===Demonstratives===
# irregular formation
# colloquially contracted to -cchi
# is represented by 
Demonstratives occur in the , , and series. The (proximal) series refers to things closer to the speaker than the hearer, the (medial) series for things closer to the hearer, and the (distal) series for things distant to both the speaker and the hearer. With , demonstratives turn into the corresponding interrogative form. Demonstratives can also be used to refer to people, for example

Demonstratives limit, and therefore precede, nouns; thus for &quot;this/my book&quot;, and for &quot;that/your book&quot;.

When demonstratives are used to refer to things not visible to the speaker or the hearer, or to (abstract) concepts, they fulfill a related but different anaphoric role. The anaphoric distals are used for shared information between the speaker and the listener.

 instead of would imply that B does not share this knowledge about Sapporo, which is inconsistent with the meaning of the sentence. The anaphoric medials are used to refer to experience or knowledge that is not shared between the speaker and listener.



Again, is inappropriate here because Sato does not (did not) know Tanaka personally. The proximal demonstratives do not have clear anaphoric uses. They can be used in situations where the distal series sound too disconnected:

==Conjugable words==

===Stem forms===
Conjugative suffixes and auxiliary verbs are attached to the stem forms of the affixee. In modern Japanese, there are six stem forms, ordered following from the endings that these forms have in verbs (according to the collation order of Japanese), where terminal and attributive forms are the same for verbs (hence only 5 surface forms), but differ for nominals, notably -nominals.
; (and ): is used for plain negative (of verbs), causative and passive constructions. The most common use of this form is with the auxiliary that turns verbs into their negative (predicate) form. (See Verbs below.) The version is used for volitional expression and formed by a .
; : is used in a linking role (a kind of serial verb construction). This is the most productive stem form, taking on a variety of endings and auxiliaries, and can even occur independently in a sense similar to the ending. This form is also used to negate adjectives.
; : is used at the ends of clauses in predicate positions. This form is also variously known as or – it is the form that verbs are listed under in a dictionary.
; : is prefixed to nominals and is used to define or classify the noun, similar to a relative clause in English. In modern Japanese it is practically identical to the terminal form, except that verbs are generally not inflected for politeness; in old Japanese these forms differed. Further, -nominals behave differently in terminal and attributive positions; see Adjectival verbs and nouns, below.
; : is used for conditional and subjunctive forms, using the ending.
; : is used to turn verbs into commands. Adjectives do not have an imperative stem form.

The application of conjugative suffixes to stem forms follow certain .

===Verbs===
 in Japanese are rigidly constrained to the end of a clause. This means that the &quot;predicate position&quot; is always located at the end of a sentence.

The subject and objects of the verb are indicated by means of &quot;particles&quot;, and the grammatical functions of the verb (primarily tense and voice) are indicated by means of conjugation. When the subject and the dissertative topic coincide, the subject is often omitted; if the verb is intransitive, the entire sentence may consist of a single verb. Verbs have two tenses indicated by conjugation, past and non-past. The semantic difference between present and future is not indicated by means of conjugation. Usually there is no ambiguity as context makes it clear whether the speaker is referring to the present or future. Voice and aspect are also indicated by means of conjugation, and possibly agglutinating auxiliary verbs. For example, the continuative aspect is formed by means of the continuative conjugation known as the &quot;gerundive&quot; or &quot;form&quot;, and the auxiliary verb ; to illustrate, → .

Verbs can be semantically classified based on certain conjugations.
; Stative verbs: indicate existential properties, such as , , , etc. These verbs generally do not have a continuative conjugation with because they are semantically continuative already.
; Continual verbs: conjugate with the auxiliary to indicate the progressive aspect. Examples: , , . To illustrate the conjugation, → .
; Punctual verbs: conjugate with to indicate a repeated action, or a continuing state after some action. Example: → ; → .
; Non-volitional verb: indicate uncontrollable action or emotion. These verbs generally have no volitional, imperative or potential conjugation. Examples: , .
; Movement verbs: indicate motion. Examples: , . In the continuative form (see § Verbal adverbs) they take the particle to indicate a purpose.
There are other possible classes, and a large amount of overlap between the classes.

Lexically, nearly every verb in Japanese is a member of exactly one of the following three regular &quot;conjugation groups&quot; (see also Japanese godan and ichidan verbs).
; : verbs with a stem ending in . The terminal stem form always rhymes with . Examples: , .
; : verbs with a stem ending in . The terminal stem form always rhymes with . Examples: , . (Some Group 1 verbs resemble Group 2b verbs, but their stems end in , not .)
; : verbs with a stem ending in a consonant. When this is and the verb ends in , it is not apparent from the terminal form whether the verb is Group 1 or Group 2b, e.g. . If the stem ends in , that consonant sound only appears in before the final of the irrealis form.

The &quot;row&quot; in the above classification means a row in the gojūon table. &quot;Upper 1-row&quot; means the row that is one row above the center row (the -row) i.e. i-row. &quot;Lower 1-row&quot; means the row that is one row below the center row (the -row) i.e. -row. &quot;5-row&quot; means the conjugation runs through all 5 rows of the gojūon table. A conjugation is fully described by identifying both the row and the column in the gojūon table. For example, belongs to , belongs to , and belongs to .

One should avoid confusing verbs in with verbs in or . For example, belongs to , whereas its homophone belongs to . Likewise, belongs to , whereas its homophone belongs to .

Historically, Classical Japanese had , and a . The verbs became most of the verbs in modern Japanese (only a handful of verbs and a single verb existed in classical Japanese). The group was reclassified as the group during the post-WWII writing reform in 1946, to write Japanese as it is pronounced. Since verbs have migrated across groups in the history of the language, the conjugation of classical verbs cannot be ascertained from knowledge of modern Japanese alone.

Of the irregular classes, there are two:
; -group: which has only one member, . In Japanese grammars these words are classified as , an abbreviation of , sa-row irregular conjugation).
; -group: which also has one member, . The Japanese name for this class is or simply .
Classical Japanese had two further irregular classes, the -group, which contained and , the -group, which included such verbs as , the equivalent of modern , as well as quite a number of extremely irregular verbs that cannot be classified.

The following table illustrates the stem forms of the above conjugation groups, with the root indicated with dots. For example, to find the hypothetical form of the group 1 verb , look in the second row to find its root, , then in the hypothetical row to get the ending , giving the stem form . When there are multiple possibilities, they are listed in the order of increasing rarity.

# The and irrealis forms for Group 1 verbs were historically one, but since the post-WWII spelling reforms they have been written differently. In modern Japanese the form is used only for the volitional mood and the form is used in all other cases; see also the conjugation table below.
# The unexpected ending is due to the verb&#x27;s root being but only being pronounced before in modern Japanese.

The above are only the stem forms of the verbs; to these one must add various verb endings in order to get the fully conjugated verb. The following table lists the most common conjugations. Note that in some cases the form is different depending on the conjugation group of the verb. See Japanese verb conjugations for a full list.

# This is an entirely different verb; has no potential form.
# These forms change depending on the final syllable of the verb&#x27;s dictionary form (whether etc.). For details, see Euphonic changes, below, and the article Japanese verb conjugation.

The polite ending conjugates as a group 1 verb, except that the negative imperfective and perfective forms are and respectively, and certain conjugations are in practice rarely if ever used. The passive and potential endings and , and the causative endings and all conjugate as group 2b verbs. Multiple verbal endings can therefore agglutinate. For example, a common formation is the &quot;causative-passive&quot; ending: .

As should be expected, the vast majority of theoretically possible combinations of conjugative endings are not semantically meaningful.

====Transitive and intransitive verbs====
Japanese has a large variety of related pairs of transitive verbs (that take a direct object) and intransitive verbs (that do not usually take a direct object), such as the transitive , and the intransitive .

Note: Some intransitive verbs (usually verbs of motion) take what looks like a direct object, but is not. For example, :

===Adjectival verbs and nouns===
Semantically speaking, words that denote attributes or properties are primarily distributed between two morphological classes (there are also a few other classes):
* – these have roots and conjugating stem forms, and are semantically and morphologically similar to stative verbs.
* – these are nouns that combine with the copula.

Unlike adjectives in languages like English, -adjectives in Japanese inflect for aspect and mood, like verbs. Japanese adjectives do not have comparative or superlative inflections; comparatives and superlatives have to be marked periphrastically using adverbs like and .

Every adjective in Japanese can be used in an attributive position, and nearly every Japanese adjective can be used in a predicative position. There are a few Japanese adjectives that cannot predicate, known as , which are derived from other word classes; examples include , , and which are all stylistic -type variants of normal -type adjectives.

All -adjectives except for have regular conjugations, and is irregular only in the fact that it is a changed form of the regular adjective permissible in the terminal and attributive forms. For all other forms it reverts to .

# The attributive and terminal forms were formerly and , respectively; in modern Japanese these are used productively for stylistic reasons only, although many set phrases such as and , derive from them.
# The imperative form is extremely rare in modern Japanese, restricted to set patterns like , where they are treated as adverbial phrases. It is impossible for an imperative form to be in a predicate position.

Common conjugations of adjectives are enumerated below. is not treated separately, because all conjugation forms are identical to those of .

# Note that these are just forms of the -type adjective 
# Since most adjectives describe non-volitional conditions, the volitional form is interpreted as &quot;it is possible&quot;, if sensible. In some rare cases it is semi-volitional: in response to a report or request.

Adjectives too are governed by euphonic rules in certain cases, as noted in the section on it below. For the polite negatives of -type adjectives, see also the section below on the copula .

===Copula ( )===
The copula behaves very much like a verb or an adjective in terms of conjugation.

Note that there are no potential, causative, or passive forms of the copula, just as with adjectives.

The following are some examples.

In continuative conjugations, is often contracted in speech to ; for some kinds of informal speech is preferable to , or is the only possibility.

======
====Historical sound change====

# Usually not reflected in spelling
Modern pronunciation is a result of a long history of phonemic drift that can be traced back to written records of the 13th century, and possibly earlier. However, it was only in 1946 that the Japanese ministry of education modified existing kana usage to conform to the . All earlier texts used the archaic orthography, now referred to as historical kana usage. The adjoining table is a nearly exhaustive list of these spelling changes.

Note that the palatalized morae and ( and ) combine with the initial consonant (if present) yielding a palatalized syllable. The most basic example of this is modern , which historically developed as → , via the → rule.

A few sound changes are not reflected in the spelling. Firstly, merged with , both being pronounced as a long . Secondly, the particles and are still written using historical kana usage, though these are pronounced as and respectively, rather than and .

Among Japanese speakers, it is not generally understood that the historical kana spellings were, at one point, reflective of pronunciation. For example, the modern reading (for ) arose from the historical . The latter was pronounced something like by the Japanese at the time it was borrowed (compare Middle Chinese ). However, a modern reader of a classical text would still read this as , the modern pronunciation.

====Verb conjugations====
Conjugations of some verbs and adjectives differ from the prescribed formation rules because of euphonic changes. Nearly all of these euphonic changes are themselves regular. For verbs the exceptions are all in the ending of the continuative form of group when the following auxiliary starts with a -sound (i.e. , , , etc.).

* denotes impossible/ungrammatical form.

There is one other irregular change: , for which there is an exceptional continuative form: + → , + → , etc.

There are dialectical differences, which are also regular and generally occur in similar situations. For example, in Kansai dialect the + conjugations are instead changed to (u-onbin), as in instead of , as perfective of . In this example, this can combine with the preceding vowel via historical sound changes, as in ( → ) instead of standard .

====Polite forms of adjectives====
The continuative form of proper adjectives, when followed by polite forms such as or , undergoes a transformation; this may be followed by historical sound changes, yielding a one-step or two-step sound change. Note that these verbs are almost invariably conjugated to polite form, as and (note the irregular conjugation of , discussed below), and that these verbs are preceded by the &quot;continuative&quot; form – – of adjectives, rather than the terminal form – – which is used before the more everyday .

The rule is → (dropping the ), possibly also combining with the previous syllable according to the spelling reform chart, which may also undergo palatalization in the case of .

Historically there were two classes of proper Old Japanese adjectives, and (&quot; adjective&quot; means &quot;not preceded by &quot;). This distinction collapsed during the evolution of Late Middle Japanese adjectives, and both are now considered adjectives. The sound change for adjectives follows the same rule as for other adjectives, notably that the preceding vowel also changes and the preceding mora undergoes palatalization, yielding → , though historically this was considered a separate but parallel rule.

====Respectful verbs====
Respectful verbs such as , , , , , etc. behave like group 1 verbs, except in the continuative and imperative forms.

====Colloquial contractions====
In speech, common combinations of conjugation and auxiliary verbs are contracted in a fairly regular manner.

There are occasional others, such as → as in → and → – these are considered quite casual and are more common among the younger generation.

Contractions differ by dialect, but behave similarly to the standard ones given above. For example, in the Kansai dialect, → .

==Other independent words==

===Adverbs===
Adverbs in Japanese are not as tightly integrated into the morphology as in many other languages; adverbs are not an independent class of words, but the role of an adverb is played by other words. For example, every adjective in the continuative form can be used as an adverb; thus, → . The primary distinguishing characteristic of adverbs is that they cannot occur in a predicate position, just as it is in English. The following classification of adverbs is not intended to be authoritative or exhaustive.

; Verbal adverbs: verbs in the continuative form with the particle . E.g. → , used for instance as: .
; Adjectival adverbs: adjectives in the continuative form, as mentioned above. Example: → 
; Nominal adverbs: grammatical nouns that function as adverbs. Example: .
; Sound symbolism: words that mimic sounds or concepts. Examples: , , , etc.

Often, especially for sound symbolism, the particle is used. See the article on Japanese sound symbolism.

===Conjunctions and interjections===
Although called &quot;conjunctions&quot;, conjunctions in Japanese are – as their English translations show – actually a kind of adverb:

Examples of conjunctions: , , etc.

Interjections in Japanese differ little in use and translation from interjections in English:

Examples of interjections: , , , , etc.

==Ancillary words==

===Particles===
Particles in Japanese are postpositional, as they immediately follow the modified component. Both the pronunciation and spelling differs for the particles , and , and are romanized according to pronunciation rather than spelling. Only a few prominent particles are listed here.

====Topic, theme, and subject: and ====

The complex distinction between the so-called topic, , and subject, , particles has been the theme of many doctoral dissertations and scholarly disputes. The clause is well known for appearing to contain two subjects. It does not simply mean &quot;the elephant&#x27;s nose is long&quot;, as that can be translated as . Rather, a more literal translation would be &quot;(speaking of) the elephant, its nose is long&quot;; furthermore, as Japanese does not distinguish between singular and plural the way English does, it could also mean &quot;as for elephants, their noses are long&quot;.

Two major scholarly surveys of Japanese linguistics in English, clarify the distinction. To simplify matters, the referents of and in this section are called the &quot;topic&quot; and &quot;subject&quot; respectively, with the understanding that if either is absent, the grammatical topic and subject may coincide.

As an abstract and rough approximation, the difference between and is a matter of focus: gives focus to the action of the sentence, i.e., to the verb or adjective, whereas gives focus to the subject of the action. However, when first being introduced to the topic and subject markers and , most are told that the difference between the two is simpler. The topic marker, , is used to declare or to make a statement. The subject marker, , is used for new information, or asking for new information.

=====Thematic =====

The use of to introduce a new theme of discourse is directly linked to the notion of grammatical theme. Opinions differ on the structure of discourse theme, though it seems fairly uncontroversial to imagine a first-in-first-out hierarchy of themes that is threaded through the discourse. However, the usage of this understanding of themes can be limiting when speaking of their scope and depth, and the introduction of later themes may cause earlier themes to expire. In these sorts of sentences, the steadfast translation into English uses constructs like &quot;speaking of X&quot; or &quot;on the topic of X&quot;, though such translations tend to be bulky as they fail to use the thematic mechanisms of English. For lack of a comprehensive strategy, many teachers of Japanese emphasize the &quot;speaking of X&quot; pattern without sufficient warning.

A common linguistic joke shows the insufficiency of rote translation with the sentence , which per the pattern would translate as &quot;I am an eel.&quot; (or &quot;(As of) me is eel&quot;). Yet, in a restaurant this sentence can reasonably be used to say &quot;My order is eel&quot; (or &quot;I would like to order an eel&quot;), with no intended humour. This is because the sentence should be literally read, &quot;As for me, it is an eel,&quot; with &quot;it&quot; referring to the speaker&#x27;s order. The topic of the sentence is clearly not its subject.

=====Contrastive =====
Related to the role of in introducing themes is its use in contrasting the current topic and its aspects from other possible topics and their aspects. The suggestive pattern is &quot;X, but…&quot; or &quot;as for X, …&quot;.

Because of its contrastive nature, the topic cannot be undefined.

In this use, is required.

In practice, the distinction between thematic and contrastive is not that useful. There can be at most one thematic in a sentence, and it has to be the first if one exists, and the remaining s are contrastive. The following sentence illustrates the difference;

The first interpretation is the thematic , treating as the theme of the predicate . That is, if the speaker knows A, B, ..., Z, then none of the people who came were A, B, ..., Z. The second interpretation is the contrastive . If the likely attendees were A, B, ..., Z, and of them the speaker knows P, Q and R, then the sentence says that P, Q and R did not come. The sentence says nothing about A&#x27;, B&#x27;, ..., Z&#x27;, all of whom the speaker knows, but none of whom were likely to come. In practice, the first interpretation is the likely one.

=====Exhaustive =====
Unlike , the subject particle nominates its referent as the sole satisfier of the predicate. This distinction is famously illustrated by the following pair of sentences:

The distinction between each example sentence may be made easier to understand if thought of in terms of the question each statement could answer. The first example sentence could answer the question:

Whereas the second example sentence could answer the question:

Similarly, in a restaurant, if asked by the waitstaff who has ordered the eels, the customer who ordered it could say:

=====Objective =====
For certain verbs, is typically used instead of to mark what would be the direct object in English:

There are various common expressions that use verbs in English, often transitive verbs, where the action happens to a specific object: &quot;to be able to do something&quot;, &quot;to want something&quot;, &quot;to like something&quot;, &quot;to dislike something&quot;. These same ideas are expressed in Japanese using adjectives and intransitive verbs that describe a subject, instead of actions that happen to an object: , , , . The equivalent of the English subject is instead the topic in Japanese and thus marked by , reflecting the topic-prominent nature of Japanese grammar.

Since these constructions in English describe an object, whereas the Japanese equivalents describe a subject marked with , some sources call this usage of the &quot;objective &quot;ga&quot;&quot;. Strictly speaking, this label may be misleading, as there is no object in the Japanese constructions.

As an example, the Japanese verb is often glossed as transitive English verb &quot;to understand&quot;. However, &quot;wakaru&quot; is an intransitive verb that describes a subject, so a more literal gloss would be &quot;to be understandable&quot;.

====Objects, locatives, instrumentals: , , , ====
The direct object of transitive verbs is indicated by the object particle .

This particle can also mean &quot;through&quot; or &quot;along&quot; or &quot;out of&quot; when used with motion verbs:

The general instrumental particle is , which can be translated as &quot;using&quot; or &quot;by&quot;:

This particle also has other uses: &quot;at&quot; (temporary location):

&quot;In&quot;:

&quot;With&quot; or &quot;in (the span of)&quot;:

The general locative particle is .

In this function it is interchangeable with . However, has additional uses: &quot;at (prolonged)&quot;:

&quot;On&quot;:

&quot;In (some year)&quot;, &quot;at (some point in time)&quot;:

====Quantity and extents: , , , , , ====
To conjoin nouns, と &quot;to&quot; is used.

The additive particle can be used to conjoin larger nominals and clauses.


For an incomplete list of conjuncts, is used.
When only one of the conjuncts is necessary, the disjunctive particle is used.
Quantities are listed between and .
This pair can also be used to indicate time or space.
: 
: You see, I have classes between 9 a.m. and 11 a.m.

Because indicates starting point or origin, it has a related use as &quot;because&quot;, analogously to English &quot;&quot; (in the sense of both &quot;from&quot; and &quot;because&quot;):
The particle and a related particle are used to indicate lowest extents: prices, business hours, etc.
 is also used in the sense of &quot;than&quot;.
====Coordinating: , , ====
The particle is used to set off quotations.

It is also used to indicate a manner of similarity, &quot;as if&quot;, &quot;like&quot; or &quot;the way&quot;.

In a related conditional use, it functions like &quot;after/when&quot;, or &quot;upon&quot;.

Finally it is used with verbs like or .

This last use is also a function of the particle , but indicates reciprocation which does not.
: 
: John and Mary are in love.
: 
: John loves Mary (but Mary might not love John back).

Finally, the particle is used in a hortative or vocative sense.

====Final: , , and related====
The sentence-final particle turns a declarative sentence into a question.

Other sentence-final particles add emotional or emphatic impact to the sentence. The particle softens a declarative sentence, similar to English &quot;you know?&quot;, &quot;eh?&quot;, &quot;I tell you!&quot;, &quot;isn&#x27;t it?&quot;, &quot;aren&#x27;t you?&quot;, etc.

A final is used in order to soften insistence, warning or command, which would sound very strong without any final particles.

There are many such emphatic particles; some examples: and usually used by males; a less formal form of ; used like by females (and males in the Kansai region), etc. They are essentially limited to speech or transcribed dialogue.

====Compound particles====
Compound particles are formed with at least one particle together with other words, including other particles. The commonly seen forms are:
* particle + verb (term. or cont. or form)
* particle + noun + particle
* noun + particle

Other structures are rarer, though possible. A few examples:



===Auxiliary verbs===
All auxiliary verbs attach to a verbal or adjectival stem form and conjugate as verbs. In modern Japanese there are two distinct classes of auxiliary verbs:
; : are usually just called &quot;verb endings&quot; or &quot;conjugated forms&quot;. These auxiliaries do not function as independent verbs.
; : are normal verbs that lose their independent meaning when used as auxiliaries.

In classical Japanese, which was more heavily agglutinating than modern Japanese, the category of &quot;auxiliary verb&quot; included every verbal ending after the stem form, and most of these endings were themselves inflected. In modern Japanese, however, some of them have stopped being productive. The prime example is the classical auxiliary , whose modern forms and are no longer viewed as inflections of the same suffix, and can take no further affixes.
# has stem forms: irrealis and , continuative , terminal , attributive , hypothetical , imperative .
# in potential usage is sometimes shortened to (group 2); thus instead of . However, it is considered non-standard.
# is sometimes shortened to (group 1), but this usage is somewhat literary.

Much of the agglutinative flavour of Japanese stems from helper auxiliaries, however. The following table contains a small selection of many such auxiliary verbs.
* Note: is the only modern verb of &quot;shimo nidan&quot; type (and it is different from the &quot;shimo nidan&quot; type of classical Japanese), with conjugations: irrealis , continuative , terminal or , attributive , hypothetical , imperative or .

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* (hbk); (pbk).

==Further reading==
* Bloch, Bernard. (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese I: Inflection. &quot;Journal of the American Oriental Society&quot;, &quot;66&quot;, 97–109.
* Bloch, Bernard. (1946). Studies in colloquial Japanese II: Syntax. &quot;Language&quot;, &quot;22&quot;, 200–248.
* Chafe, William L. (1976). Giveness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics, and point of view. In C. Li (Ed.), &quot;Subject and topic&quot; (pp. 25–56). New York: Academic Press. .
* Jorden, Eleanor Harz, Noda, Mari. (1987). &quot;&quot;
* Katsuki-Pestemer, Noriko. (2009): A Grammar of Classical Japanese. München: LINCOM. .
* Kiyose, Gisaburo N. (1995). &quot;Japanese Grammar: A New Approach&quot;. Kyoto: Kyoto University Press. .
* Kuno, Susumu. (1976). Subject, theme, and the speaker&#x27;s empathy: A re-examination of relativization phenomena. In Charles N. Li (Ed.), &quot;Subject and topic&quot; (pp. 417–444). New York: Academic Press. .
* Makino, Seiichi &amp; Tsutsui, Michio. (1986). &quot;A dictionary of basic Japanese grammar&quot;. Japan Times. 
* Makino, Seiichi &amp; Tsutsui, Michio. (1995). &quot;A dictionary of intermediate Japanese grammar&quot;. Japan Times. 
* Martin, Samuel E. (1975). &quot;A reference grammar of Japanese&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press. .
* McClain, Yoko Matsuoka. (1981). &quot;Handbook of modern Japanese grammar: 口語日本文法便覧 [Kōgo Nihon bunpō benran]&quot;. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press. ; .
* Mizutani, Osamu; &amp; Mizutani, Nobuko. (1987). &quot;How to be polite in Japanese: 日本語の敬語 [Nihongo no keigo]&quot;. Tokyo: Japan Times. .
* Shibamoto, Janet S. (1985). &quot;Japanese women&#x27;s language&quot;. New York: Academic Press. . Graduate Level
* Tsujimura, Natsuko. (1996). &quot;An introduction to Japanese linguistics&quot;. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers. (hbk); (pbk). Upper Level Textbooks
* Tsujimura, Natsuko. (Ed.) (1999). &quot;The handbook of Japanese linguistics&quot;. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. . Readings/Anthologies

==External links==

* FAQ from the Usenet newsgroup codice_1
* An introduction to Japanese - Syntax, Grammar &amp; Language, online version by Michiel Kamermans
* Tae Kim&#x27;s Guide to Learning Japanese  – Japanese online grammar guide
* Shoko Hamano, &quot;Visualizing Japanese Grammar&quot; – animated Japanese grammar lessons from George Washington University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="0" end="8" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q171263" start="15" end="28" title="Agglutinative language" label="agglutinative"/>
<link wikidata="Q48612" start="30" end="39" title="Synthetic language" label="synthetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41" end="45" title="Mora (linguistics)#Japanese" label="mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q512366" start="73" end="85" title="phonotactics" label="phonotactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q932126" start="89" end="93" title="Monophthong" label="pure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="117" end="122" title="Vowel length#Phonemic vowel length" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="127" end="136" title="Gemination" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952542" start="173" end="185" title="Japanese pitch accent" label="pitch-accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="210" end="229" title="subject–object–verb" label="subject–object–verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480213" start="235" end="244" title="Japanese particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="314" end="327" title="topic–comment" label="topic–comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q94427" start="357" end="367" title="head-final" label="head-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339103" start="407" end="421" title="branching (linguistics)" label="left-branching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451185" start="423" end="446" title="Sentence-final particle" label="Sentence-final particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="574" end="582" title="Article (grammar)" label="articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q656627" start="594" end="604" title="Japanese verb conjugation" label="conjugated"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="620" end="625" title="Grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="630" end="635" title="Voice (grammar)" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="645" end="651" title="Grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824482" start="653" end="672" title="Japanese adjectives" label="Japanese adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q11013002" start="727" end="737" title="Honorific speech in Japanese" label="honorifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="1137" end="1160" title="Joseph Harold Greenberg" label="Joseph Harold Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="1551" end="1561" title="Preposition and postposition" label="adposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="3778" end="3788" title="word class" label="word class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721259" start="4166" end="4180" title="defective verb" label="defective verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442568" start="4243" end="4253" title="light verb" label="light verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354303" start="4491" end="4510" title="Eleanor Harz Jorden" label="Eleanor Harz Jorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="4620" end="4629" title="Predicate (grammar)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="4792" end="4801" title="inflection" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="4859" end="4871" title="closed class" label="closed class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="5026" end="5042" title="periphrasis" label="periphrastically"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="5110" end="5133" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="5166" end="5178" title="Open class (linguistics)" label="open classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="5575" end="5581" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753073" start="5592" end="5604" title="Basque verbs" label="Basque verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q99274778" start="5814" end="5834" title="East Asian languages" label="East Asian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="5938" end="5944" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302206" start="6428" end="6439" title="Rebracketing" label="rebracketed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192464" start="7008" end="7020" title="Rendaku" label="sound change"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="7333" end="7344" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188078" start="7523" end="7533" title="declension" label="declension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="7734" end="7746" title="stative verb" label="stative verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222379" start="7790" end="7807" title="Sino-Japanese vocabulary" label="Chinese loanwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192464" start="8152" end="8159" title="rendaku" label="rendaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824482" start="8926" end="8936" title="taru adjective" label="adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824482" start="8941" end="8951" title="naru adjective" label="adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736700" start="9036" end="9048" title="Old Japanese" label="Old Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q182695" start="9151" end="9168" title="Late Old Japanese" label="Late Old Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531390" start="9375" end="9388" title="Shizuki Tadao" label="Shizuki Tadao"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="9492" end="9495" title="Edo period" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="9506" end="9511" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="10359" end="10371" title="stative verb" label="stative verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="11203" end="11212" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="11213" end="11223" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182695" start="11550" end="11565" title="Early Middle Japanese" label="Middle Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480213" start="11671" end="11680" title="Japanese particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826351" start="12129" end="12137" title="referent" label="referent"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="12864" end="12871" title="Subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982067" start="12875" end="12891" title="null-subject language" label="commonly omitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="13363" end="13370" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="13385" end="13391" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="13520" end="13524" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13562" end="13569" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="13742" end="13748" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="13752" end="13766" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="13772" end="13781" title="Grammatical particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="13855" end="13863" title="Romanization" label="romanize"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="14156" end="14170" title="phonology" label="phonologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="14176" end="14190" title="Preposition and postposition" label="postpositional"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="14201" end="14250" title="Clitic" label="merge with the structural word that precedes them"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952542" start="14302" end="14307" title="Japanese pitch accent" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="14777" end="14790" title="lexical word" label="lexical words"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120608" start="14850" end="14864" title="function word" label="function words"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="17290" end="17300" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354303" start="17642" end="17656" title="Eleanor Jorden" label="Eleanor Jorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="17811" end="17829" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="17831" end="17837" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="17842" end="17849" title="article (grammar)" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="17957" end="17961" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="17967" end="17980" title="inflection" label="noninflecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="18568" end="18578" title="suppletion" label="suppletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="18714" end="18722" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="18735" end="18740" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520033" start="18838" end="18843" title="count noun" label="count"/>
<link wikidata="Q489168" start="18848" end="18857" title="mass noun" label="mass noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450795" start="18889" end="18899" title="collective number" label="collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="18911" end="18924" title="reduplication" label="reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192464" start="18981" end="18988" title="rendaku" label="rendaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634309" start="19032" end="19042" title="productivity (linguistics)" label="productive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="19123" end="19129" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="19321" end="19324" title="Edo (Tokyo)" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="20666" end="20682" title="Grammatical case" label="Grammatical case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480213" start="20710" end="20719" title="Japanese particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="20900" end="20914" title="Topic and comment" label="sentence topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="21002" end="21012" title="Nominative case" label="Nominative"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21036" end="21041" title="Topic marker#Japanese: は" label="topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="21044" end="21052" title="Genitive case" label="Genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="21058" end="21064" title="Dative case" label="Dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="21070" end="21080" title="Accusative case" label="Accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q260425" start="21086" end="21092" title="Lative case" label="Lative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156986" start="21166" end="21174" title="Ablative case" label="Ablative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="21245" end="21257" title="Instrumental case" label="Instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="21258" end="21266" title="Locative case" label="Locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="21563" end="21575" title="closed-class word" label="closed-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q164573" start="22181" end="22188" title="subject (grammar)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q468801" start="22666" end="22682" title="personal pronoun" label="personal pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q953129" start="23580" end="23597" title="reflexive pronoun" label="reflexive pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412952" start="23729" end="23736" title="Valency (linguistics)" label="valency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="23903" end="23920" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="23926" end="23941" title="transitive verb" label="transitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q282301" start="24164" end="24177" title="Demonstrative" label="Demonstrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q156751" start="24831" end="24840" title="Anaphora (linguistics)" label="anaphoric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25284" end="25292" title="Anatomical terms of location#Proximal and distal" label="proximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062216" start="26163" end="26187" title="serial verb construction" label="serial verb construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179080" start="26427" end="26436" title="predicate (grammar)" label="predicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402059" start="26635" end="26650" title="relative clause" label="relative clause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26913" end="26939" title="#Adjectival verbs and nouns" label="Adjectival verbs and nouns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27416" end="27425" title="Japanese grammar#Particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="27529" end="27540" title="Grammatical conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656627" start="28217" end="28221" title="te form of Japanese verb" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29024" end="29040" title="Japanese grammar#Verbal adverbs" label="§ Verbal adverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158433" start="29314" end="29346" title="Japanese godan and ichidan verbs" label="Japanese godan and ichidan verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q362703" start="29864" end="29872" title="irrealis" label="irrealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q240357" start="29947" end="29953" title="gojūon" label="gojūon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240357" start="30227" end="30233" title="gojūon" label="gojūon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240357" start="30324" end="30330" title="gojūon" label="gojūon"/>
<link wikidata="Q656627" start="32630" end="32655" title="Japanese verb conjugation" label="Japanese verb conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32857" end="32873" title="#Euphonic changes (音便, onbin)" label="Euphonic changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q656627" start="32898" end="32923" title="Japanese verb conjugation" label="Japanese verb conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="33579" end="33594" title="transitive verb" label="transitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="33628" end="33645" title="intransitive verb" label="intransitive verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="34160" end="34172" title="stative verb" label="stative verb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34545" end="34565" title="Adjective#Attributive adjective" label="attributive position"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34620" end="34640" title="Adjective#Predicative adjective" label="predicative position"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551966" start="35235" end="35245" title="set phrase" label="set phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="36119" end="36125" title="Copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="36800" end="36804" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142552" start="36898" end="36919" title="historical kana usage" label="historical kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="37774" end="37788" title="Middle Chinese" label="Middle Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191393" start="38512" end="38526" title="Kansai dialect" label="Kansai dialect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38570" end="38577" title="u-onbin" label="u-onbin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39511" end="39534" title="Old Japanese#Adjectives" label="Old Japanese adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39652" end="39683" title="Late Middle Japanese#Adjectives" label="Late Middle Japanese adjectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191393" start="40514" end="40528" title="Kansai dialect" label="Kansai dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q960086" start="41512" end="41536" title="Japanese sound symbolism" label="Japanese sound symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="47432" end="47437" title="Topic–comment" label="topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q846615" start="47486" end="47501" title="Topic-prominent language" label="topic-prominent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451185" start="50178" end="50201" title="sentence-final particle" label="sentence-final particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="50795" end="50808" title="Kansai region" label="Kansai region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51278" end="51287" title="#Stem forms" label="stem form"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354303" start="53320" end="53340" title="Eleanor Harz Jorden" label="Jorden, Eleanor Harz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89588" wikidata="Q94613" url="?curid=89588" title="Interstate 68">
<text>Interstate 68 (I-68) is a Interstate Highway in the U.S. states of West Virginia and Maryland, connecting I-79 in Morgantown, West Virginia, east to I-70 in Hancock, Maryland. I-68 is also Corridor E of the Appalachian Development Highway System (ADHS). From 1965 until the freeway&#x27;s construction was completed in 1991, it was designated as U.S. Route 48 (US 48). In Maryland, the highway is known as the National Freeway, an homage to the historic National Road, which I-68 parallels between Keysers Ridge and Hancock. The freeway mainly spans rural areas and crosses numerous mountain ridges along its route. A road cut at Sideling Hill exposed geological features of the mountain and has become a tourist attraction.

US 219 and US 220 overlap I-68 in Garrett County and Cumberland, respectively, and US 40 overlaps with the freeway from Keysers Ridge to the eastern end of the freeway at Hancock.

The construction of I-68 began in 1965 and continued for over 25 years, with completion on August 2, 1991. While the road was under construction, it was predicted that economic conditions would improve along the corridor for the five counties connected by I-68: Allegany, Garrett, and Washington in Maryland and Preston and Monongalia in West Virginia. The two largest cities connected by the highway are Morgantown, West Virginia, and Cumberland, Maryland. Although the freeway serves no major metropolitan areas, it provides a major transportation route in western Maryland and northern West Virginia and also provides an alternative to the Pennsylvania Turnpike for westbound traffic from Washington DC and Baltimore.

Various West Virginia officials have proposed extending the highway westward to the Ohio River valley, ending in either Moundsville, or Wheeling, West Virginia. An extension to Moundsville was approved by federal officials at one point but shelved due to funding problems.

==History==
===Predecessors===
Prior to the construction of the freeway from Morgantown to Hancock, several different routes carried traffic across the region. West Virginia Route 73 (WV 73) extended from Bridgeport to Bruceton Mills, serving regions now served by I-79 (Bridgeport to Morgantown) and I-68 (Morgantown to Bruceton Mills). After the I-68 freeway, then known as US 48, was completed in West Virginia, the WV 73 designation was removed. Portions of the road still exist as County Route 73 (CR 73), CR 73/73, and CR 857. Between I-68&#x27;s exit 10 at Cheat Lake and exit 15 at Coopers Rock, I-68 was largely built directly over old WV 73&#x27;s roadbed.

At Bruceton Mills, WV 73 ended at WV 26, which, from there, runs northeast into Pennsylvania, becoming Pennsylvania Route 281 at the state line and meeting US 40 north of the border. From there, eastbound traffic would follow US 40 into Maryland. I-68 now parallels US 40 through western Maryland.

US 40 followed the route of the National Road through Pennsylvania and Maryland. The National Road was the first federally funded road built in the U.S., authorized by Congress in 1806. Construction lasted from 1811 to 1837, establishing a road that extended from Cumberland to Vandalia, Illinois. Upon the establishment of the U.S. Numbered Highway System in 1926, the route of the National Road became part of US 40.

===Cumberland Thruway===
In the early 1960s, as the Interstate Highway System was being built throughout the U.S., east–west travel through western Maryland was difficult, as US 40, the predecessor to I-68, was a two-lane country road with steep grades and hairpin turns. In Cumberland, the traffic situation was particularly problematic, as the usage of US 40 exceeded the capacity of the city&#x27;s narrow streets. Traffic following US 40 through Cumberland entered through the Cumberland Narrows and followed Henderson Avenue to Baltimore Avenue. After the construction of I-68, this route through Cumberland became US 40 Alternate (US 40 Alt.).

Construction began on one of the first sections of what would become I-68, the Cumberland Thruway, on June 10, 1965. This portion of the highway, which consists of a mile-long () elevated bridge, was completed and opened to the public on December 5, 1966. The elevated highway connected Lee Street in west Cumberland to Maryland Avenue in east Cumberland, providing a quicker path for motorists traveling through the town on US 40 and US 220. The Cumberland Thruway was extended to US 220 and then to Vocke Road (Maryland Route 658, or MD 658) by 1970. Problems quickly emerged with the highway, especially near an area called &quot;Moose Curve&quot;. At Moose Curve, the road curves sharply at the bottom of Haystack Mountain, and traffic accidents are common.

===Corridor E===

In 1965, the Appalachian Development Act was passed, authorizing the establishment of the ADHS, which was meant to provide access to areas throughout the Appalachian Mountains that were not previously served by the Interstate Highway System. A set of corridors was defined, comprising of highways from New York to Mississippi. Corridor E in this system was defined to have endpoints at I-79 in Morgantown, West Virginia, and I-70 in Hancock, Maryland. At the time, there were no freeways along the corridor, though construction on the Cumberland Thruway began that year. It was this corridor that would eventually become I-68.

The construction of Corridor E, which was also designated as US 48, took over 20 years and hundreds of millions of dollars to complete. The cost of completing the freeway in West Virginia has been estimated at $113 million (equivalent to $ in ). The cost of building I-68 from Cumberland to the West Virginia state line came to $126 million (equivalent to $ in ); the portion between Cumberland and Sideling Hill cost $182 million (equivalent to $ in ); and the section at Sideling Hill cost $44 million (equivalent to $ in ).

Much of the work in building the freeway was completed during the 1970s, with US 48 opened from Vocke Road in LaVale to MD 36 in Frostburg on October 12, 1973, and to MD 546 on November 1, 1974. On November 15, 1975, the West Virginia portion and a portion from the West Virginia state line to Keysers Ridge in Maryland opened, followed by the remainder of the freeway in Garrett County on August 13, 1976.

In the 1980s, the focus of construction shifted to the east of Cumberland, where a section of the road still had not been completed. The first corridor for the construction to be approved by the Maryland State Highway Administration (MDSHA) ran south of US 40. This corridor would have bypassed towns in eastern Allegany County, such as Flintstone, leaving them without access to the freeway, and would have passed directly through Green Ridge State Forest, the largest state forest in Maryland. This proposed corridor provoked strong opposition, largely due to the environmental damage that would be caused by the road construction in Green Ridge State Forest. Environmental groups sued MDSHA in order to halt the planned construction, but the court ruled in favor of the state highway administration. In 1984, however, MDSHA reversed its earlier decision and chose an alignment that closely paralleled US 40, passing through Flintstone and to the north of Green Ridge State Forest. Construction on the final section of I-68 began May 25, 1987, and was completed on August 2, 1991.

===Designation as I-68===

Though the National Freeway was designated as US 48, as the completion of the freeway neared, the possibility of the freeway being designated as an Interstate Highway came up. In the 1980s, the project to improve US 50 between Washington DC and Annapolis to Interstate Highway standards had been assigned the designation of I-68. MDSHA, however, later concluded that adding additional route shields to the US 50 freeway would not be helpful to drivers since about half the freeway already had two route designations (US 50 and US 301) and drivers on the freeway were already familiar with the US 50 designation. This made the designation to be applied to that freeway more flexible, and so, in 1989, the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), the organization composed of the various state departments of transportation that decides route numbering in the U.S., approved MDSHA&#x27;s request to renumber the US 50 freeway from I-68 to I-595. That same year, AASHTO approved changing US 48&#x27;s designation to I-68. This change took effect upon the completion of the last section of the National Freeway on August 2, 1991.

With the completion of I-68 and the change in its route number, the US 48 designation was removed. In 2002, AASHTO approved the establishment of a new US 48, this time for the Corridor H highway from Weston, West Virginia, to Strasburg, Virginia. This marks the third time that the US 48 number has been assigned to a highway, the first use being for a highway in California that existed in the 1920s.

===Incidents===
Numerous accidents and incidents have occurred on I-68. On June 1, 1991, a gasoline tanker descending into downtown Cumberland from the east attempted to exit the freeway at exit 43D, Maryland Avenue. The tanker went out of control and overturned as the driver tried to go around the sharp turn at the exit. Gasoline began to leak from the damaged tanker, forcing the evacuation of a three-block area of Cumberland. Approximately 30 minutes later, the tanker exploded, setting eight houses on fire. The fire caused an estimated $250,000 in damages (equivalent to $ in ) and prompted MDSHA to place signs prohibiting hazardous materials trucks from exiting at the Maryland Avenue exit.

On May 23, 2003, poor visibility due to fog was a major contributing factor to an 85-vehicle pileup on I-68 on Savage Mountain west of Frostburg. Two people were killed and nearly 100 people were injured. Because of the extent of the wreckage on the road, I-68 remained blocked for 24 hours while the wreckage was cleared. In the aftermath of the pileup, the question of how to deal with fog in the future was discussed. Though the cost of a fog warning system can be considerable, MDSHA installed such a system in 2005 at a cost of $230,000 (equivalent to $ in ). The system alerts drivers when visibility drops below .

===Effect on surrounding region===

One of the arguments in favor of the construction of I-68 was that the freeway would improve the poor economic conditions in western Maryland. The economy of the surrounding area has improved since the construction of the freeway, especially in Garrett County, where the freeway opened up the county to tourism from Washington DC and Baltimore. Correspondingly, Garrett County saw a sharp increase in population and employment during and after the construction of the road, with full- and part-time employment increasing from 8,868 in 1976 to 15,334 in 1991. Economic difficulties, however, remain in Allegany and Garrett counties. There were concerns over loss of customers to businesses that have been cut off from the main highway due to the construction of the new alignment in the 1980s, leading to protests when then-Governor Harry Hughes visited the Sideling Hill road cut when it was opened.

===Proposed extension===
In the 1990s, there was discussion about a future westward extension to I-68. Such an extension would connect the western terminus of I-68 in Morgantown to WV 2 in Moundsville. A 1989 proposal had suggested a toll road be built along this corridor. In 2003, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) approved the extension, paving the way for federal funding and for the road to become part of the National Highway System on completion. The project, however, ran into problems due to lack of funds, and, in 2008, West Virginia Governor Joe Manchin suggested dropping the project altogether, making construction of a westward extension of I-68 unlikely in the near future.

In 2014, Marshall County officials brought the extension of I-68 up again as a way for oil companies to have easier access to drill into the area, likely by fracking. Much like the second leg of PA 576 (Southern Beltway) in the Pittsburgh area, an extension of I-68 is being spurred in response to the Marcellus natural gas trend. If the extension were to be built, it would also include a widening of WV 2 to four lanes and would cost an estimated $5 million per mile (/km). It is expected that the project would be divided into two legs, first from Morgantown to Cameron and then Cameron to Moundsville.

Others have proposed extending I-68 to Wheeling, West Virginia, and connecting it with I-470.

==Route description==
|WV
|-
|MD
|-
|Total
|}

I-68 spans , connecting I-79 in Morgantown, West Virginia, to I-70 in Hancock, Maryland, across the Appalachian Mountains. The control cities—the cities officially chosen to be the destinations shown on guide signs—for I-68 are Morgantown, Cumberland, and Hancock. I-68 is the main route connecting Western Maryland to the rest of Maryland. I-68 is also advertised to drivers on I-70 and I-270 as an &quot;alternate route to Ohio and points west&quot; by MDSHA.

===West Virginia===

I-68 begins at exit 148 on I-79 near Morgantown and runs eastward, meeting with US 119 east of its terminus at I-79. I-68 turns northeastward, curving around Morgantown, with four interchanges in the Morgantown area—I-79, US 119, WV 7, and CR 857 (Cheat Road). Leaving the Morgantown area, I-68 again runs eastward, intersecting WV 43, which provides access to Cheat Lake and Uniontown, Pennsylvania. Near this interchange, I-68 passes over Cheat Lake and climbs a steep ascent out of Cheat Canyon.

Entering Preston County, the route intersect CR 73/12, which provides access to Coopers Rock State Forest. In contrast to the Morgantown area, the portion of Preston County that I-68 crosses is more rural, with the only town along the route being Bruceton Mills. In Bruceton Mills, I-68 meets WV 26. I-68 meets CR 5 (Hazelton Road) at its last exit before entering Garrett County, Maryland.

The region of West Virginia through which the freeway passes is rural and mountainous. There are several sections that have steep grades, especially near the Cheat River Canyon, where there is a truck escape ramp.

The peak traffic density in terms of annual average daily traffic (AADT) on I-68 in West Virginia is 32,900 vehicles per day at the interchange with I-79 in Morgantown. The traffic gradually decreases further eastward, reaching a low point at 14,600 vehicles per day at the Hazelton exit.

===Maryland===

After entering Garrett County, I-68 continues its run through rural areas, crossing the northern part of the county. The terrain through this area consists of ridges that extend from southwest to northeast, with I-68 crossing the ridges through its east–west run. The first exit in Maryland is at MD 42 in Friendsville. I-68 ascends Keysers Ridge, where it meets US 40 and US 219, both of which join the highway at Keysers Ridge. The roadway that used to be the surface alignment of US 40 parallels I-68 to Cumberland and is now designated as US 40 Alt. I-68 crosses Negro Mountain, which was the highest point along the historic National Road that the freeway parallels east of Keysers Ridge. This is the source of the name of the freeway in Maryland: the National Freeway. east of Grantsville, US 219 leaves the National Freeway to run northward toward Meyersdale, Pennsylvania, while I-68 continues eastward, crossing the Eastern Continental Divide and Savage Mountain before entering Allegany County.

The section of I-68 west of Dans Mountain in Allegany County is located in the Allegheny Mountains, characterized in Garrett County by a series of uphill and downhill stretches along the freeway, each corresponding to a ridge that the freeway crosses. In Allegany County, the freeway crosses the Allegheny Front, where, from Savage Mountain to LaVale, the highway drops in elevation by in a distance of .
The traffic density on I-68 in Garrett County is rather sparse compared to that of Allegany County. At the Maryland–West Virginia state line, there is an AADT of 11,581 vehicles per day. This density increases to its highest point in Garrett County at exit 22, where US 219 leaves I-68, at 19,551. At the Allegany County line, the traffic density decreases slightly to 18,408. In Allegany County, the vehicle count increases to 28,861 in LaVale and to the freeway&#x27;s peak of 46,191 at the first US 220 interchange (exit 42) in Cumberland. East of Cumberland, the vehicle count decreases to 16,551 at Martins Mountain and stays nearly constant to the eastern terminus of I-68 in Hancock.

After entering Allegany County, I-68 bypasses Frostburg to the south, with two exits, one to Midlothian Road (unsigned MD 736) and one to MD 36. Near the MD 36 exit is God&#x27;s Ark of Safety church, which is known for its attempt to build a replica of Noah&#x27;s Ark. This replica, which currently consists of a steel frame, can be seen from I-68.

East of Frostburg, I-68 crosses a bridge above Spruce Hollow near Clarysville, passing over MD 55, which runs along the bottom of the valley. The freeway runs along the hillside above US 40 Alt. in the valley formed by Braddock Run. Entering LaVale, I-68 has exits to US 40 Alt. and MD 658 (signed southbound as US 220 Truck). I-68 ascends Haystack Mountain, entering the city of Cumberland. This is the most congested section of the highway in Maryland. The speed limit on the highway drops from in LaVale to until the US 220 exit and to in downtown Cumberland. This drop in the speed limit is due to several factors, including heavy congestion, closely spaced interchanges, and a sharp curve in the road, known locally as &quot;Moose Curve&quot;, located at the bottom of Haystack Mountain. This section of the highway was originally built in the 1960s as the Cumberland Thruway, a bypass to the original path of US 40 through Cumberland.
Until 2008, signs at exit 43A in downtown Cumberland labeled the exit as providing access to WV 28 Alt. Because of this, many truckers used this exit to get to WV 28. This created problems on WV 28 Alt. in Ridgeley, West Virginia, as trucks became stuck under a low railroad overpass, blocking traffic through Ridgeley. To reduce this problem, MDSHA removed references to WV 28 Alt. from guide signs for exit 43A and placed warning signs in Cumberland and on I-68 approaching Cumberland advising truckers to instead use exit 43B to MD 51, which allows them to connect to WV 28 via Virginia Avenue, bypassing the low overpass in Ridgeley.
At exit 44 in east Cumberland, US 40 Alt. meets the freeway and ends, and, at exit 46, US 220 leaves I-68 and runs northward toward Bedford, Pennsylvania. I-68 continues across northeastern Allegany County, passing Rocky Gap State Park near exit 50. In northeastern Allegany County, the former US 40 bypassed by I-68 is designated as MD 144, with several exits from I-68 along the route. I-68 crosses several mountain ridges along this section of the highway, including Martins Mountain, Town Hill, and Green Ridge, and the highway passes through Green Ridge State Forest. East of Green Ridge State Forest, MD 144 ends at US 40 Scenic, another former section of US 40.

I-68 crosses into Washington County at Sideling Hill Creek and ascends Sideling Hill. The road cut that was built into Sideling Hill for I-68 can be seen for several miles in each direction and has become a tourist attraction as a result of the geologic structure exposed by the road cut.

On the east side of Sideling Hill, I-68 again interchanges with US 40 Scenic, at its eastern terminus at Woodmont Road. Here, US 40 Scenic ends at a section of MD 144 separate from the section further west. east of this interchange, I-68 ends at I-70 and US 522 in the town of Hancock.

==Exit list==















==See also==
* 

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Interstate Guide – I-68
* I-68 in West Virginia at AARoads.com
* I-68 in Maryland at AARoads.com
* I-68 at MDRoads.com
* West Virginia Roads - I-68
* Maryland Roads - I-68
* Roads to the Future - National Freeway (I-68)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="0" end="13" title="Interstate 68" label="Interstate 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="15" end="19" title="Interstate 68" label="I-68"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="26" end="44" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="67" end="80" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="85" end="93" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94868" start="106" end="110" title="Interstate 79" label="I-79"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="114" end="139" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94632" start="149" end="153" title="Interstate 70" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="157" end="174" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="189" end="199" title="Interstate 68" label="Corridor E"/>
<link wikidata="Q800055" start="207" end="245" title="Appalachian Development Highway System" label="Appalachian Development Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="346" end="359" title="Interstate 68" label="U.S. Route 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="361" end="366" title="Interstate 68" label="US 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q94613" start="410" end="426" title="Interstate 68" label="National Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072546" start="454" end="467" title="National Road" label="National Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398403" start="498" end="511" title="Keysers Ridge, Maryland" label="Keysers Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483123" start="630" end="643" title="Sideling Hill" label="Sideling Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120316" start="726" end="732" title="U.S. Route 219" label="US 219"/>
<link wikidata="Q935367" start="737" end="743" title="U.S. Route 220" label="US 220"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="744" end="751" title="concurrency (road)" label="overlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="760" end="774" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="779" end="789" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q409496" start="809" end="814" title="U.S. Route 40" label="US 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q156257" start="1169" end="1177" title="Allegany County, Maryland" label="Allegany"/>
<link wikidata="Q511164" start="1192" end="1202" title="Washington County, Maryland" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q495157" start="1219" end="1226" title="Preston County, West Virginia" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q488649" start="1231" end="1241" title="Monongalia County, West Virginia" label="Monongalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623935" start="1550" end="1571" title="Pennsylvania Turnpike" label="Pennsylvania Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1599" end="1612" title="Washington DC" label="Washington DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="1617" end="1626" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="1713" end="1723" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361821" start="1749" end="1760" title="Moundsville, West Virginia" label="Moundsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="1765" end="1773" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2063" end="2085" title="West Virginia Route 73" label="West Virginia Route 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052960" start="2108" end="2118" title="Bridgeport, West Virginia" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844262" start="2122" end="2136" title="Bruceton Mills, West Virginia" label="Bruceton Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314928" start="2467" end="2477" title="Cheat Lake, West Virginia" label="Cheat Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167950" start="2493" end="2505" title="Coopers Rock State Forest" label="Coopers Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508421" start="2605" end="2610" title="West Virginia Route 26" label="WV 26"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2674" end="2696" title="Pennsylvania Route 281" label="Pennsylvania Route 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q409496" start="2727" end="2732" title="U.S. Route 40" label="US 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072546" start="2902" end="2915" title="National Road" label="National Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3038" end="3046" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q577674" start="3148" end="3166" title="Vandalia, Illinois" label="Vandalia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="3198" end="3226" title="U.S. Numbered Highway System" label="U.S. Numbered Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="3342" end="3367" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="3565" end="3575" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193930" start="3771" end="3789" title="Cumberland Narrows" label="Cumberland Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q453164" start="3910" end="3925" title="U.S. Route 40 Alternate (Keysers Ridge–Cumberland, Maryland)" label="US 40 Alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q935367" start="4376" end="4382" title="U.S. Route 220" label="US 220"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4454" end="4472" title="Maryland Route 658" label="Maryland Route 658"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687251" start="4650" end="4667" title="Haystack Mountain (Maryland)" label="Haystack Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q800055" start="4812" end="4816" title="Appalachian Development Highway System" label="ADHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="4876" end="4897" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5024" end="5032" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="5036" end="5047" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q94868" start="5108" end="5112" title="Interstate 79" label="I-79"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="5116" end="5141" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94632" start="5147" end="5151" title="Interstate 70" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="5155" end="5172" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483123" start="5749" end="5762" title="Sideling Hill" label="Sideling Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q453037" start="5998" end="6003" title="Maryland Route 36" label="MD 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q374219" start="6007" end="6016" title="Frostburg, Maryland" label="Frostburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480609" start="6045" end="6051" title="Maryland Route 546" label="MD 546"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398403" start="6172" end="6185" title="Keysers Ridge, Maryland" label="Keysers Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="6250" end="6264" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203575" start="6481" end="6518" title="Maryland State Highway Administration" label="Maryland State Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886999" start="6623" end="6633" title="Flintstone, Maryland" label="Flintstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q14217008" start="6718" end="6742" title="Green Ridge State Forest" label="Green Ridge State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="7545" end="7563" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q409726" start="7610" end="7615" title="U.S. Route 50" label="US 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7624" end="7637" title="Washington DC" label="Washington DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="7642" end="7651" title="Annapolis, Maryland" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q94261" start="7655" end="7683" title="Interstate Highway standards" label="Interstate Highway standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427857" start="7924" end="7930" title="U.S. Route 301" label="US 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q463415" start="8101" end="8167" title="American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials" label="American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214728" start="8370" end="8375" title="Interstate 595 (Maryland)" label="I-595"/>
<link wikidata="Q409684" start="8707" end="8716" title="U.S. Route 48" label="new US 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q409684" start="8736" end="8746" title="Corridor H" label="Corridor H"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532326" start="8760" end="8781" title="Weston, West Virginia" label="Weston, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373665" start="8786" end="8805" title="Strasburg, Virginia" label="Strasburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352883" start="8911" end="8934" title="U.S. Route 48 (1926)" label="a highway in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339582" start="9758" end="9764" title="pileup" label="pileup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427749" start="9776" end="9791" title="Savage Mountain" label="Savage Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q374219" start="9800" end="9809" title="Frostburg, Maryland" label="Frostburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501236" start="10568" end="10582" title="Garrett County, Maryland" label="Garrett County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10639" end="10652" title="Washington DC" label="Washington DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="10657" end="10666" title="Baltimore, Maryland" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q880642" start="11155" end="11167" title="Harry Hughes" label="Harry Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508362" start="11405" end="11409" title="West Virginia Route 2" label="WV 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361821" start="11413" end="11424" title="Moundsville, West Virginia" label="Moundsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q800112" start="11511" end="11541" title="Federal Highway Administration" label="Federal Highway Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q800459" start="11647" end="11670" title="National Highway System (United States)" label="National Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q538868" start="11785" end="11796" title="Joe Manchin" label="Joe Manchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q504838" start="11931" end="11946" title="Marshall County, West Virginia" label="Marshall County"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="12079" end="12087" title="fracking" label="fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416114" start="12117" end="12123" title="Pennsylvania Route 576" label="PA 576"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="12150" end="12160" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954569" start="12224" end="12251" title="Marcellus natural gas trend" label="Marcellus natural gas trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q515200" start="12487" end="12494" title="Cameron, West Virginia" label="Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q838112" start="12568" end="12591" title="Wheeling, West Virginia" label="Wheeling, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q452974" start="12616" end="12621" title="Interstate 470 (Ohio–West Virginia)" label="I-470"/>
<link wikidata="Q94868" start="12695" end="12699" title="Interstate 79" label="I-79"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="12703" end="12728" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94632" start="12733" end="12737" title="Interstate 70" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="12741" end="12758" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="12771" end="12792" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165854" start="12798" end="12812" title="control cities" label="control cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="12911" end="12921" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835523" start="12970" end="12986" title="Western Maryland" label="Western Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213923" start="13059" end="13064" title="Interstate 270 (Maryland)" label="I-270"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="13096" end="13100" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203575" start="13126" end="13131" title="Maryland State Highway Administration" label="MDSHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q94868" start="13182" end="13186" title="Interstate 79 in West Virginia" label="I-79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120301" start="13235" end="13241" title="U.S. Route 119 in West Virginia" label="US 119"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508378" start="13385" end="13389" title="West Virginia Route 7" label="WV 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052774" start="13484" end="13489" title="Mon-Fayette Expressway" label="WV 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088911" start="13516" end="13526" title="Cheat Lake" label="Cheat Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187047" start="13531" end="13554" title="Uniontown, Pennsylvania" label="Uniontown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088908" start="13640" end="13652" title="Cheat Canyon" label="Cheat Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167950" start="13735" end="13760" title="Coopers Rock State Forest" label="Coopers Rock State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844262" start="13902" end="13916" title="Bruceton Mills, West Virginia" label="Bruceton Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508421" start="13948" end="13953" title="West Virginia Route 26" label="WV 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q268756" start="14242" end="14259" title="truck escape ramp" label="truck escape ramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932823" start="14299" end="14327" title="annual average daily traffic" label="annual average daily traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688119" start="14536" end="14544" title="Hazelton, West Virginia" label="Hazelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306256" start="14865" end="14870" title="Maryland Route 42" label="MD 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q754757" start="14874" end="14886" title="Friendsville, Maryland" label="Friendsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398403" start="14901" end="14914" title="Keysers Ridge, Maryland" label="Keysers Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214592" start="14931" end="14936" title="U.S. Route 40 in Maryland" label="US 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214801" start="14941" end="14947" title="U.S. Route 219 in Maryland" label="US 219"/>
<link wikidata="Q453164" start="15111" end="15121" title="U.S. Route 40 Alternate (Keysers Ridge–Cumberland, Maryland)" label="US 40 Alt."/>
<link wikidata="Q6987605" start="15135" end="15149" title="Negro Mountain" label="Negro Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072546" start="15198" end="15211" title="National Road" label="National Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q753983" start="15351" end="15362" title="Grantsville, Maryland" label="Grantsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182921" start="15423" end="15447" title="Meyersdale, Pennsylvania" label="Meyersdale, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q306945" start="15493" end="15519" title="Eastern Continental Divide" label="Eastern Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427749" start="15524" end="15539" title="Savage Mountain" label="Savage Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221003" start="15602" end="15615" title="Dans Mountain" label="Dans Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="15653" end="15672" title="Allegheny Mountains" label="Allegheny Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731302" start="15870" end="15885" title="Allegheny Front" label="Allegheny Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q753725" start="16417" end="16423" title="LaVale, Maryland" label="LaVale"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="16661" end="16668" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q374219" start="16717" end="16726" title="Frostburg, Maryland" label="Frostburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480724" start="16790" end="16796" title="Maryland Route 736" label="MD 736"/>
<link wikidata="Q453037" start="16809" end="16814" title="Maryland Route 36" label="MD 36"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575666" start="16839" end="16863" title="God&amp;#x27;s Ark of Safety" label="God&amp;#x27;s Ark of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="16925" end="16940" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886922" start="17089" end="17100" title="Clarysville, Maryland" label="Clarysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306451" start="17115" end="17120" title="Maryland Route 55" label="MD 55"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480111" start="17306" end="17312" title="Maryland Route 658" label="MD 658"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431300" start="17335" end="17347" title="U.S. Route 220 Truck (Maryland)" label="US 220 Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687251" start="17363" end="17380" title="Haystack Mountain (Maryland)" label="Haystack Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="17403" end="17413" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214831" start="17543" end="17549" title="U.S. Route 220 in Maryland" label="US 220"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508430" start="18057" end="18067" title="West Virginia Route 28 Alternate" label="WV 28 Alt."/>
<link wikidata="Q2508430" start="18124" end="18129" title="West Virginia Route 28" label="WV 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810237" start="18170" end="18193" title="Ridgeley, West Virginia" label="Ridgeley, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203575" start="18308" end="18313" title="Maryland State Highway Administration" label="MDSHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306395" start="18496" end="18501" title="Maryland Route 51" label="MD 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133571" start="18734" end="18755" title="Bedford, Pennsylvania" label="Bedford, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355786" start="18817" end="18837" title="Rocky Gap State Park" label="Rocky Gap State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449229" start="18936" end="18942" title="Maryland Route 144" label="MD 144"/>
<link wikidata="Q14217008" start="19149" end="19173" title="Green Ridge State Forest" label="Green Ridge State Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214696" start="19224" end="19236" title="U.S. Route 40 Scenic" label="US 40 Scenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q511164" start="19290" end="19307" title="Washington County, Maryland" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692395" start="19311" end="19330" title="Sideling Hill Creek (Potomac River tributary)" label="Sideling Hill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483123" start="19343" end="19356" title="Sideling Hill" label="Sideling Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213710" start="19808" end="19812" title="Interstate 70 in Maryland" label="I-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120325" start="19817" end="19823" title="U.S. Route 522" label="US 522"/>
<link wikidata="Q755066" start="19839" end="19846" title="Hancock, Maryland" label="Hancock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89598" wikidata="Q8071686" url="?curid=89598" title="Ziemassvētki">
<text>Ziemassvētki (), also Ziemsvētki is an annual festival in Latvia which observes the winter solstice and birth of Jesus Christ. Latvians around the world celebrate it from 24 to 25 December. 24 December is Ziemassvētku vakars (Christmas Eve, lit. Christmas Evening), while 25 December is Pirmie Ziemassvētki (First Christmas), 26 December Otrie Ziemassvētki (Second Christmas). Christianity traditionally celebrates the birthday of Jesus Christ on 25 December, according to the Julian calendar, but Orthodox churches follow the Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar and, as a result, the majority of Orthodox churches celebrate Ziemassvētki on 6, 7 and 8 January.

Ziemassvētki is also celebrated by people whose religious belief is not Christianity. Nowadays the customary Ziemassvētki traditions are decorating the Ziemassvētku egle (Christmas tree), Ziemassvētku vecītis (Santa Claus, lit. Old Christmas Man), baking &quot;piparkūkas&quot; (gingerbread) and mandarin scent.

==Ziemassvētki fir decoration==

Ziemassvētki fir decorating custom was known in Livonia even before the 16th century. The Blackheads Guild provided the information in 1510 about winter traditions in Riga and referred to earlier such events in 1476, therefore, the former executive of Riga&#x27;s House of the Blackheads and historian Ojārs Spārītis considers the historical information on the tradition of decorating a &quot;Ziemassvētki tree&quot; in Riga to originate in 1476.

The Blackheads Guild also indicates that the tree was a bouquet, but, taking into account the customs of the Middle Ages, it can be concluded that such bouquets could only be decorated with ribbons, dried flowers, straw weaved dolls and, possibly, fruits. Later this &quot;tree&quot;, which could not be a spruce, but an &quot;installation&quot; made only out of wooden sticks, along with songs and dances were brought forth outside the celebrating house, where it had been located for the entire Ziemassvētki period and was burned on a spot in Town Hall Square around 6 January. The Brotherhood of Blackheads guild showed a similar tradition in Tallinn (known at that time as Revel) in 1514. It is possible that, from here, the tradition spread all over the world (see chronicle quote below).

===Chronicle news===

For Yule Eve or Dance Eve impacted on the Blackhead&#x27;s traditions, which turned log burning into a fir tree burning, as evidenced by these quotations:

Paul Einhorn on Latvian Ziemassvētki traditions from Duchy of Courland&#x27;s work &quot;Reformatio gentis leticcae in ducatu Curlandiae&quot; (1636):
Russow Chronicle on Ziemassvētki traditions in Livonia before 16th century.:
==Latvian traditions==

===Ancient Latvian traditions===

Alongside Ziemassvētki, an ancient Latvian tradition is preserved in the so-called Yule Eve, reminiscent of ancient ritual activities - log pulling, mimicking solar progress. In some countries, Solstice Eve is also called Ķūķu (variants - Ķoču, Kūķu, Ķūcu) Eve, suggesting an ancient ritual holiday meal choice, which promoted prosperity and welfare. It was made from shelled (crushed in a mortar) barley or wheat grains, which were boiled with a half of a pig head; the spread tended to also add peas and beans.

Another widely known Ziemassvētki tradition was ķekatas walking or gypsies walking. Mummers, dressed in various masks, went from one village to another, to bring them blessing and to drive away various evil spirits. Therefore, mummers everywhere were gladly welcomed and treated. Budēļi leader - father budēļi or elder budēļi, who had all mummers serve to a regimental leader, always carried along a ferrule, which was used to whip all the people in the house. This was Father Budēļi&#x27;s ferrule of life, to which Latvian tradition attributed a magical power of health, fertility and carried a moral status, in tune with Europe wide distributed habit of expecting winter solstice with scalded branches, they took it along for marches and, touched with it people and beasts, transferring to them a life force, that dwells in these branches. In Courland and Semigallia regions, ķekatas or ķiņķēziņus (ķēmus) were called budēļi (also known as bubuļi, buduļi, buki, būzaļi, buzuļi) or dancing children, Vidzeme region calls them vecīši, maskās (maskarati), skutelnieki (suselnieki), nūjinieki (kūjinieki), preiļi, kurciemi. Latgale region ķekatas mummers were called kaļedās (kaladnieki; cf. &quot;Koliada&quot;) or talderi.

The idea of masking is based on ancient fertility rites. Usually, maskās tried to portray themselves as spirits, who wanted to either placate or impress. One of the best known ancient mummer masks was a bear mask because it was believed a bear with his growl was able to frighten off all evil spirits. Buki&#x27;s masks were made under the sheet by affixing a flexible card arcing downward, which was covered with a sheet and attached to it horns and a beard, as for cranes - they inverted the fur coat to the other side and in one sleeve put an ax with a head, with spoons tied to both sides, which looked like ears and a beak, which could be modified.

One of the mummers&#x27; customs was also to disguise as death, when one of the mummers covered himself with a white sheet, preparing from turnips redundant teeth. One hand holds a wooden dagger, which was smudged in red color, second hand bore a plate, which was put into a combustible substance. This fire cast light on death&#x27;s face to look pale, similar to a corpse.

===Modern Latvian traditions===

Traditional Latvian decorations on Ziemassvētki are spruce branches and decorations, which are made from bird&#x27;s feathers and eggs, straw, bentgrass, fruits, vegetables, and berries. Gifts are given, which are usually placed under the fir tree. To get a gift it is often required to recite a poem or sing a song. An adopted tradition is that gifts are brought by Ziemassvētku vecītis (also known as Santa Claus or Salavecis in recent times), who is sometimes helped by dwarfs or Snow White.

At a children&#x27;s party during Ziemassvētki, people often dress up as wild beasts and dwarfs, which is the ancient tradition of lending. Also, Father Budēļi or Elder was turned into Ziemassvētku vecītis or Salavecis because of new traditions.

==See also==
* Public holidays in Latvia

==References==
==External links==
* Latvian folk songs about Ziemassvētki
* Ziemassvētki folk songs from www.dainuskapis.lv
* Latvian folklore - Ziemassvētki www.liis.lv
* Ziemassvētki diary www.merrychristmas.lv
* Latvian traditional seasonal rhythms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8071686" start="0" end="12" title="Ziemassvētki" label="Ziemassvētki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071686" start="22" end="32" title="Ziemassvētki" label="Ziemsvētki"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="58" end="64" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="84" end="99" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="104" end="125" title="Nativity of Jesus" label="birth of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="226" end="239" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="377" end="389" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="477" end="492" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="498" end="515" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142865" start="527" end="563" title="Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar" label="Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="735" end="747" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="834" end="848" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="873" end="884" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178600" start="942" end="953" title="gingerbread" label="gingerbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="959" end="967" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="1009" end="1025" title="Christmas tree" label="Ziemassvētki fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="1057" end="1064" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q74736" start="1273" end="1296" title="House of the Blackheads (Riga)" label="House of the Blackheads"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1311" end="1325" title="Ojārs Spārītis" label="Ojārs Spārītis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211945" start="2278" end="2282" title="Yule" label="Yule"/>
<link wikidata="Q74552" start="2316" end="2332" title="Brotherhood of Blackheads" label="Blackhead&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763500" start="2430" end="2442" title="Paul Einhorn" label="Paul Einhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="2446" end="2453" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2581" end="2597" title="The Chronicle of Livonia" label="Russow Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211945" start="2799" end="2807" title="Yule" label="Yule Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q117801803" start="3278" end="3285" title="ķekatas" label="ķekatas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3314" end="3320" title="Mummer" label="Mummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="4076" end="4084" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215389" start="4089" end="4099" title="Semigallia" label="Semigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q745303" start="4232" end="4239" title="Vidzeme" label="Vidzeme"/>
<link wikidata="Q208113" start="4353" end="4360" title="Latgale" label="Latgale"/>
<link wikidata="Q135856" start="4427" end="4434" title="Koliada" label="Koliada"/>
<link wikidata="Q81895" start="5022" end="5027" title="spoon" label="spoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916957" start="5249" end="5256" title="turnips" label="turnips"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="5815" end="5819" title="poetry" label="poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="5830" end="5834" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="5886" end="5906" title="Santa Claus" label="Ziemassvētku vecītis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="5992" end="5998" title="Dwarf (mythology)" label="dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11831" start="6002" end="6012" title="Snow White" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257802" start="6277" end="6302" title="Public holidays in Latvia" label="Public holidays in Latvia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89600" wikidata="Q6672817" url="?curid=89600" title="Jāņi">
<text>Jāņi () is an annual Latvian festival celebrating the summer solstice. Although, astronomically the solstice falls on the 21st or 22nd of June, the public holidays—Līgo Day and Jāņi Day—are on the 23rd and 24th of June. The day before Jāņi is known as Līgosvētki, Līgovakars or simply known as Līgo.

On Jāņi, people travel from the city into the countryside to gather and eat, drink, sing and celebrate the solstice by observing the ancient folk traditions relating to renewal and fertility. 

It is celebrated both in Latvia and in many areas where the Latvian diaspora lives such as the United States, Canada, Argentina, and Australia.

==Etymology==
The name stems from the pre-Christian Latvian name of Jānis and had been found in written sources as early as the 19th century. The name stems from the verb &quot;jāt&quot; &#x27;to come/ride/go&#x27; as a reference to the passge of the seasons and the advance of the cosmic flow.

The name &quot;Līgo&quot; or &quot;Līgosvētki&quot; was first used and introduced in 1900 in his Jāņi songs collection by Emilis Melngailis, who would later express regret for his decision in through newspaper &quot;Jaunākās Ziņas&quot;:

Occasionally used in the 20th and 21st century, the use of Līgo as a word to describe the whole celebration is still debated. Linguists have stated that either Līgo is simply a misused refrain sung in many traditional Jāņi songs or that it comes from the name Līgā or Līgo - a purported minor Livonian pagan deity representing merriment and amity. The worship of this deity by a &quot;vaidelotis&quot; (Latvian pagan priest) is depicted in the flag of the Latvian Song Festival which was made for the initial edition in 1873 and is displayed in every opening ceremony of the following editions.

==Traditions==
===Use of plants===
Plant material, collected and used for decorative, therapeutic and other symbolic purposes, is important in the celebration of Jāņi. Most herbaceous plants are used, but people typically collect bedstraw, cow wheat, vetchling and clover. 

Plant material is used to decorate rooms, courtyards, yards, and woven into wreaths. Specific tree species are used as sources of material for decoration. Birch boughs and oak branches are commonly used, however aspen and alder are not as they are considered evil. Some herbs were collected at noon, others on Jāņi Eve, or on Jāņi morning when covered in dew. In 1627, P. Einhorn wrote:

During Jāņi, foliage of rowan, oak, linden and birch trees is collected and hung to decorate homes, barns and granaries, as well as tied to gates, doors, and cars. Thorns, thistles, and nettles are hung to repel evil spirits and witches. In past times, herbaceous plants were dried and fed to cows shortly after calving during winter and spring. On Zāļu Day, herbs were used to make a tea which was given to sick people and livestock. On Jāņi Day, rowan twigs were tied together, dried and used for child&#x27;s fumigation, to treat sickness, anxiety, or where a child was afflicted by an evil eye.

====Wreath making====
Circular wreaths made of flowers, grasses and oak leaves are woven and worn on the head. Different types of plants are used to make wreaths for males and females. Women and girls wear wreaths made from flowers, grasses, and herbs. It is believed that wreaths braided with twenty-seven flowers and herbs prevents disasters and diseases, and repels enemies. Men and boys wear wreaths made of oak leaves, symbolising the physical strength of the oak tree. Oak wreaths were also thought to promise the blessing of horses and bees. Together with Jāņi cheese and fires, wreaths are also symbols of the sun.

===Fire===
During Jāņi, fires (also known as pūdeļa, pundeļa, Jāņi candles, and witch burning) are lit and burned from sunset till next morning. This practice reflects the belief that light from the fires will transmit to the next solar year. It is believed that fires should be burned at a high point in the landscape, from which the light of the fire bestows power and fertility on the fields and people on which it shines. Leaping over the Jāņi fire is said to bring good luck and health through the coming year.

While fires are typically wood-fuelled, tar barrels or tarred wheels hoisted on poles are also burned.

===Singing===
Singing Līgo songs or Jāņi songs is associated with the promotion of fertility, acquisition of good fortune and prevention of calamity. Historically, the singing of Līgo songs began two weeks before Jāņi, reached its highest point on Jāņi Eve and lasted until Peter or Māras Day (15 August)—a period of around a month. After that, the singing of Līgo songs ceased until the next year. Singing Ligo songs on Jāņi night begins after dinner and continues throughout the night until the rising of the sun, either during jumping over Fire of Jāņi, or while going from houses to houses. Singing visits on Jāņi were called aplīgošana, servants visited their masters, maidens visited young men and vice versa.

On Jāņi Day people drink beer and eat cheese, believing that it will promote the growth of barley and production of cow milk in the next summer. Singing visitors from neighbouring houses are treated with cheese and beer.

===Other traditions===
====Witches====
There is a belief that on Jāņi morning, milk witches were running on dew and shouted: &quot;Everything to me, everything to me!&quot; If anyone heard it, they must respond with: &quot;I butchered half of them!&quot; Then there would be no shortage of milk. Witches are believed to have disguised themselves as normal women by dressing in white robes and letting their hair loose. Once disguised, it is believed that they would set spells or curses on the fields and livestock of their enemies.

====Fern flowers====
It was believed that whoever found a fern flower would gain wealth and happiness and learn the secrets of the past and future. &quot;Whoever acquires the fern flower will be happy, because it can make anything they want to come true. The flower is hindered by evil spirits and only a brave person can get it&quot;. &quot;On Jāņi Night, jump eight times around eight while on a broom handle, which is hoisted from a ground. During this time do not talk and do not laugh. Once you have done so, then hop on the broom shaft astride to the nearest fern patch, but only on your own, then you will see the blossoming of a fern flower&quot;. 
‘Looking for fern flower’ is also referred to couples excusing themselves from festivities for some intimacy and time alone.

==History==

John the Baptist Day celebration during the summer solstice time was known throughout the Christian world. Since 1584, Balthasar Russow wrote in his Chronicle of Livonia, that &quot;All over the great land by Fire of Jāņi happened a great joyous dancing, singing and jumping&quot;. 

It is known, that at that time Riga&#x27;s fishermen, mast selectors and ferries each year after solstice drove boats to Pārdaugava or to some islands in the Daugava, where, together with families and guests burned bonfires, rejoicing until the morning dawn.

When, in 1759, Johann Steinhauer, a rich Latvian mast selector, bought part of Zasumuiža, it began a Herbal Eve celebration tradition. Later, the celebration was moved to Hermeliņš Manor, then on the right bank of the Daugava by the castle. Around 1790, a tradition to hold festive fireworks on Daugava was introduced. In 1820, the Riga City Council ordered to transfer Daugavmala Herbal Market to Šāļu Gate at the end of Svērtuves Street. In 1832, a Latvian weekly newspaper &quot;Tas Latviešu Ļaužu Draugs&quot; gave the following description of the holiday:

After Latvia gained its independence in 1918, the celebration of Zāļu diena turned into a popular holiday. It was proposed, that 22, 23 and 24 June should be recognized as national holidays, on 22 June celebrating Heroes Day (remembering the victory in Battle of Cēsis), Zāļu diena on 23 June and Jāņi Day on 24 June.

==Similar festive celebration traditions worldwide==

Celebration of the summer solstice is an ancient European tradition. It was especially observed in countries such as Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, Finland, Sweden, Russia, Ireland, France, Belarus, Norway, Italy, Portugal, Malta, United Kingdom, Spain, Poland, Ukraine.

It was also observed by European settlers in Canada (especially in Quebec) and the US.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Oswald Lideks (1940). Latvian holiday. Riga.
* Peter Schmidt (1940–1941). Latvian folk beliefs. Riga.
* Edith Olupe (1992). Latvian seasonal festivities. Riga.
* Latvian folk songs Vol. IV Riga, 1982.

==External links==
* Latvian folk songs about Jāņi celebration 
* Jāņi celebration descriptions &quot;Latvian Dainas&quot; 
* Latvian Jāņi songs 
* Jāņi symbols 
* Austris Grasis. Reflections on Jāņi 
* Latvian traditional seasonal rhythms 
* Traditional solstice rituals in Turaida – 360° virtual tour | Virtual Latvia </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6672817" start="0" end="4" title="Jāņi" label="Jāņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="21" end="28" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="54" end="69" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15289690" start="708" end="713" title="Jānis" label="Jānis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337560" start="1058" end="1075" title="Emilis Melngailis" label="Emilis Melngailis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164876" start="1152" end="1166" title="Jaunākās Ziņas" label="Jaunākās Ziņas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191609" start="1360" end="1367" title="refrain" label="refrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q690126" start="1468" end="1476" title="Livonians" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298953" start="1631" end="1652" title="Latvian Song and Dance Festival" label="Latvian Song Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="1944" end="1961" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q148633" start="2001" end="2009" title="bedstraw" label="bedstraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q161626" start="2011" end="2020" title="cow wheat" label="cow wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q157209" start="2022" end="2031" title="vetchling" label="vetchling"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="2036" end="2042" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763500" start="2415" end="2425" title="Paul Einhorn" label="P. Einhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="2458" end="2463" title="rowan" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165145" start="2465" end="2468" title="English oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="2470" end="2476" title="Tilia" label="linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="2481" end="2486" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="2534" end="2539" title="barns" label="barns"/>
<link wikidata="Q379932" start="2819" end="2822" title="herbal tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363828" start="4562" end="4571" title="Māras" label="Māras Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="5021" end="5025" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943" start="5034" end="5040" title="cheese" label="cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="5087" end="5093" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396956" start="5810" end="5821" title="fern flower" label="fern flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="6548" end="6564" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q495702" start="6667" end="6683" title="Balthasar Russow" label="Balthasar Russow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866542" start="6693" end="6717" title="Livonian Chronicle" label="his Chronicle of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331744" start="6886" end="6890" title="Mast (sailing)" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4183867" start="6953" end="6963" title="Pārdaugava" label="Pārdaugava"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639534" start="7107" end="7124" title="Johann Steinhauer" label="Johann Steinhauer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7171" end="7180" title="Zasumuiža" label="Zasumuiža"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7263" end="7278" title="Hermeliņš Manor" label="Hermeliņš Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089528" start="7424" end="7441" title="Riga City Council" label="Riga City Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7574" end="7599" title="Tas Latviešu Ļaužu Draugs" label="Tas Latviešu Ļaužu Draugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497456" start="7660" end="7698" title="Latvian independence movement" label="Latvia gained its independence in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q183286" start="7907" end="7922" title="Battle of Cēsis (1919)" label="Battle of Cēsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="8361" end="8367" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89601" wikidata="Q16363828" url="?curid=89601" title="Māras">
<text>Māras () or Māra Day (; sometimes referred to as the Great Māra Day or Mother Day) was a Latvian festival, devoted to Māra, an ancient deity, and was celebrated on 15 August. According to the solar calendar, Māras marks the midpoint between Jāņi, which is summer solstice, and Miķeļi, which represents the end of the harvest season. The actual date, likely, is the result of Christian influence, identifying Māra with Virgin Mary, whose devoted holiday (Assumption of Mary) is observed on 15 August.

==See also==
* Māra
* Virgin Mary
* Assumption of Mary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16363828" start="0" end="5" title="Māras" label="Māras"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363828" start="12" end="20" title="Māras" label="Māra Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363828" start="53" end="67" title="Māras" label="Great Māra Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363828" start="71" end="81" title="Māras" label="Mother Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="89" end="96" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302527" start="118" end="122" title="Māra" label="Māra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774" start="164" end="173" title="15 August" label="15 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="192" end="197" title="Sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672817" start="241" end="245" title="Jāņi" label="Jāņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="263" end="271" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="277" end="283" title="Miķeļi" label="Miķeļi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="375" end="384" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="418" end="429" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="454" end="472" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302527" start="516" end="520" title="Māra" label="Māra"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="523" end="534" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069073" start="537" end="555" title="Dormition of the Mother of God" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89602" wikidata="Q21070889" url="?curid=89602" title="British comedy">
<text>In film, television, and radio, British comedy has produced some of the most renowned characters in the world. In it, satire is one of the features of British comedy. Radio comedy in Britain has been almost exclusively hosted on BBC.

==History==

British comedy history is measured in centuries. Shakespeare incorporated many chase scenes and beatings into his comedies, such as in his play &quot;The Comedy of Errors&quot;. Punch and Judy made their first recorded appearance in Britain in 1662, when Samuel Pepys noted a &quot;pretty&quot; puppet play being performed in Covent Garden, London. The various episodes of Punch and Judy are dominated by the anarchic clowning of Mr. Punch.

Satire has been a major feature of comedy in the British Isles for centuries. The pictorial satire of William Hogarth was a precursor to the development of political cartoons in 18th-century Britain The medium developed under the direction of James Gillray from London, who has been referred to as the father of the political cartoon.

In early 19th-century Britain, pantomime acquired its present form, which includes slapstick comedy and featured the first mainstream clown, Joseph Grimaldi, while comedy routines also featured heavily in British music hall theatre which became popular in the 1850s. British comedians who honed their skills at pantomime and music hall sketches include Charlie Chaplin, Stan Laurel, George Formby, and Dan Leno. The music hall comedian and theatre impresario Fred Karno developed a form of sketch comedy without dialogue in the 1890s, and Chaplin and Laurel were among the young comedians who worked for him as part of &quot;Fred Karno&#x27;s Army&quot;.

==Film comedy==
==Radio==
Radio comedy in Britain has been almost exclusively the preserve of the BBC. In the 1940s and 1950s, variety dominated the schedules, and popular series included &quot;It&#x27;s That Man Again&quot; and &quot;Much Binding in the Marsh&quot;. In the 1950s, the BBC was running &quot;Hancock&#x27;s Half Hour&quot; starring Tony Hancock. &quot;Hancock&#x27;s Half Hour&quot; was later transferred to television.

One of the notable radio shows was the double entendre-laden &quot;Round the Horne&quot; (1965–1968), a sequel to the earlier series &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot;, which ran from 1959 to 1964.

Later radio shows made use of the panel game format, including the long-running &quot;Just a Minute&quot; (1967–), &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry I Haven&#x27;t a Clue&quot; (1972–), and &quot;The News Quiz&quot; (1977–), which often broadcast a dozen of so episodes a year.

==Television==
Following the success of &quot;Hancock&#x27;s Half Hour&quot; and &quot;Steptoe and Son&quot;, sitcoms became a part of some television schedules. The BBC has generally been dominant in television comedy, but the commercial stations have also had some successes. Other formats have also been popular, such as with sketch shows, stand-up comedy, impressionists, and puppet shows.

Notable satirical comedies are the 1960s series &quot;That Was The Week That Was&quot;, the 1980s series &quot;Not the Nine O&#x27;Clock News&quot;, and ITV&#x27;s puppet show &quot;Spitting Image&quot;. The show of the 1980s and early 1990s, &quot;Spitting Image&quot;, was a satire of politics, entertainment, sport, and British culture of the era, and at its peak, it was watched by 15 million people. British satire has also gone over into quiz shows; popular examples include the news quiz &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot;, &quot;8 out of 10 cats&quot;, and &quot;Shooting Stars&quot;.

In the 1980s, alternative comedy was spearheaded by Ben Elton and The Comic Strip group, which included Alexei Sayle, Rik Mayall, and French and Saunders. The 1990s and 2000s also have those that have used editing, surreal humour, and cultural references to great effect.

==See also==
* British Comedy Guide
* List of British comedians
* British Comedy Awards
* British humour
* British sitcom
* List of U.K. game shows
* List of BBC sitcoms

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="118" end="124" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748941" start="167" end="179" title="Radio comedy" label="Radio comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="229" end="232" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="256" end="262" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="297" end="308" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q506505" start="398" end="418" title="The Comedy of Errors" label="The Comedy of Errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="426" end="440" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="574" end="595" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="690" end="696" title="Satire" label="Satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="739" end="752" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="792" end="807" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916094" start="846" end="864" title="political cartoons" label="political cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q520806" start="933" end="946" title="James Gillray" label="James Gillray"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="1057" end="1066" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="1109" end="1118" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q375106" start="1167" end="1182" title="Joseph Grimaldi" label="Joseph Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q940462" start="1239" end="1249" title="music hall" label="music hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="1379" end="1394" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="1396" end="1407" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181816" start="1409" end="1422" title="George Formby" label="George Formby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618270" start="1428" end="1436" title="Dan Leno" label="Dan Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q969031" start="1485" end="1495" title="Fred Karno" label="Fred Karno"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1780" end="1783" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q336181" start="1809" end="1816" title="Variety show" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q13569877" start="1876" end="1900" title="ITMA" label="It&amp;#x27;s That Man Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930922" start="1917" end="1942" title="Much Binding in the Marsh" label="Much Binding in the Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761690" start="1990" end="2014" title="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour" label="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365832" start="2030" end="2042" title="Tony Hancock" label="Tony Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030511" start="2158" end="2173" title="double entendre" label="double entendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371210" start="2186" end="2201" title="Round the Horne" label="Round the Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858458" start="2258" end="2272" title="Beyond Our Ken" label="Beyond Our Ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331688" start="2396" end="2409" title="Just a Minute" label="Just a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q689735" start="2431" end="2467" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753924" start="2493" end="2506" title="The News Quiz" label="The News Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761690" start="2622" end="2646" title="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour" label="Hancock&amp;#x27;s Half Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="2663" end="2678" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="2686" end="2693" title="sitcom" label="sitcoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2742" end="2745" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696995" start="2777" end="2794" title="television comedy" label="television comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="2905" end="2917" title="Sketch comedy" label="sketch shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="2919" end="2934" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148872" start="2936" end="2950" title="impressionist (entertainment)" label="impressionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="2956" end="2968" title="Puppetry" label="puppet shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="2979" end="2988" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302237" start="3025" end="3051" title="That Was The Week That Was" label="That Was The Week That Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044417" start="3082" end="3112" title="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News" label="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3124" end="3127" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="3153" end="3167" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837662" start="3220" end="3234" title="Spitting Image" label="Spitting Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q32501" start="3294" end="3309" title="British culture" label="British culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601537" start="3415" end="3425" title="List of U.K. game shows" label="quiz shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="3472" end="3495" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144186" start="3509" end="3525" title="8 out of 10 cats" label="8 out of 10 cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500603" start="3543" end="3557" title="Shooting Stars (British TV series)" label="Shooting Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="3580" end="3598" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q436712" start="3618" end="3627" title="Ben Elton" label="Ben Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="3632" end="3647" title="The Comic Strip" label="The Comic Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q970287" start="3670" end="3682" title="Alexei Sayle" label="Alexei Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="3684" end="3694" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455241" start="3700" end="3719" title="French and Saunders" label="French and Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q194105" start="3772" end="3779" title="editing" label="editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="3781" end="3795" title="surreal humour" label="surreal humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969829" start="3854" end="3874" title="British Comedy Guide" label="British Comedy Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11791620" start="3877" end="3902" title="List of British comedians" label="List of British comedians"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="3905" end="3926" title="British Comedy Awards" label="British Comedy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q918570" start="3929" end="3943" title="British humour" label="British humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q918098" start="3946" end="3960" title="British sitcom" label="British sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601537" start="3963" end="3986" title="List of U.K. game shows" label="List of U.K. game shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563173" start="3989" end="4008" title="List of BBC sitcoms" label="List of BBC sitcoms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89603" wikidata="Q254886" url="?curid=89603" title="Joanna Lumley">
<text>Dame Joanna Lamond Lumley (born 1 May 1946) is a British actress, presenter, author, television producer, activist and former model. She has won two BAFTA TV Awards for her role as Patsy Stone in the BBC sitcom &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (1992–2012) and was nominated for the 2011 Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play for the Broadway revival of &quot;La Bête&quot;. In 2013, she received the Special Recognition Award at the National Television Awards and in 2017 she was honoured with the BAFTA Fellowship award.

Lumley&#x27;s other television credits include &quot;The New Avengers&quot; (1976–1977), &quot;Sapphire &amp; Steel&quot; (1979–1982), &quot;Sensitive Skin&quot; (2005–2007), &quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot; (2006–2008) and &quot;Finding Alice&quot; (2021–present). She also as played Elaine Perkins in &quot;Coronation Street&quot; in 1973. Her film appearances include &quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot; (1969), &quot;Trail of the Pink Panther&quot; (1982), &quot;Curse of the Pink Panther&quot; (1983), &quot;Shirley Valentine&quot; (1989), &quot;James and the Giant Peach&quot; (1996), &quot;Ella Enchanted&quot; (2004), &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; (2005), &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot; (2013) and &quot;Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie&quot; (2016). She had roles in two episodes of &quot;Are You Being Served?&quot; (1973–1975) written by Jeremy Lloyd, whom she had married and divorced three years prior to her first appearance on the show.

Lumley is an advocate and human rights activist for Survival International and the Gurkha Justice Campaign. She supports charities and animal welfare groups, such as Compassion in World Farming and Vegetarians&#x27; International Voice for Animals. Lumley was made a Dame (DBE) in the 2022 New Year Honours for services to drama, entertainment and charity.

==Early life==
Joanna Lamond Lumley was born on 1 May 1946 in Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, in British India. Her mother, Thyra Beatrice Rose (née Weir), was English. Her grandfather Lieutenant Colonel Leslie Weir had been born in Ghazipur and served as an army officer in Kashmir; he was a close friend of the 13th Dalai Lama.

Her father, Major James Rutherford Lumley, was born in Lahore (now part of Pakistan) with Scottish and English ancestry. He was a direct descendant of Maj.-Gen. Sir James Rutherford Lumley and himself served as an officer in the British Indian Army&#x27;s 6th Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s Own Gurkha Rifles in Burma during World War II, most notably at the Battle of Mogaung. His life was saved by Tul Bahadur Pun. Maj.-Gen. Sir James Rutherford Lumley was a direct descendant of Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scots.

Joanna Lumley&#x27;s parents married in 1941. She has early memories of living in the tropics.

The family went &quot;home&quot; on leave to England, travelling on the . When her parents returned to Asia, she stayed, boarding at Mickledene School in Rolvenden, Kent. She was eight years old, which she later described as &quot;paralysingly young&quot;. From 11 to 17 she attended Holmhurst St Mary&#x27;s Convent School, the Ridge,&lt;ref name=&quot;historicengland/1043422&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; run by Community of the Holy Family:
:&quot;I especially loved my second boarding school, an Anglo-Catholic convent in the hills behind Hastings. The nuns wore blue stockings and were brainy and lovely. There were 70 boarders and I was happy as a clam.&quot;

Lumley attended the Lucie Clayton Finishing School in London, after being turned down by the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art at the age of 16.

==Career==

Lumley spent three years as a photographic model, notably for Brian Duffy, who photographed her with her son, born in 1967. That year she also appeared on the BBC2 programme &quot;The Impresarios: For Appearance&#x27;s Sake&quot;. She also worked as a house model for Jean Muir. Over forty years later, she participated in another photoshoot – again with her son – for Duffy as part of a retrospective of the photographer&#x27;s work.

Lumley appeared in an early episode of the &quot;Bruce Forsyth Show&quot; in 1966. She appeared in a British television advertisement for Nimble Bread first screened in 1969.

Lumley did not receive any formal training at drama school. Her acting career began in 1969 with a small, uncredited role in the film &quot;Some Girls Do&quot;, and as a Bond girl in &quot;On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service&quot;, in which she had two lines as the English girl among the villainous Ernst Stavro Blofeld&#x27;s &quot;Angels of Death&quot;. Lumley went on to have a brief but memorable role as Elaine Perkins in &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, in which her character turned down Ken Barlow&#x27;s offer of marriage, as well as roles in other popular television series such as &quot;Are You Being Served?&quot;, &quot;Steptoe and Son&quot; and &quot;The Protectors&quot;. In 1973, she made another big screen appearance as Jessica Van Helsing in &quot;The Satanic Rites of Dracula&quot;, the last Hammer Dracula film to star Christopher Lee. She also had a role in the comedy film &quot;Don&#x27;t Just Lie There, Say Something!&quot; (1974) alongside Leslie Phillips and Joan Sims.

===Major roles===

Lumley has specialised in upper-class parts throughout her career, thanks to her voice and accent. Lumley&#x27;s first major role was as Purdey in &quot;The New Avengers&quot;, successor to the secret agent series &quot;The Avengers&quot;, a role she played in all twenty-six episodes from 1976 to 1977.

In 1979, she appeared in another series which acquired a cult following: &quot;Sapphire &amp; Steel&quot;, with David McCallum. Conceived as ITV&#x27;s answer to &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, Lumley played a mysterious elemental being (&quot;Sapphire&quot;) who, with her collaborator, &quot;Steel&quot;, dealt with breaches in the fabric of time. In 1986, television producer Sydney Newman suggested Lumley for the role of the Doctor but his idea was dismissed.

Over a decade later Lumley&#x27;s career was boosted by her portrayal of the louche, selfish and frequently drunk fashion director Patsy Stone, companion to Jennifer Saunders&#x27; Edina Monsoon in the BBC comedy television series &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (1992–1996, 2001–2004, 2011–2012). &quot;Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie&quot; was released in 2016.

From 1994 to 1995, Lumley starred alongside Nadine Garner and John Bowe in the British television show &quot;Class Act&quot;, playing the part of Kate Swift, an upper-class lady who had fallen on hard times.

Other work has included: &quot;Lovejoy&quot; as widow Victoria Cavero, &quot;In the Kingdom of the Thunder Dragon&quot; (1996), a film about a journey made by her grandparents in Bhutan, and &quot;A Rather English Marriage&quot; (nominated for a BAFTA for Best Actress 1999) and &quot;Dr Willoughby&quot; (1999). In 1995, she provided the voice of Annie the rag doll in the animated series &quot;The Forgotten Toys&quot;. In 1999, she also provided the voice for Sims the chicken in the BAFTA award-winning animated series &quot;The Foxbusters&quot;. In 2000, she co-produced a new drama series &quot;The Cazalets&quot;. She appeared in a TV series on Sarawak, where she spent time in her childhood.

Lumley starred as the elderly Delilah Stagg in the 2006 sitcom &quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot; with Dawn French, Jennifer Saunders, and Sue Johnston. In July 2007, she starred in the second series of the drama &quot;Sensitive Skin&quot; where she played the main character Davina Jackson. The BBC said this will be the final series of the dark comedy.

She has worked with Tim Burton on two film projects, in &quot;James and the Giant Peach&quot; (1996) and &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; (2005). She has also appeared alongside Hugh Laurie in the British romantic comedy &quot;Maybe Baby&quot; (2000) and alongside Anne Hathaway in &quot;Ella Enchanted&quot; (2004). She has appeared twice as Mrs. Dolly Bantry in &quot;Agatha Christie&#x27;s Marple&quot;, in the episodes: &#x27;The Body in the Library&#x27; (2004) &amp; &#x27;The Mirror Crack&#x27;d from Side to Side&#x27; (2009). In 2010, she appeared in a 4-episode guest arc on the BBC drama, &quot;Mistresses&quot; as Vivienne Roden. In 2013, she appeared in the Martin Scorsese crime drama, &quot;The Wolf of Wall Street&quot;.

She starred in David Hirson&#x27;s &quot;La Bête&quot; – Comedy Theatre, London, 26 June – 28 August 2010 with David Hyde Pierce and Mark Rylance, directed by Matthew Warchus. She also starred in &quot;La Bête&quot; at the Music Box Theatre, Broadway, New York which opened on 14 October 2010. She was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play, for her performance.

==Media work==
Lumley, who has one of the most recognised voices in the UK, has gained prominence as a voice-over artist. Users of AOL in the United Kingdom are familiar with Joanna Lumley&#x27;s voice. She recorded the greetings &quot;Welcome&quot;, &quot;You have email&quot; and &quot;Goodbye&quot; for that company.

From 2004 to 2006 she appeared in adverts for insurance brokers Privilege.

Lumley appeared on the last run of ITV&#x27;s &quot;Parkinson&quot; as a guest, on 27 October 2007, discussing the subject of young girls in the UK. She was asked to write the introduction to a revised edition in November 2007 of the book called &quot;The Magic Key to Charm&quot; written by the pioneering female journalist Eileen Ascroft. This is a book of tips to women, first written by Ascroft in 1938 about how to be glamorous. &quot;I thought it was absolutely enchanting, it&#x27;s how young women were told how to behave in the old days and I think it might be just coming back for a bit of a revival&quot;, she explained in the interview.&quot;Because, I have to say I adore our young ones and I think we have got some of the prettiest and loveliest girls in the world but I think sometimes the behaviour gets a bit bad and I think the girls let themselves down. They are so pretty and so lovely but they should behave better, I think, then they will be more successful.&quot;

In 1999 she appeared in the Comic Relief &quot;Doctor Who&quot; parody &quot;The Curse of Fatal Death&quot; as the final incarnation of the Doctor. She also appeared with Jennifer Saunders, Dawn French and Sienna Miller in the French and Saunders pastiche of &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; for &quot;Comic Relief&quot; 2009 in which she played the role of Tanya (named Patsy in the spoof).

In 2004 Lumley appeared as the &quot;Woman with the Sydney Opera House Head&quot; in Dirk Maggs&#x27;s long-awaited radio adaptation of the third book of the Douglas Adams series &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;.

In 2005 she published her autobiography, &quot;No Room for Secrets&quot;, which was serialised by &quot;The Times&quot;, for which she was once a regular contributor.

In September 2008, the BBC aired &quot;Joanna Lumley in the Land of the Northern Lights&quot;, a documentary about her search to see the Northern Lights in northern Norway.

In 2009 she portrayed a rock star, believed to have been dead for 35 years, and her twin, in the &quot;Counter Culture Blues&quot; episode of the British television mystery series &quot;Lewis&quot; (known in the U.S. as &quot;Inspector Lewis&quot;).

In 2011, Lumley appeared in &quot;Uptown Downstairs Abbey&quot;, the Comic Relief parody of the critically acclaimed historical television dramas &quot;Downton Abbey&quot; and &quot;Upstairs Downstairs&quot;. Playing herself and the character of Mrs. Danvers, she starred alongside others including Jennifer Saunders, Kim Cattrall, Victoria Wood, Harry Enfield, Patrick Barlow, Dale Winton, Olivia Colman and Tim Vine.

In recent years, Lumley has worked extensively on ITV, and in 2010 Lumley was executive producer and presenter of &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Nile&quot;, where she journeyed up the River Nile from sea to source in Rwanda, for ITV. This was broadcast in four parts on ITV beginning on 12 April 2010, and repeated in June 2013.

Lumley travelled again for ITV in 2011, this time visiting Greece for a four-part series titled &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Greek Odyssey&quot;. The series aired on ITV beginning on 13 October. Once again, in 2012, Lumley travelled for ITV, now in search of Noah&#x27;s Ark. The trip, which encompassed 3 continents and also involved an adventurous jaunt into Iran, aired in late 2012 as a single 90-minute documentary titled &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Ark&quot;.

In March 2014 she appeared in a BBC One hour-long documentary featuring American musician Will.i.am. The programme was called &quot;Joanna Lumley Meets will.i.am&quot;. In December 2014, she presented &quot;Bette Midler: One Night Only&quot;, a one-off ITV special.

In 2015 she presented a three-part factual series for ITV called &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Trans-Siberian Adventure&quot;. The series saw Lumley travel 6400 miles from Hong Kong to Moscow, along the Trans-Siberian Railway.

In September 2016, she presented &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Japan&quot;, a three-part documentary series for ITV and in July 2017, she presented &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s India&quot; for ITV.

In 2018 she presented &quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Silk Road Adventure&quot;, a four-part travelogue covering eight countries which were part of the ancient trade route.

In May 2024, Lumley was announced as the UK&#x27;s jury spokesperson for the final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2024.

==Activism==
Lumley is also known for her support for Gurkhas, the exiled Tibetan people and government, the Khonds indigenous people of India and the Prospect Burma charity, which offers grants to Burmese students, for whom she broadcast a BBC Radio 4 charity appeal in 2001. Her father was a commanding officer of a troop of Gurkhas who fought in World War II.

===Gurkha Justice Campaign===
In 2008, Lumley became the public face of the Gurkha Justice Campaign, a campaign to provide all Nepalese origin Gurkha veterans who served in the British Army before 1997 the right to settle in Britain. Those serving following 1997 had already been granted permission, but the British Government had not extended the offer to all of the Gurkhas. On 20 November 2008, Lumley led a large all-party group including Gurkhas starting from Parliament Square to 10 Downing Street with a petition signed by 250,000 people.

On 24 April 2009, she stated that she was &quot;ashamed&quot; of the UK administration&#x27;s decision to affix five criteria to the Gurkhas&#x27; right to settle in the UK. With the support of both Opposition parties and Labour rebel MPs on 29 April 2009, a Liberal Democrat motion that all Gurkhas be offered an equal right of residence was passed, allowing Gurkhas who served before 1997 residence in the UK and access to housing, social security and healthcare. Following the Government defeat, the Minister for Immigration Phil Woolas stated that a further review would be completed by the middle of July.

On 5 May 2009, Lumley said that she had received private assurances of support from &quot;a senior member of the Royal Family&quot;, and attended a meeting with Prime Minister Gordon Brown at 10 Downing Street the following day. Afterwards, she described the meeting as &quot;extremely positive&quot;, and praised Mr Brown, saying, &quot;I trust him. I rely on him. And I know that he has now taken this matter into his own hands and so today is a very good day.&quot;

However, on the day following the meeting with Brown, five Gurkha veterans who had applied for residency in the United Kingdom received letters telling them that their appeals had been rejected – many saw this as a betrayal, despite the fact that for the letters to have been received the day after the meeting they might have been sent before it (and certainly following the 29 April Commons vote). Lumley confronted Phil Woolas at the BBC Westminster studios about the issue and, after her pursuing him around the studio, the pair held an impromptu press conference in which Woolas agreed to accept Gurkha Justice Campaign input in developing new guidelines by July while giving sympathetic treatment to Gurkhas not meeting the then current immigration guidelines before the development of new guidelines.

Following a Commons Home Affairs Committee meeting in which talks were held between campaigners, the Ministry of Defence and the Home Office on 19 May, all Gurkha veterans who had served four years or more in the British Army before 1997 were given the right to settle in Britain.

Lumley&#x27;s success in campaigning prompted calls for her to stand as a Member of Parliament at the 2010 UK general election. However, she has dismissed the suggestion. During an appearance on &quot;Friday Night with Jonathan Ross&quot; on 29 May 2009, she reiterated that she had no desire to stand for election to the House of Commons.

In July 2009, Lumley went on a visit to Nepal. Upon her arrival at Tribhuvan International Airport, she was greeted by crowds of Gurkha supporters. Lumley said in a statement, &quot;I feel so humbled by the fact I&#x27;m going to meet so many ex-Gurkhas and their families, and see where they are and how they live.&quot; While there, Lumley was hailed &#x27;Daughter of Nepal&#x27; by the crowds of fans at the airport.

===Work for Survival International===

Lumley has long been a supporter of Survival International and the cause of indigenous rights, and narrated Survival&#x27;s documentary, &quot;Mine: Story of a Sacred Mountain&quot;. The film tells the story of the remote Dongria Kondha tribe in India and their battle to stop a vast bauxite mine from destroying their land and way of life. In defence of the Dongria, she has said, &quot;It greatly disturbs me that a British company will be responsible for the destruction of these wonderful people. I urge the public to support the Dongria, who simply want to be allowed to live in peace. Unlike so many of India&#x27;s rural poor, the Dongria actually live very well in the Niyamgiri hills, and it&#x27;s a terrible irony that what Vedanta is proposing to do in the name of &#x27;development&#x27; will actually destroy this completely self-sufficient people.&quot; Lumley also contributed her writing for the book &quot;We Are One: A Celebration of Tribal Peoples&quot;, released in October 2009 with profits going in support of Survival. A collection of photographs, statements from tribal people and essays from international authors, the book explores the richness of the cultures of indigenous peoples around the world and the risks to their existence. In her essay for the book, Lumley speaks of the Dongria way of life and the threats they face in the name of corporate interests, and calls for action to stop such decisions.

===Other patronage===
Since 1984 Lumley has been a Patron of Born Free Foundation founded in the same year by the stars of the popular wildlife film Born Free, Bill Travers and Virginia McKenna. The Foundation (originally called Zoo Check), campaigns to &#x27;keep wildlife in the wild&#x27;. She has fronted a number of the charity&#x27;s campaigns, including the relocation of endangered giraffe in Kenya and, in 2020, narrating a short film entitled &#x27;Protect Them, Protect Us&#x27;, concerning the relentless exploitation and consumption of wildlife and the natural world, and its link with the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the death of Bill Travers in 1994, Lumley remains a close friend of McKenna and her eldest son, Will Travers, who is the charity&#x27;s Executive President.

In May 2016, Lumley became a Patron of Population Matters, an organisation campaigning for the achievement of a sustainable global population size.

Lumley has been a Patron of the UK charity Tree Aid, since 1993. The organisation aims to enable communities in Africa&#x27;s drylands to fight poverty and become self-reliant, while improving the environment.

Lumley is also a Patron of the Pastoral and Environmental Network in the Horn of Africa (PENHA). PENHA is an African inspired and led international nongovernmental organization (INGO) and research institute, founded in 1989 by a group of development practitioners concerned about the future of pastoralism in the Horn of Africa.

Another charity which Lumley is a Patron of is &quot;Kids for Kids&quot;, helping children in Darfur, Sudan.

Lumley is also a Patron of the Peter Pan Moat Brae Trust. Moat Brae was the favourite place for author J. M. Barrie to play as a child and the house and gardens are said to have inspired Barrie to create Peter Pan. The trust is undertaking a £4 million fundraising project to renovate the Georgian house and gardens to operate as an educational and cultural centre for local schools and JM Barrie enthusiasts and scholars.

Lumley is a Patron of the UK environmental charity Earth Restoration Service. which supports environmental restoration programmes in UK schools, particularly by planting trees and wildflower meadows. In 2008, she spoke on behalf of the charity in the House of Lords to argue for a strong and more widespread environmental movement across the world, and in 2009 she provided the voice over for a short animated film produced by the charity.

Lumley is Patron of the UK charity Trust in Children which aims to help children from poor backgrounds to access education and opportunities for non-academic development.

Lumley has a long association and interest in Nepal and its people that grew out of her father&#x27;s service as an officer in 6th Gurkha Rifles. She agreed to become a Vice Patron of The Gurkha Welfare Trust in 2009.

===London Garden Bridge===

Lumley first lobbied for a garden bridge across London&#x27;s River Thames in the late 1990s as a memorial to the late Princess Diana; this campaign was unsuccessful. In 2002 she presented detailed plans (produced by engineering group Arup) for the bridge to then Mayor of London Ken Livingstone; this bid was also rejected. In 2012 days after the re-election of Boris Johnson as Mayor of London Lumley sent an effusive congratulatory letter to him outlining her proposal for the bridge. It was later revealed that she felt confident of a favourable response from Johnson as she had known him &quot;since he was four years old&quot;. Thomas Heatherwick was proposed by Lumley as the designer for the bridge; he is mentioned favourably in her 2004 autobiography.

The Johnson-chaired Transport for London body initiated a competition for a new central London cross-river footbridge. Three firms were invited to submit proposals and Heatherwick Studios won the competition despite having never previously built a bridge on the proposed scale unlike the losing practices which had built very many. This outcome proved highly controversial. Equally the subsequent funding arrangements for the bridge attracted criticism. These included: &quot;Unorthodox&quot; circumvention of official procedures for public money use by then Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne. A £10,000 taxpayer-funded trip by Johnson, Heatherwick and Sir Edward Lister to Apple Computer in San Francisco seeking sponsorship for the bridge (the bid failed). Escalating cost estimates for the project topped out at around £200 million leading to withdrawal of pledged private sponsorship.

This together with strong opposition from local residents created ever-greater scrutiny of the proposals. It became clear that the bridge would be closed at night, involve the felling of 30 mature trees and effectively privatise long-held public space in central London. Lumley also reversed her position on cycleway provision for the bridge.

Johnson continued to support the failing project until his very last day in office; attempting to shore up its funding with last minute manoeuvring to guarantee public money for the by then £70m shortfall.

Following the election of Sadiq Khan in 2016 Mayoral support for the project was withdrawn (finally in August 2017) in the face of lack of funds and persistent planning issues.

£46.4m of public money had been spent. A Khan-commissioned report concluded that the &quot;business case for the bridge was flimsy and that the procurement process in which Heatherwick Studio won the contract was “not open, fair or competitive”.

Lumley made little comment on the fiasco until in 2017, interviewed by &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper she stated that the cancellation was “absolutely shattering, devastating... The negativity troubles me in my heart. I hope we’re not turning into the sort of country that instantly says no before it considers saying yes. A nation that just pulls the shutters down. The silent majority still love the bridge, but of course they were not asked what they think.&quot; Murdoch was on record as having supported both Johnson and the bridge project.

===Research fellowship===
In 1996, the Lumley Research Fellowship was established at Green College, University of Oxford. Sponsored by Friends Provident financial group, it was for a young researcher on &quot;major environmental or wildlife issues, with particular reference to Africa&quot;. The candidates were interviewed by Lumley.

==Influence==
In February 2013, Lumley was assessed as one of the 100 most influential women in the United Kingdom by BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Woman&#x27;s Hour&quot;.

==Personal life==
Lumley&#x27;s son was born in 1967. His father is photographer Michael Claydon. She was briefly married to actor Jeremy Lloyd between 1970 and 1971. She married the conductor Stephen Barlow in 1986; they live in Central London.&lt;ref name=&quot;independent/1610102&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They also own a house near the village of Penpont, Dumfriesshire, in Scotland.

Lumley supports over 60 charities and has been a vegetarian for over 40 years. She has donated books to Book Aid International. She is patron of the Born Free Foundation and passionate about the Free Tibet campaign.

In May 2009 Lumley supported the Green Party during the 2009 European Elections campaign. For Lumley, the work of Green MEPs in the European Parliament in pursuing human rights and animal rights made the Green Party &quot;the obvious choice&quot; and urged UK voters &quot;to cast a positive vote for a better future by voting Green in the European Elections.&quot; Lumley also appeared in literature to support changing the British electoral system from first-past-the-post to alternative vote for electing Members of Parliament to the House of Commons in the Alternative Vote referendum in 2011.

In 2010, Lumley donated £1,000 to Caroline Lucas&#x27;s campaign to become the first Green Party MP during the 2010 General Election campaign. She endorsed the parliamentary candidacy of Dr Lucas at the 2015 general election.

In August 2015, Lumley backed children&#x27;s fairytales app &quot;GivingTales&quot; in aid of UNICEF together with other British celebrities including Roger Moore, Stephen Fry, Ewan McGregor, Joan Collins, Michael Caine, David Walliams, Charlotte Rampling, Paul McKenna and Michael Ball.

In July 2021, Lumley joined an international line-up of actors in backing calls for the Great Barrier Reef to be placed on a list of world heritage sites currently in danger.

In 2023, Lumley attended the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla. In July 2023, Lumley announced that she is suffering from prosopagnosia, a condition which impairs facial perception.

==Honours==
Lumley was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1995 New Year Honours and promoted Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2022 New Year Honours for services to drama, entertainment and charitable causes.

==Awards==
Elected a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society (FRGS), Lumley was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Letters (Hon. D.Litt.) by the University of Kent in July 1994. In 2002, she was awarded an honorary degree by Oxford Brookes University. In 2006, she was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Letters (Hon. D.Litt.) by the University of St Andrews.

In July 2008, she was awarded an Honorary Doctor of the University (Hon DUniv) by Queen&#x27;s University Belfast, and in March 2019, she and her husband were both awarded honorary doctorates by the University of Chester.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Non-acting television===
==Theatre==
*&quot;Not Now, Darling&quot; – Canterbury, 1969
*&quot;Don&#x27;t Just Lie There Say Something&quot; – Garrick Theatre, 1971
*&quot;The End of Me Old Cigar&quot; – Greenwich Theatre, 1975
*&quot;Cinderella&#x27;s Star Night&quot; (all-star cast to raise funds for The Bobath Centre Prince) – Prince Edward Theatre, 31 January 1982
*&quot;Private Lives&quot; – UK tour, 1982
*&quot;Noel &amp; Gertie&quot; – King&#x27;s Head, Islington, 1983
*&quot;Hedda Gabler&quot; – Dundee Rep, 1984
*&quot;Blithe Spirit&quot; – Vaudeville Theatre, 1986
*&quot;An Ideal Husband&quot; – Chichester Festival, 1987
*&quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; – Dundee Rep, 1988
*&quot;The Revengers&#x27; Comedies&quot; – Strand Theatre, 1991
*&quot;Who Shall I Be Tomorrow?&quot; – Greenwich Theatre, 1992
*&quot;The Letter&quot; – Lyric Hammersmith, 1995
*&quot;Jack and the Beanstalk&quot; – Royal Albert Hall, 1996
*&quot;The Cherry Orchard&quot; – Sheffield Crucible, 2007
*&quot;La Bête&quot; – Comedy Theatre and Music Box Theater, New York, 2010
*&quot;The Lion in Winter&quot; – Theatre Royal Haymarket, 2011
*&quot;Joanna Lumley: It&#x27;s All About Me&quot; – UK and Ireland tour, 2018

==Radio==
*&quot;Conversations From A Long Marriage&quot; – BBC Radio 4 comedy with Roger Allam written by Jan Etherington, 2018–2023

==Books==
===As author===
*&quot;Peacocks and Commas: Best of the &quot;Spectator&quot; Competitions&quot; (1983) – Editor
*&quot;Stare Back and Smile: Memoirs&quot; (1989) – Memoir
*&quot;Forces Sweethearts&quot; (1993) – Editor
*&quot;Girl Friday&quot; (1994)
*&quot;In the Kingdom of the Thunder Dragon&quot; (1997)
*&quot;No Room for Secrets&quot; (2005) – Memoir
*&quot;Absolutely&quot; (2011) – Memoir
*&quot;A Queen for All Seasons: A Celebration of Our One and Only Queen Elizabeth II on Her Platinum Jubilee&quot; (2021) – Biography

She has also narrated a number of audiobooks and provided forewords for works by other authors.

===As subject===
*&quot;Joanna Lumley – The Biography&quot; by Tim Ewbank and Stafford Hildred; an unauthorised biography.

==Home media==
*&quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Nile&quot; (2010)
*&quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Trans-Siberian Adventure&quot; (2015)
*&quot;Joanna Lumley&#x27;s Japan&quot; (2016)
*Joanna Lumley&#x27;s &quot;Silk Road Adventure&quot; (2018)
*Joanna Lumley&#x27;s &quot;India&quot; (2018)
*Joanna Lumley&#x27;s &quot;Home Sweet Home&quot; (2021)
*Joanna Lumley&#x27;s &quot;Spice Trail Adventure&quot; (2023)

==References==
==External links==
*Biography on the BBC
*Joanna Lumley&#x27;s biography
*Booking Agent Profile 
*The Gurkha Welfare Trust Vice Patron</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="0" end="25" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Dame Joanna Lamond Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="149" end="164" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA TV Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148282" start="181" end="192" title="Patsy Stone" label="Patsy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="200" end="203" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="217" end="236" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q627778" start="286" end="332" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="341" end="349" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461413" start="367" end="374" title="La Bête (play)" label="La Bête"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099088" start="441" end="467" title="National Television Awards" label="National Television Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="506" end="522" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722688" start="584" end="600" title="The New Avengers (TV series)" label="The New Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250446" start="626" end="646" title="Sapphire &amp;amp; Steel" label="Sapphire &amp;amp; Steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="672" end="686" title="Sensitive Skin (British TV series)" label="Sensitive Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="712" end="731" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085661" start="760" end="773" title="Finding Alice" label="Finding Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567889" start="815" end="829" title="Elaine Perkins" label="Elaine Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="839" end="856" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q107894" start="907" end="943" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (film)" label="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199530" start="964" end="989" title="Trail of the Pink Panther" label="Trail of the Pink Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193469" start="1010" end="1035" title="Curse of the Pink Panther" label="Curse of the Pink Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404361" start="1056" end="1073" title="Shirley Valentine (film)" label="Shirley Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131380" start="1094" end="1119" title="James and the Giant Peach (film)" label="James and the Giant Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q939325" start="1140" end="1154" title="Ella Enchanted (film)" label="Ella Enchanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="1175" end="1187" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="1208" end="1231" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1255" end="1285" title="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie" label="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q640327" start="1339" end="1360" title="Are You Being Served?" label="Are You Being Served?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805798" start="1390" end="1402" title="Jeremy Lloyd" label="Jeremy Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="1429" end="1436" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476215" start="1520" end="1541" title="Human rights defender" label="human rights activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="1546" end="1568" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620123" start="1577" end="1600" title="Gurkha Justice Campaign" label="Gurkha Justice Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="1629" end="1643" title="animal welfare" label="animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092816" start="1660" end="1687" title="Compassion in World Farming" label="Compassion in World Farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153559" start="1692" end="1741" title="Viva! (organisation)" label="Vegetarians&amp;#x27; International Voice for Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1761" end="1765" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281328" start="1779" end="1800" title="2022 New Year Honours" label="2022 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="1914" end="1922" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="1924" end="1941" title="Jammu and Kashmir (princely state)" label="Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1946" end="1959" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="2034" end="2052" title="Lieutenant colonel" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006321" start="2082" end="2090" title="Ghazipur" label="Ghazipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43100" start="2124" end="2131" title="Kashmir" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25238" start="2162" end="2177" title="13th Dalai Lama" label="13th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="2192" end="2197" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="2235" end="2241" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2255" end="2263" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115428505" start="2331" end="2368" title="James Rutherford Lumley" label="Maj.-Gen. Sir James Rutherford Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="2409" end="2428" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642770" start="2436" end="2480" title="6th Queen Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s Own Gurkha Rifles" label="6th Queen Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s Own Gurkha Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="2484" end="2509" title="Burma campaign" label="Burma during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373265" start="2531" end="2548" title="Battle of Mogaung" label="Battle of Mogaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963630" start="2572" end="2587" title="Tul Bahadur Pun" label="Tul Bahadur Pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q241923" start="2654" end="2683" title="Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scots" label="Joan Beaufort, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313624" start="2936" end="2945" title="Rolvenden" label="Rolvenden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3066" end="3116" title="Augustus Hare#Holmhurst" label="Holmhurst St Mary&amp;#x27;s Convent School, the Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375360" start="3189" end="3217" title="Community of the Holy Family" label="Community of the Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696965" start="3462" end="3492" title="Lucie Clayton Charm Academy" label="Lucie Clayton Finishing School"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3496" end="3502" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q523926" start="3535" end="3564" title="RADA" label="Royal Academy of Dramatic Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963625" start="3658" end="3669" title="Brian Duffy (photographer)" label="Brian Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="3755" end="3759" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171234" start="3864" end="3873" title="Jean Muir" label="Jean Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245136" start="4081" end="4094" title="Bruce Forsyth" label="Bruce Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559406" start="4348" end="4361" title="Some Girls Do" label="Some Girls Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="4378" end="4387" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q107894" start="4397" end="4433" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (film)" label="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104987" start="4509" end="4529" title="Ernst Stavro Blofeld" label="Ernst Stavro Blofeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567889" start="4619" end="4633" title="Elaine Perkins" label="Elaine Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="4643" end="4660" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387284" start="4703" end="4713" title="Ken Barlow" label="Ken Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q640327" start="4806" end="4827" title="Are You Being Served?" label="Are You Being Served?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248747" start="4841" end="4856" title="Steptoe and Son" label="Steptoe and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q607885" start="4873" end="4887" title="The Protectors" label="The Protectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254444" start="4975" end="5003" title="The Satanic Rites of Dracula" label="The Satanic Rites of Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q180338" start="5048" end="5063" title="Christopher Lee" label="Christopher Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291682" start="5110" end="5151" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Just Lie There, Say Something!" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Just Lie There, Say Something!"/>
<link wikidata="Q710142" start="5175" end="5190" title="Leslie Phillips" label="Leslie Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q449036" start="5195" end="5204" title="Joan Sims" label="Joan Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410916" start="5363" end="5369" title="Purdey (The New Avengers)" label="Purdey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722688" start="5379" end="5395" title="The New Avengers (TV series)" label="The New Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="5446" end="5458" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250446" start="5610" end="5630" title="Sapphire &amp;amp; Steel" label="Sapphire &amp;amp; Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313023" start="5643" end="5657" title="David McCallum" label="David McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5672" end="5675" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="5699" end="5709" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280214" start="5902" end="5915" title="Sydney Newman" label="Sydney Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604994" start="5916" end="5945" title="List of actors considered for the part of the Doctor" label="suggested Lumley for the role"/>
<link wikidata="Q34358" start="5949" end="5959" title="The Doctor (Doctor Who)" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148282" start="6120" end="6131" title="Patsy Stone" label="Patsy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="6146" end="6163" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6170" end="6183" title="Absolutely Fabulous#Eddy" label="Edina Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="6191" end="6194" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="6226" end="6245" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6293" end="6323" title="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie" label="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031635" start="6397" end="6410" title="Nadine Garner" label="Nadine Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699376" start="6415" end="6424" title="John Bowe (actor)" label="John Bowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127966" start="6462" end="6471" title="Class Act (British TV series)" label="Class Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q372581" start="6593" end="6600" title="Lovejoy" label="Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="6741" end="6747" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659153" start="6759" end="6784" title="A Rather English Marriage" label="A Rather English Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="6808" end="6813" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304566" start="6847" end="6860" title="Dr Willoughby" label="Dr Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757821" start="7095" end="7105" title="Foxbusters" label="Foxbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="7214" end="7221" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="7319" end="7325" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="7332" end="7351" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="7363" end="7374" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="7376" end="7393" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335065" start="7399" end="7411" title="Sue Johnston" label="Sue Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451056" start="7479" end="7493" title="Sensitive Skin (UK TV series)" label="Sensitive Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="7636" end="7646" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131380" start="7678" end="7703" title="James and the Giant Peach (film)" label="James and the Giant Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="7727" end="7739" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q49017" start="7786" end="7797" title="Hugh Laurie" label="Hugh Laurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914437" start="7835" end="7845" title="Maybe Baby (2000 film)" label="Maybe Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q36301" start="7873" end="7886" title="Anne Hathaway" label="Anne Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q939325" start="7896" end="7910" title="Ella Enchanted (film)" label="Ella Enchanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q391056" start="7978" end="8007" title="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple" label="Agatha Christie&amp;#x27;s Marple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8197" end="8200" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8214" end="8224" title="Mistresses (British TV series)" label="Mistresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="8279" end="8294" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392744" start="8314" end="8337" title="The Wolf of Wall Street (2013 film)" label="The Wolf of Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235022" start="8361" end="8373" title="David Hirson" label="David Hirson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461413" start="8387" end="8394" title="La Bête (play)" label="La Bête"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="8403" end="8417" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Comedy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q373976" start="8457" end="8474" title="David Hyde Pierce" label="David Hyde Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q324572" start="8479" end="8491" title="Mark Rylance" label="Mark Rylance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299812" start="8505" end="8520" title="Matthew Warchus" label="Matthew Warchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461413" start="8548" end="8555" title="La Bête (play)" label="La Bête"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954899" start="8569" end="8586" title="Music Box Theatre" label="Music Box Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q627778" start="8666" end="8712" title="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play" label="Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="8867" end="8870" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="9103" end="9112" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246300" start="9121" end="9130" title="Privilege (insurance company)" label="Privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="9168" end="9171" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855349" start="9185" end="9194" title="Parkinson (TV series)" label="Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349321" start="9458" end="9472" title="Eileen Ascroft" label="Eileen Ascroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="10149" end="10161" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033553" start="10198" end="10222" title="The Curse of Fatal Death" label="The Curse of Fatal Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q193458" start="10327" end="10340" title="Sienna Miller" label="Sienna Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q686861" start="10386" end="10395" title="Mamma Mia! (musical)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304666" start="10412" end="10424" title="Red Nose Day 2009" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="10661" end="10674" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q673644" start="10688" end="10729" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary to Quintessential Phases" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="10764" end="10777" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="10842" end="10851" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="11043" end="11058" title="Aurora (astronomy)" label="Northern Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="11071" end="11077" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523064" start="11266" end="11271" title="Lewis (TV series)" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11400" end="11412" title="Comic Relief#2011 event" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="11483" end="11496" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168760" start="11513" end="11532" title="Upstairs, Downstairs (1971 TV series)" label="Upstairs Downstairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209175" start="11649" end="11661" title="Kim Cattrall" label="Kim Cattrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309588" start="11663" end="11676" title="Victoria Wood" label="Victoria Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127826" start="11678" end="11691" title="Harry Enfield" label="Harry Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897723" start="11693" end="11707" title="Patrick Barlow" label="Patrick Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q515011" start="11709" end="11720" title="Dale Winton" label="Dale Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088045" start="11722" end="11735" title="Olivia Colman" label="Olivia Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804427" start="11740" end="11748" title="Tim Vine" label="Tim Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="11931" end="11941" title="River Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="11964" end="11970" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="12334" end="12349" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="12573" end="12580" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="12631" end="12640" title="Will.i.am" label="Will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093042" start="12748" end="12776" title="One Night Only (TV series)" label="Bette Midler: One Night Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="12990" end="12996" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q58767" start="13008" end="13030" title="Trans-Siberian Railway" label="Trans-Siberian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="13374" end="13393" title="Silk Road" label="ancient trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q114565318" start="13486" end="13514" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2024" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="13571" end="13577" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075369" start="13584" end="13620" title="Tibetan independence movement" label="exiled Tibetan people and government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290610" start="13626" end="13632" title="Khonds" label="Khonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13866" end="13878" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620123" start="13957" end="13980" title="Gurkha Justice Campaign" label="Gurkha Justice Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317274" start="14008" end="14023" title="Nepalis" label="Nepalese origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207962" start="14024" end="14030" title="Gurkha" label="Gurkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="14058" end="14070" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368556" start="14346" end="14363" title="Parliament Square" label="Parliament Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="14367" end="14384" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q125590038" start="14931" end="14955" title="Minister of State for Immigration" label="Minister for Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q338063" start="14956" end="14967" title="Phil Woolas" label="Phil Woolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q645968" start="15153" end="15165" title="British royal family" label="Royal Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="15201" end="15215" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="15216" end="15228" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="15232" end="15249" title="10 Downing Street" label="10 Downing Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q338063" start="15928" end="15939" title="Phil Woolas" label="Phil Woolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152450" start="16331" end="16361" title="Home Affairs Select Committee" label="Commons Home Affairs Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="16420" end="16439" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="16448" end="16459" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="16675" end="16695" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="16703" end="16727" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 UK general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503548" start="16802" end="16833" title="Friday Night with Jonathan Ross" label="Friday Night with Jonathan Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q61066" start="17009" end="17040" title="Tribhuvan International Airport" label="Tribhuvan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887464" start="17439" end="17461" title="Survival International" label="Survival International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290610" start="17625" end="17639" title="Khonds" label="Dongria Kondha"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="17687" end="17694" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503753" start="18138" end="18145" title="Vedanta Resources" label="Vedanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="18594" end="18612" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q893920" start="18901" end="18921" title="Born Free Foundation" label="Born Free Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453797" start="18989" end="18998" title="Born Free" label="Born Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q862624" start="19000" end="19012" title="Bill Travers" label="Bill Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q269872" start="19017" end="19033" title="Virginia McKenna" label="Virginia McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q58214420" start="19568" end="19580" title="Will Travers" label="Will Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155736" start="19669" end="19687" title="Population Matters" label="Population Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837530" start="19822" end="19830" title="Tree Aid" label="Tree Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q115822436" start="20021" end="20085" title="Pastoral and Environmental Network in the Horn of Africa" label="Pastoral and Environmental Network in the Horn of Africa (PENHA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="20303" end="20317" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404980" start="20373" end="20386" title="Kids for Kids" label="Kids for Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886481" start="20488" end="20497" title="Moat Brae" label="Moat Brae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81796" start="20533" end="20545" title="J. M. Barrie" label="J. M. Barrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="20634" end="20643" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536096" start="21015" end="21029" title="Tree planting" label="planting trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585615" start="21034" end="21044" title="wildflower" label="wildflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="21105" end="21119" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="21162" end="21184" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="21255" end="21268" title="Animation" label="animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="21513" end="21518" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620127" start="21651" end="21675" title="The Gurkha Welfare Trust" label="The Gurkha Welfare Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="21776" end="21788" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="21833" end="21847" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="21978" end="21993" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q220723" start="21994" end="22009" title="Ken Livingstone" label="Ken Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="22077" end="22090" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051023" start="22348" end="22366" title="Thomas Heatherwick" label="Thomas Heatherwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="22461" end="22474" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q682520" start="22497" end="22517" title="Transport for London" label="Transport for London"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="23036" end="23063" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332493" start="23064" end="23078" title="George Osborne" label="George Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65930945" start="23143" end="23156" title="Edward Lister, Baron Udny-Lister" label="Edward Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="23160" end="23174" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="23178" end="23191" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q334155" start="23953" end="23963" title="Sadiq Khan" label="Sadiq Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544655" start="24985" end="24998" title="Green College, Oxford" label="Green College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="25000" end="25020" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q502313" start="25035" end="25052" title="Friends Provident" label="Friends Provident"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="25354" end="25365" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030649" start="25379" end="25396" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Hour" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805798" start="25536" end="25548" title="Jeremy Lloyd" label="Jeremy Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q64755019" start="25753" end="25760" title="Penpont" label="Penpont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247384" start="25762" end="25775" title="Dumfriesshire" label="Dumfriesshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="25840" end="25850" title="Vegetarianism" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942927" start="25895" end="25917" title="Book Aid International" label="Book Aid International"/>
<link wikidata="Q893920" start="25940" end="25960" title="Born Free Foundation" label="Born Free Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054664" start="25986" end="26005" title="Free Tibet" label="Free Tibet campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="26041" end="26052" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q528608" start="26064" end="26087" title="2009 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2009 European Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="26140" end="26159" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="26463" end="26482" title="First-past-the-post voting" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="26486" end="26502" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="alternative vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="26545" end="26561" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788922" start="26569" end="26596" title="2011 United Kingdom Alternative Vote referendum" label="Alternative Vote referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="26631" end="26632" title="pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q9670" start="26641" end="26655" title="Caroline Lucas" label="Caroline Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="26810" end="26831" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="26986" end="26997" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="26999" end="27010" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q165518" start="27012" end="27025" title="Ewan McGregor" label="Ewan McGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152843" start="27027" end="27039" title="Joan Collins" label="Joan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="27041" end="27054" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q359665" start="27056" end="27070" title="David Walliams" label="David Walliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q234679" start="27072" end="27090" title="Charlotte Rampling" label="Charlotte Rampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000621" start="27092" end="27104" title="Paul McKenna" label="Paul McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q934543" start="27109" end="27121" title="Michael Ball" label="Michael Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="27212" end="27230" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q113857620" start="27329" end="27377" title="Coronation of Charles III and Camilla" label="coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="27437" end="27450" title="prosopagnosia" label="prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q529895" start="27478" end="27495" title="facial perception" label="facial perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27531" end="27573" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590527" start="27587" end="27608" title="1995 New Year Honours" label="1995 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="27622" end="27671" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281328" start="27685" end="27706" title="2022 New Year Honours" label="2022 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="27789" end="27829" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="27869" end="27886" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="27909" end="27927" title="University of Kent" label="University of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="27970" end="27985" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q132478" start="27989" end="28014" title="Oxford Brookes University" label="Oxford Brookes University"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="28053" end="28070" title="Doctor of Letters" label="Doctor of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="28093" end="28117" title="University of St Andrews" label="University of St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="28162" end="28186" title="Honorary degree" label="Doctor of the University"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="28202" end="28233" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="28292" end="28310" title="honorary doctorate" label="honorary doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q762243" start="28319" end="28340" title="University of Chester" label="University of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062145" start="28434" end="28450" title="Not Now, Darling" label="Not Now, Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813385" start="28766" end="28779" title="Private Lives" label="Private Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q176465" start="28876" end="28888" title="Hedda Gabler" label="Hedda Gabler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400728" start="28921" end="28934" title="Blithe Spirit (play)" label="Blithe Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143075" start="28975" end="28991" title="An Ideal Husband" label="An Ideal Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="29033" end="29051" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760513" start="29084" end="29112" title="The Revengers&amp;#x27; Comedies" label="The Revengers&amp;#x27; Comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952295" start="29213" end="29223" title="The Letter (play)" label="The Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="29263" end="29285" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q478381" start="29325" end="29343" title="The Cherry Orchard" label="The Cherry Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461413" start="29384" end="29391" title="La Bête (play)" label="La Bête"/>
<link wikidata="Q615544" start="29460" end="29478" title="The Lion in Winter" label="The Lion in Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424994" start="29681" end="29692" title="Roger Allam" label="Roger Allam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148881" start="29704" end="29719" title="Jan Etherington" label="Jan Etherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564366" start="29969" end="29980" title="Girl Friday (television)" label="Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="30484" end="30493" title="biography" label="biography"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89604" wikidata="Q4351893" url="?curid=89604" title="Miķeļi">
<text>Miķeļi
() or Miķeļdiena is a Latvian autumn equinox and annual harvest festival and market. Latvian Miķeļi dainas referred to good and rich husbands as bread fathers, who are associated with the autumn harvest ripening. In different regions, the Miķeļi celebration was also called Mīkaļiem or Mīklāli, but it is also known to other households as Sila Miķelis, Miega Miķelis, and Miega Mača. According to an old calendar, this holiday is celebrated around autumn equinox time (around 21–23 September), when the duration of night is same as the duration of day.

The Latvian name of this holiday is Apjumības or Appļāvības, because this day was the last one when grains could have been harvested. A characteristic Miķeļdiena pagan ritual was finding Jumis, through which farmers sought to ensure the fertility of the fields in the coming year. The Miķeļi&#x27;s house was considered to be pine forest&#x27;s sandy soils, since he expressed his protection to gatherers of forest&#x27;s riches.

==Title==

Miķeļdiena name is derived from a name of an honorable Christian archangel Michael, whose day is celebrated during the autumn solstice time. In Latvian mythology, it gradually replaced a time to celebrate the autumn equinox of Apjumības or Appļāvības, which was the last harvest day, which with the help of magic rituals sought to ensure the success next year and to obtain the favor of Jumis.

==Holiday traditions==

===Collecting Jumis===

According to ancient beliefs, cereals farmers lived with fertility deity Jumis and only with the owner, in whose cereals dwelt Jumis, growing fine bread. Therefore, they had to always leave a tithe of grains, to placate Jumis and so that he would not leaves the fields forever, since if only once one field is left without a grain patch, Jumis will become upset and he will never return.

When on Miķeļi a family solemnly went to mow the last field, all of the mowers reaped grain from all sides toward the middle of the fields, where they left a small bundle of cereal. It is tied in a knot and is used for magical activities, believing, that Jumis is hiding in there. Sometimes a bundle is tied in the form of the roof, dug the ground on Jumis roots, and dug out worms and insects, who were below the last sheaf, calling upon Jumīšus. If insects, who appeared at the excavation, hastily fled back to where they came from, then it meant that the future will be all good. Similarly, it was the same with mice, frogs and other critters escaping from the last sheaf, since they were considered to be the creatures of Jumis.

During the harvest, the collected Jumīšus (one stalk with two spikes fused together) were gathered and woven into a crown or a belt. Jumis&#x27; crown was usually carried to the receiver&#x27;s home and put on the landlady&#x27;s head, while a sowed belt was put around the landlord&#x27;s waist. The found Jumīšus was brought home, and inserted into built-in slot and was stored all winter. It was believed, that only the house owner will receive the variety of benefits, while Jumis finders will still be the same after autumn. In other rituals every mowers flung their scythes over left shoulder. Whose scythe was thrown furthest, that worker will be married.

===Feast===

On Miķeļi people usually sacrificed a ram, goat or piglet, which were fed particularly on this day and called upon Miķeļi. The hostess of the holiday feast baked a special loaf of Jumis bread. It mentioned in the description, that the landlord took grains from each type of seeding cereal to make malt beer. Latvian dainas also mention Miķeļi as a celebration of beer employer. Since Miķeļi falls into the most opulent season, the feast table on that day is full of food. Miķeļi is a time of feast, chanting and singing about Jumis, and flower giving, while also each dish was given to Houses gods, before they could eat themselves.

===Betting and proposing===

During Jumis catching unmarried maidens observed insects, who were believed to be an embodiment of natural fertility. If the found beetle was beautiful, then maidens believed they would have a beautiful husband. Miķeļi was the last summer day, when men sought for maidens to woo and did drinking bets. After Miķeļi the proposing had to be postponed for another year.

===Sacrificial rituals===

Since the Miķeļdiena began the veļu laiks (Time of the Dead), farmers donated wax, butter, bread, cheese, meat, wool, and money on Miķeļi day. In 1570, the Duchy of Courland&#x27;s church enforced the law of collecting, and taught how to look, in order for Latvian farmers to not practice &quot;soul feast&quot; (referred in text as &#x27;Dwessel Meley&#x27;) from Miķeļi till All Saints&#x27; Day. It also prohibited the sacrifice of wax, candle, wool, chicken, egg, butter etc. Miķeļdiena, similar to Jurģi, the time of spring solstice, repeated rooster sacrifice and greased the stable door with blood, in order for evil spirits to never enter the stables, and only the holy Miķeļi could.

==Miķeļi traditions in Latvian dainas==

==Miķeļi traditions in other countries==

Medieval Catholic traditional archangel Michael was the soldier&#x27;s guardian. Miķeļi Day is mostly celebrated by Northern European people. Germans call this celebration &quot;Michaelis&quot; or &quot;Michaeli&quot;, Englishmen call it &quot;Michaelmas&quot;, Swedes - &quot;Mickelsmäss&quot;, Danes - &quot;Mikkelsdag&quot;, Norwegians - &quot;Mikkelsmess&quot;, Finns - &quot;Mikkelinpäivä&quot;, while Estonians call it &quot;Mihklipäev&quot;.

Since the Middle Ages up to the 18th century, this festival served as a tax deadline and lease payment. The traditional festive meal that day was a roasted goose.

==References==
==External links==
* Ancient Latvian solar calendar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="0" end="6" title="Miķeļi" label="Miķeļi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="13" end="23" title="Miķeļi" label="Miķeļdiena"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="29" end="36" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="44" end="51" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427690" start="107" end="113" title="Daina (Latvia)" label="dainas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="281" end="289" title="Miķeļi" label="Mīkaļiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="293" end="300" title="Miķeļi" label="Mīklāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="407" end="419" title="Julian calendar" label="old calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="462" end="469" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="597" end="606" title="Miķeļi" label="Apjumības"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351893" start="610" end="620" title="Miķeļi" label="Appļāvības"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="661" end="666" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="723" end="728" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187448" start="748" end="753" title="Jumis" label="Jumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188869" start="815" end="820" title="field (agriculture)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="1068" end="1085" title="archangel Michael" label="archangel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q187448" start="1147" end="1164" title="Latvian mythology" label="Latvian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187448" start="1390" end="1395" title="Jumis" label="Jumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="2456" end="2460" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q158583" start="2631" end="2637" title="Spike (botany)" label="spikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="3141" end="3147" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="3284" end="3287" title="Sheep" label="ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="3289" end="3293" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="3297" end="3300" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="3609" end="3613" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="4460" end="4484" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duchy of Courland&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851156" start="4807" end="4812" title="Jurģi" label="Jurģi"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="4833" end="4841" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="5196" end="5211" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5222" end="5229" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="5299" end="5309" title="English people" label="Englishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5540" end="5551" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89605" wikidata="Q235415" url="?curid=89605" title="Jennifer Saunders">
<text>Jennifer Jane Saunders (born 6 July 1958) is an English actress, comedian, singer, and screenwriter. Saunders originally found attention in the 1980s, when she became a member of The Comic Strip after graduating from the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama with her best friend and comedy partner, Dawn French. With French, she co-wrote and starred in their eponymous sketch show, &quot;French and Saunders&quot;, for which they jointly received a BAFTA Fellowship in 2009. Saunders later received acclaim in the 1990s for writing and playing her character Edina Monsoon in her sitcom &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;.

==Early life==
Jennifer Jane Saunders was born on 6 July 1958 in Sleaford, Lincolnshire, England. Her mother, Barbara Jane (née Duminy), was a biology teacher, and her father, Robert Thomas Saunders, served as a pilot in the Royal Air Force (RAF). He reached the rank of group captain, and later worked for British Aerospace. Six months after her birth, Saunders&#x27; parents moved to Cyprus. Her family moved to Camberley, and then to Melksham at the age of ten. She has three brothers: Tim, Peter, and Simon. As her father was in the armed forces during her childhood years, Saunders changed schools several times. She was educated from the age of five to 18 in boarding schools and then at St Paul&#x27;s Girls&#x27; School, an independent school in west London. Her first year of secondary school was at a comprehensive school in Wiltshire. Her parents had wanted her to board at Stonar School. Her family moved to Cheshire in 1971 when her father left the RAF for Hawker Siddeley. Her headmistress at Northwich Grammar School For Girls was Janet Dines, where she played in goal for the school hockey team. After school, she worked for a year in Italy as an au pair.

In 1977, Saunders received a place at the Central School of Speech and Drama in London on a drama teachers&#x27; course, where she met her future comedy partner, Dawn French. French and Saunders came from RAF backgrounds, and had grown up on the same base, even having had the same best friend, without ever meeting. The comic duo originally did not get on well, and as far as Saunders was concerned, French was a &quot;cocky little upstart&quot;. The distrust was mutual: French considered Saunders snooty and uptight. French wanted to become a drama teacher, whereas Saunders loathed the idea and had not fully understood what the course was about; thus, she disliked French for being enthusiastic and confident about the course. Saunders was shocked to find that she was taking a course to become a teacher, as her mother had filled in the application form. Her mother was saddened when Saunders chose not to apply for an Oxbridge university education.

After the initial friction experienced during drama school, French and Saunders shared a flat together. French has remarked on Saunders&#x27; messy habits when sharing the house saying: &quot;When we lived together in Chalk Farm, she had a room at the top of the house. We got broken into and the police said, &#x27;Well, it is quite bad, but the worst is that room at the top.&#x27; And, of course, nobody had been in there.&quot; The two performed together after graduation, working the festival, cabaret, and stand-up circuits. They formed a double-act called The Menopause Sisters. Saunders described the act, which involved wearing tampons in their ears, as &quot;cringeworthy&quot;. The manager of the club where they performed recalled, &quot;They didn&#x27;t seem to give a damn. There was no star quality about them at all.&quot;

==Career==
===Early career===
French and Saunders would eventually come to public attention as members of the informal comedy collective The Comic Strip, part of the alternative comedy scene in the early 1980s. They answered a 1980 advert in &quot;The Stage&quot; newspaper looking for female comedians to perform at The Comic Strip, which had, until that point, only had male performers. When they walked into the audition, they were immediately told, &quot;You&#x27;re booked. When can you start?&quot; They became continuing members of The Comic Strip, which included Adrian Edmondson, Rik Mayall, Peter Richardson, Nigel Planer, Pete Richens, Alexei Sayle and Robbie Coltrane.

The group performed at the Boulevard Theatre, above Soho&#x27;s Raymond Revuebar, and gained a cult following, with visiting audience members including Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson, and Robin Williams, who once joined in the performance. By the time French and Saunders became members of The Comic Strip, French was already working as a drama teacher, while Saunders was on the dole and spending much of her time in bed.

====1980s and 1990s====
The comedy group appeared on Channel 4&#x27;s first night on air, in the first episode of &quot;The Comic Strip Presents: Five Go Mad In Dorset&quot;, broadcast on 2 November 1982. In the episodes &quot;Bad News&quot; and &quot;More Bad News&quot;, Saunders plays a trashy rock journalist touring with the fictional heavy metal band, Bad News.

In 1985, Saunders starred in and co-wrote &quot;Girls on Top&quot; with French, Tracey Ullman, and Ruby Wax, which portrayed four eccentric women sharing a flat in London. Saunders also appeared in Ben Elton&#x27;s &quot;Happy Families&quot; where she played various members of the same family, including all four Fuddle sisters in the six-episode BBC situation comedy. Saunders starred in a Comic Strip film called &quot;The Supergrass&quot;, a parody of slick 1980s police dramas, directed by Peter Richardson. Saunders played Meryl Streep playing Arthur Scargill&#x27;s wife in &quot;Strike&quot;, a Comic Strip spoof on the 1984 miners&#x27; strike. She appeared twice as a guest on &quot;The Young Ones&quot;.

In 1987, she and French created &quot;French and Saunders&quot;, a popular sketch comedy series for the BBC which sporadically aired until 2007, often with long gaps between series. Saunders also appeared in Amnesty International&#x27;s &quot;The Secret Policeman&#x27;s Biggest Ball&quot; live benefit in 1989, along with Dawn French and others.

Saunders and French followed separate careers as well as irregularly maintaining their comedy sketch show. Saunders&#x27; biggest solo success has been &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;, based largely on a 14-minute &quot;French &amp; Saunders&quot; sketch called &quot;Modern Mother and Daughter&quot;. Saunders and French were going to star together, but, just as the studio had been booked, French received a long-awaited phone call confirming an adoption agency had a baby for her to adopt.

Saunders proceeded to star in the comedy. The series, which she wrote and starred in as the irresponsible fashion PR agent Edina Monsoon alongside Joanna Lumley, who played Patsy Stone, brought her international acclaim and attention. The show ran for five full series, two telemovies, three special episodes, and a feature film over the course of 24 years from 1992 to 2016. The series is also known as &quot;Ab Fab&quot; and was broadcast in the United States on Comedy Central and BBC America, becoming cult viewing.

Saunders has appeared on the American sitcoms &quot;Roseanne&quot;, playing Edina Monsoon in the episode &quot;Satan, Darling&quot;, and &quot;Friends&quot; as Andrea Waltham, the step-mother of Emily, Ross Geller&#x27;s fiancée, in the episodes &quot;The One After Ross Says Rachel&quot; and &quot;The One with Ross&#x27;s Wedding&quot;. Although they share no scenes, Jennifer&#x27;s Absolutely Fabulous co-star June Whitfield also appeared in &quot;The One With Ross&#x27;s Wedding Part Two&quot; as the Walthams&#x27; housekeeper. In 1999, she appeared alongside French in &quot;Let Them Eat Cake&quot;.

====2000s====

Saunders wrote and starred in a comedy drama about a Women&#x27;s Institute entitled &quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot;, also known as &quot;Clatterford&quot; in the United States. The first series aired in 2006, the second in 2008, and the third in 2009 on BBC One. The show starred David Mitchell, Sally Phillips, and Sue Johnston, as well as Dawn French and Joanna Lumley.

In 2007, Saunders and psychologist Tanya Byron wrote BBC Two&#x27;s &quot;The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle&quot; about a neurotic daytime talk show host. The show ran for one series. Saunders played the eponymous character whose programme features crude headlines such as &quot;Wife a slapper? Lie detector reveals all&quot;.

Also in 2007, the final series of &quot;French &amp; Saunders&quot; aired. &quot;A Bucket o&#x27; French &amp; Saunders&quot; featured a compilation of old and new sketches and aired on BBC One in September 2007. It was the third show she had written in a year. In 2008 and 2009, French &amp; Saunders completed their final live tour, &quot;French &amp; Saunders: Still Alive&quot;.

Saunders appeared on the &quot;Star in a Reasonably Priced Car&quot; segment of BBC Two&#x27;s motoring show &quot;Top Gear&quot;, posting a lap time of 1:46.1s, making her the fifth-fastest guest ever in the car that was used at that time. A self-confessed petrolhead, she has a passion for Alfa Romeos and has so far owned four.

====2010s====
In 2011, Saunders wrote and appeared in &quot;Uptown Downstairs Abbey&quot;, the Comic Relief parody of the critically acclaimed historical television dramas &quot;Downton Abbey&quot; and &quot;Upstairs Downstairs&quot;. Playing the Dowager Countess, she starred alongside Lumley, Kim Cattrall, Victoria Wood, Harry Enfield, Patrick Barlow, Dale Winton, Olivia Colman, Tim Vine, Simon Callow, Michael Gambon, and Harry Hill.

In 2012, Saunders guest-starred in &quot;Dead Boss&quot;, a BBC Three comedy set in the fictional Broadmarsh prison where she plays the cruel and work-shy governor, Margaret. The show&#x27;s creator, Sharon Horgan, stated that she &#x27;begged&#x27; Saunders to take the role, having been a fan of Saunders&#x27; previous comedy work.

She also wrote the script for the Spice Girls-based jukebox musical &quot;Viva Forever!&quot;

In 2013, Saunders starred as Lady Constance Keeble in the BBC adaptation of &quot;Blandings&quot; by P. G. Wodehouse. In 2017, Saunders appeared on the &quot;Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Looking for Mr. Goodbart&quot; as an elderly woman accompanied around by Bart.

===Film===
Saunders has also appeared in several films, such as &quot;In the Bleak Midwinter&quot; (1995), &quot;Muppet Treasure Island&quot; (1996), &quot;Fanny &amp; Elvis&quot; (1999), and also made cameo appearances in the Spice Girls&#x27; film &quot;Spice World&quot; (1997) and &quot;Absolument fabuleux&quot; (2001), a French film based on &quot;Absolutely Fabulous.&quot;

In the animated film, &quot;Shrek 2&quot; (2004), she provided the voice of the Fairy Godmother and sang the songs &quot;The Fairy Godmother Song&quot; and &quot;Holding Out for a Hero&quot;. Her part took only four days to record. The sequel broke the first &quot;Shrek&quot;″s own box office record in the U.S in just a fortnight, and it proceeded to make $353 million in just three weeks in the U.S. Her role won the People&#x27;s Choice Award for the best movie villain in 2005. 

She voiced Miss Spink in the animated film &quot;Coraline&quot;, in which her comedy partner Dawn French voiced a character called Miss Forcible. In 2015, she voiced Queen Elizabeth II in the animated film &quot;Minions,&quot; and in 2016, she voiced Miss Nana Noodleman in the animated film &quot;Sing&quot;, reprising the role again in &quot;Sing 2&quot;.

In 2022 she starred in &quot;Death on the Nile&quot; as Marie Van Schuyler alongside Dawn French, Gal Gadot and Kenneth Branagh who also directed the film.

===Theatre===
In 2018, Saunders appeared at the Vaudeville Theatre in the production of &quot;Lady Windermere&#x27;s Fan&quot; as The Duchess of Berwick.

In June 2019, she appeared on stage in the production of Noël Coward&#x27;s play, &quot;Blithe Spirit&quot;, as eccentric clairvoyant Madam Arcati. The show first opened at Theatre Royal Bath, and after a short tour of England it later transferred to the Duke of York&#x27;s Theatre, London in March 2020. Two weeks into its run performances were cancelled due to the pandemic.

She reprised the role in autumn 2021 for eight weeks in the West End at The Harold Pinter Theatre.

In 2022, Saunders played the role of Mother Superior in &quot;Sister Act the Musical&quot; for six weeks at the Eventim Apollo Hammersmith, alongside Beverley Knight as Deloris Van Cartier.

In December 2023, Saunders made her pantomime debut as Captain Hook in &quot;Peter Pan&quot; at the London Palladium alongside Julian Clary, Paul Zerdin, Nigel Havers, Gary Wilmot, Rob Madge, Francis Mayli McCann and Louis Gaunt.

==Personal life==
Saunders, who grew up in nearby Acton Bridge, married Adrian Edmondson at Christ Church, Crowton, Cheshire on 11 May 1985. At the wedding were fellow Comic Strip members Rik Mayall (Edmonson&#x27;s longtime comedy partner) and Robbie Coltrane, whom the vicar, Rev Austin Oates, much to his surprise, described as &#x27;delightful and charming&#x27;. The reception was held at Jennifer&#x27;s parents&#x27; home. Afterwards the couple visited Saint Lucia.

They have three daughters: singer-songwriter Ella Edmondson (b. 1986), actress Beattie Edmondson (b. 1987), and actress Freya Edmondson (b. 1990). They together have five grandchildren.

In July 2010, Saunders announced that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer the previous October, and was in remission following a lumpectomy, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.

Saunders published her autobiography, &quot;Bonkers: My Life in Laughs&quot;, in October 2013.

She is a patron for Smart Works Charity, a non-profit organisation supporting unemployed women into work through clothing and coaching.

==Awards and recognition==
Along with Dawn French, Saunders declined an OBE in 2001.

In 2003, she was listed in &quot;The Observer&quot; as one of the 50 funniest acts in British comedy. Saunders was placed 93rd out of E!&#x27;s 100 Sexiest British Stars. She also came 18th for Best British Role Models for teenage girls in Britain according to &quot;Good Housekeeping Magazine&quot;.

Saunders was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Exeter in July 2007. In July 2011, she was awarded an honorary doctorate by Edge Hill University.

In 2005, Saunders was named the fourth funniest woman in Britain in a poll of 4,000 women. She has been nominated for and received many awards, including:

===Won===
*1991: Writers&#x27; Guild of Great Britain Award for TV Light Entertainment – &quot;French &amp; Saunders.&quot;
*1993: BAFTA Television Award for Best Comedy Series for – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (shared with Jon Plowman and Bob Spiers)
*1993: Writers&#x27; Guild of Great Britain Award TV for Situation Comedy – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous.&quot;
*1993: British Comedy Award for Top Female Performer
*2002: Honorary Rose Award – awarded with Dawn French
*2005: People&#x27;s Choice Award for Favourite Movie Villain – &quot;Shrek 2&quot;
*2009: BAFTA Fellowship – awarded with Dawn French
*2012: BAFTA Television Award for Best Female Performance In a Comedy Programme – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;

===Nominated===
*1993: BAFTA Television Award for Best Light Entertainment Performance for – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;
*1993: British Comedy Award for Best Comedy Actress – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;
*1994: British Comedy Award for Best TV Comedy Actress – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;
*1995: BAFTA Television Award for Best Comedy Series for – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (shared with Jon Plowman and Bob Spiers)
*1996: BAFTA Television Award for Best Comedy Series for – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (shared with Jon Plowman and Bob Spiers)
*1997: BAFTA Television Award for Best Comedy Series for – &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (shared with Jon Plowman, Bob Spiers and Janice Thomas)

==Filmography==
===Television===
===Film===
==Writer==
*2016: &quot;Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie&quot; (writer)
*2012: &quot;Viva Forever!&quot; (writer)
*2006: &quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot; (16 episodes, 2006–2009)
*2008: &quot;French and Saunders Still Alive&quot; (V) (writer)
*2007: &quot;The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle&quot; (6 episodes, 2007)
*2007: &quot;A Bucket o&#x27; French &amp; Saunders&quot; (5 episodes, 2007)
*2001: &quot;Absolument fabuleux&quot; (creator: TV series Absolutely Fabulous)
*2000: &quot;Mirrorball&quot; (TV) (writer)
*2000: &quot;French &amp; Saunders Live&quot; (V) (writer)
*1999: &quot;The Nearly Complete and Utter History of Everything&quot; (TV) (writer)
*1998: &quot;Absolutely Fabulous: A Life&quot; (V) (writer)
*1998: &quot;Absolutely Fabulous: Absolutely Not!&quot; (V) (original idea)
*1996: &quot;Roseanne&quot; (1 episode, 1996)
*1993: &quot;French and Saunders Live&quot; (V) (writer)
*1992: &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (38 episodes, 1992–2012)
*1991: &quot;Comic Relief&quot; (TV) (uncredited)
*1987: &quot;French and Saunders&quot; (38 episodes, 1987–2005)
*1986: &quot;Comic Relief&quot; (TV) (writer)
*1984: &quot;The Comic Strip Presents...&quot; (2 episodes, 1984–1986)
*1985: &quot;Girls on Top&quot; TV series (unknown episodes)
*1981: &quot;The Comic Strip&quot; (TV) (writer)

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Absolutely Fabulous: Continuity&quot;
*&quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (scripts from the show)
*&quot;Absolutely Fabulous 2&quot; (more scripts from the show)
*&quot;A Feast of French and Saunders&quot; (with Dawn French)
;Autobiography
*&quot;Bonkers: My Life in Laughs&quot; (Viking, 2013)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="0" end="22" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Jane Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="179" end="194" title="The Comic Strip" label="The Comic Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="221" end="261" title="Royal Central School of Speech and Drama" label="Royal Central School of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="303" end="314" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455241" start="392" end="411" title="French and Saunders" label="French and Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="453" end="469" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338110" start="562" end="575" title="Edina Monsoon" label="Edina Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="596" end="615" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891939" start="689" end="697" title="Sleaford" label="Sleaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="699" end="711" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="849" end="864" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975529" start="895" end="908" title="group captain" label="group captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q918733" start="931" end="948" title="British Aerospace" label="British Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="1010" end="1016" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="1289" end="1304" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638918" start="1318" end="1351" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Girls&amp;#x27; School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736184" start="1435" end="1455" title="The George Ward Technology College" label="comprehensive school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618810" start="1509" end="1522" title="Stonar School" label="Stonar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177691" start="1631" end="1665" title="The County High School, Leftwich" label="Northwich Grammar School For Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q212816" start="1787" end="1794" title="au pair" label="au pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="1839" end="1873" title="Central School of Speech and Drama" label="Central School of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="1959" end="1970" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="2722" end="2730" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648511" start="2972" end="2982" title="Chalk Farm" label="Chalk Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q976338" start="3391" end="3398" title="tampons" label="tampons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="3731" end="3746" title="The Comic Strip" label="The Comic Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="3760" end="3778" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235126" start="3842" end="3851" title="The Stage" label="The Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="4165" end="4181" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q439095" start="4183" end="4193" title="Rik Mayall" label="Rik Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376846" start="4195" end="4211" title="Peter Richardson (British director)" label="Peter Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="4213" end="4225" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172216" start="4227" end="4239" title="Pete Richens" label="Pete Richens"/>
<link wikidata="Q970287" start="4241" end="4253" title="Alexei Sayle" label="Alexei Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="4258" end="4273" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299104" start="4340" end="4356" title="Raymond Revuebar" label="Raymond Revuebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="4428" end="4442" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="4444" end="4458" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="4464" end="4478" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11232643" start="4652" end="4660" title="Jobseeker&amp;#x27;s Allowance" label="the dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4753" end="4762" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4820" end="4844" title="The Comic Strip#The Comic Strip Presents..." label="The Comic Strip Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q798748" start="4927" end="4935" title="Bad News (band)" label="Bad News"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="5040" end="5051" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564659" start="5117" end="5129" title="Girls on Top (British TV series)" label="Girls on Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q130549" start="5149" end="5162" title="Tracey Ullman" label="Tracey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q460549" start="5168" end="5176" title="Ruby Wax" label="Ruby Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q436712" start="5267" end="5276" title="Ben Elton" label="Ben Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q746044" start="5290" end="5304" title="Happy Families (1985 TV series)" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="5421" end="5437" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="5598" end="5610" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q561149" start="5619" end="5634" title="Arthur Scargill" label="Arthur Scargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q918544" start="5697" end="5721" title="1984 miners&amp;#x27; strike" label="1984 miners&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="5762" end="5776" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455241" start="5823" end="5842" title="French and Saunders" label="French and Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="5860" end="5873" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5889" end="5892" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="5993" end="6014" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q494221" start="6028" end="6068" title="The Secret Policeman&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="The Secret Policeman&amp;#x27;s Biggest Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="6291" end="6310" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="6741" end="6743" title="Public relations" label="PR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6750" end="6763" title="Absolutely Fabulous#Eddy" label="Edina Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="6774" end="6787" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7148282" start="6800" end="6811" title="Patsy Stone" label="Patsy Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="7092" end="7106" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876747" start="7111" end="7122" title="BBC America" label="BBC America"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="7186" end="7192" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="7200" end="7208" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233757" start="7259" end="7273" title="List of Roseanne episodes" label="Satan, Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="7291" end="7298" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7343" end="7348" title="Ross Geller#Emily Waltham" label="Emily"/>
<link wikidata="Q747424" start="7350" end="7361" title="Ross Geller" label="Ross Geller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755024" start="7400" end="7430" title="The One After Ross Says Rachel" label="The One After Ross Says Rachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q729531" start="7447" end="7479" title="The One with Ross&amp;#x27;s Wedding" label="The One with Ross&amp;#x27;s Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361617" start="7562" end="7576" title="June Whitfield" label="June Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532967" start="7731" end="7748" title="Let Them Eat Cake (TV series)" label="Let Them Eat Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="7804" end="7816" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925762" start="7825" end="7847" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="7863" end="7882" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7935" end="7948" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="8027" end="8034" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q457134" start="8053" end="8067" title="David Mitchell (comedian)" label="David Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628719" start="8069" end="8083" title="Sally Phillips" label="Sally Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335065" start="8089" end="8101" title="Sue Johnston" label="Sue Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="8114" end="8125" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="8130" end="8143" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q430816" start="8181" end="8192" title="Tanya Byron" label="Tanya Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="8199" end="8206" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878704" start="8220" end="8255" title="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle" label="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5243465" start="8279" end="8286" title="daytime television" label="daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="8287" end="8296" title="talk show" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630372" start="8891" end="8922" title="Top Gear test track" label="Star in a Reasonably Priced Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="8975" end="8983" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="9152" end="9162" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304668" start="9252" end="9275" title="Red Nose Day 2011" label="Uptown Downstairs Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="9287" end="9299" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q83071" start="9370" end="9383" title="Downton Abbey" label="Downton Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168760" start="9400" end="9419" title="Upstairs, Downstairs (1971 TV series)" label="Upstairs Downstairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9439" end="9455" title="List of Downton Abbey characters#Violet Crawley" label="Dowager Countess"/>
<link wikidata="Q209175" start="9487" end="9499" title="Kim Cattrall" label="Kim Cattrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309588" start="9501" end="9514" title="Victoria Wood" label="Victoria Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127826" start="9516" end="9529" title="Harry Enfield" label="Harry Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897723" start="9531" end="9545" title="Patrick Barlow" label="Patrick Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q515011" start="9547" end="9558" title="Dale Winton" label="Dale Winton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088045" start="9560" end="9573" title="Olivia Colman" label="Olivia Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804427" start="9575" end="9583" title="Tim Vine" label="Tim Vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q731187" start="9585" end="9597" title="Simon Callow" label="Simon Callow"/>
<link wikidata="Q203545" start="9599" end="9613" title="Michael Gambon" label="Michael Gambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127834" start="9619" end="9629" title="Harry Hill" label="Harry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245106" start="9673" end="9682" title="Dead Boss" label="Dead Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490096" start="9832" end="9845" title="Sharon Horgan" label="Sharon Horgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="10002" end="10013" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q643684" start="10020" end="10035" title="jukebox musical" label="jukebox musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937461" start="10042" end="10055" title="Viva Forever!" label="Viva Forever!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470050" start="10092" end="10113" title="Lady Constance Keeble" label="Lady Constance Keeble"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10121" end="10124" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925032" start="10145" end="10154" title="Blandings (TV series)" label="Blandings"/>
<link wikidata="Q207515" start="10164" end="10179" title="P. G. Wodehouse" label="P. G. Wodehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="10221" end="10229" title="Simpsons" label="Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642116" start="10250" end="10274" title="Looking for Mr. Goodbart" label="Looking for Mr. Goodbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="10323" end="10327" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245295" start="10400" end="10422" title="In the Bleak Midwinter (film)" label="In the Bleak Midwinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788520" start="10443" end="10465" title="Muppet Treasure Island" label="Muppet Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="10532" end="10548" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="10557" end="10568" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137856" start="10586" end="10597" title="Spice World (film)" label="Spice World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822028" start="10621" end="10640" title="Absolument fabuleux" label="Absolument fabuleux"/>
<link wikidata="Q242080" start="10657" end="10668" title="French film" label="French film"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="10740" end="10747" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316745" start="10792" end="10807" title="Fairy Godmother (Shrek)" label="Fairy Godmother"/>
<link wikidata="Q931644" start="10874" end="10896" title="Holding Out for a Hero" label="Holding Out for a Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q483815" start="10977" end="10982" title="Shrek" label="Shrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="11132" end="11158" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="11246" end="11254" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="11363" end="11381" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619743" start="11409" end="11416" title="Minions (film)" label="Minions"/>
<link wikidata="Q20762698" start="11495" end="11499" title="Sing (2016 American film)" label="Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30933418" start="11541" end="11547" title="Sing 2" label="Sing 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q56816969" start="11585" end="11602" title="Death on the Nile (2022 film)" label="Death on the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="11641" end="11652" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q185654" start="11654" end="11663" title="Gal Gadot" label="Gal Gadot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55294" start="11668" end="11683" title="Kenneth Branagh" label="Kenneth Branagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469224" start="11807" end="11833" title="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan" label="Lady Windermere&amp;#x27;s Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400728" start="11956" end="11969" title="Blithe Spirit (play)" label="Blithe Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662026" start="12323" end="12344" title="Harold Pinter Theatre" label="Harold Pinter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q656057" start="12409" end="12431" title="Sister Act the Musical" label="Sister Act the Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337772" start="12459" end="12485" title="Eventim Apollo Hammersmith" label="Eventim Apollo Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q508171" start="12497" end="12512" title="Beverley Knight" label="Beverley Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035128" start="12593" end="12605" title="Captain Hook" label="Captain Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q107190" start="12615" end="12624" title="Peter Pan" label="Peter Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q676755" start="12638" end="12654" title="London Palladium" label="London Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307060" start="12665" end="12677" title="Julian Clary" label="Julian Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154545" start="12679" end="12690" title="Paul Zerdin" label="Paul Zerdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q466361" start="12692" end="12704" title="Nigel Havers" label="Nigel Havers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526171" start="12706" end="12717" title="Gary Wilmot" label="Gary Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347272" start="12719" end="12728" title="Rob Madge" label="Rob Madge"/>
<link wikidata="Q115781238" start="12730" end="12750" title="Frances Mayli McCann" label="Francis Mayli McCann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677666" start="12819" end="12831" title="Acton Bridge" label="Acton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="12841" end="12857" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108680" start="12861" end="12883" title="Christ Church, Crowton" label="Christ Church, Crowton"/>
<link wikidata="Q296008" start="13014" end="13029" title="Robbie Coltrane" label="Robbie Coltrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="13229" end="13240" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364489" start="13288" end="13302" title="Ella Edmondson" label="Ella Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21804208" start="13322" end="13339" title="Beattie Edmondson" label="Beattie Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="13496" end="13509" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q542022" start="13565" end="13575" title="lumpectomy" label="lumpectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="13577" end="13589" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="13595" end="13607" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="13915" end="13918" title="OBE" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="13962" end="13974" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q830215" start="14063" end="14065" title="E!" label="E!"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="14196" end="14222" title="Good Housekeeping Magazine" label="Good Housekeeping Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="14281" end="14301" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q937482" start="14371" end="14391" title="Edge Hill University" label="Edge Hill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="14681" end="14703" title="BAFTA Television Award" label="BAFTA Television Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968290" start="14778" end="14789" title="Jon Plowman" label="Jon Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907839" start="14794" end="14804" title="Bob Spiers" label="Bob Spiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="14922" end="14942" title="British Comedy Award" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q684965" start="14975" end="14994" title="Rose d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Honorary Rose Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="15029" end="15055" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="15113" end="15118" title="British Academy Television Awards" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="15145" end="15156" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969375" start="15164" end="15236" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Comedy Performance" label="BAFTA Television Award for Best Female Performance In a Comedy Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="15245" end="15264" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369077" start="15295" end="15317" title="BAFTA Television Award" label="BAFTA Television Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="15404" end="15424" title="British Comedy Award" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16052" end="16082" title="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie" label="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937461" start="16111" end="16124" title="Viva Forever!" label="Viva Forever!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="16153" end="16172" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501973" start="16217" end="16248" title="French and Saunders Still Alive" label="French and Saunders Still Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878704" start="16281" end="16316" title="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle" label="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822028" start="16432" end="16451" title="Absolument fabuleux" label="Absolument fabuleux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874670" start="16512" end="16522" title="Mirrorball (TV pilot)" label="Mirrorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753332" start="16615" end="16666" title="The Nearly Complete and Utter History of Everything" label="The Nearly Complete and Utter History of Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="16836" end="16844" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="16939" end="16958" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="17003" end="17015" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455241" start="17053" end="17072" title="French and Saunders" label="French and Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="17117" end="17129" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="17163" end="17190" title="The Comic Strip Presents..." label="The Comic Strip Presents..."/>
<link wikidata="Q5564659" start="17234" end="17246" title="Girls on Top (British TV series)" label="Girls on Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="17295" end="17310" title="The Comic Strip" label="The Comic Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="17565" end="17576" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89606" wikidata="Q55994" url="?curid=89606" title="Mike Farrell">
<text>Michael Joseph Farrell Jr. (born February 6, 1939) is an American actor, best known for his role as Captain B.J. Hunnicutt on the television series &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; (1975–83). In addition, Farrell was a producer of &quot;Patch Adams&quot; (1998) starring Robin Williams, and he starred in the television series &quot;Providence&quot; (1999–2002).

Farrell is also an activist and public speaker for various political causes. He has been the President of Death Penalty Focus since 1994. He is a long-time opponent of the death penalty. In 2001, Farrell said of the work: “I’ve wept many times. But I keep finding people who inspire me—some of them on death row, and more of them in the trenches, in the courts, in religious circles, fighting against the death penalty.” Farrell has helped raise defense funds for inmates he believes are innocent.

==Early life==
Farrell, one of four children, was born in South St. Paul, Minnesota, the son of Agnes Sarah Cosgrove and Michael Joseph Farrell.

When he was two years old, his family moved from South St. Paul to Hollywood, California, where his father worked as a carpenter on film sets. Farrell attended West Hollywood Grammar School in the same class as fellow actor Natalie Wood, and graduated from Hollywood High School. He served in the United States Marine Corps from 1957 to 1959. After being discharged, he worked at various jobs before becoming an actor.

==Acting career==
===Early career===

During the 1960s, Farrell guest-starred in a few series. Notable roles included playing a young US Forest Service ranger in the &quot;Lassie&quot; episode &quot;Never Look Back&quot; (February 1967); Federal Agent Modell in the episode &quot;Monkee Chow Mein&quot; on &quot;The Monkees&quot; in 1967; as a bellhop (uncredited) in &quot;The Graduate&quot; in 1967; astronaut Arland in the episode &quot;Genie, Genie, Who&#x27;s Got the Genie?&quot; on &quot;I Dream of Jeannie&quot;; an Army doctor in the episode &quot;The Bankroll&quot; of &quot;Combat!&quot;; and an ex-high school friend turned famous actor of Chet Kincaid in &quot;The Bill Cosby Show&quot;.

In 1968, he originated the continuing role of Scott Banning in the NBC soap opera &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;. In 1970, he starred as one of the young doctors in the CBS prime-time series &quot;The Interns&quot;, in a cast led by Broderick Crawford. In 1971, he played the assistant to Anthony Quinn in ABC&#x27;s &quot;The Man and the City&quot;. In 1973, while under contract to Universal Studios, Farrell starred with Robert Foxworth in &quot;The Questor Tapes&quot;. During the years under contract, he guest-starred in a number of shows, including &quot;Banacek&quot;; &quot;Mannix&quot;; &quot;Marcus Welby, M.D.&quot;; &quot;The Six Million Dollar Man&quot;; and &quot;The New Land&quot;; and starred in a television pilot with Jane Wyman, which did not sell.

In the early 1970s, Farrell guest-starred in the television Western drama &quot;Bonanza&quot; and did a number of commercials as a spokesman for Maytag dryers and Plymouth automobiles, among other products.
===&quot;M*A*S*H&quot; (1975–83) and later roles===
Farrell&#x27;s big break came in 1975 when Wayne Rogers departed &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; between the third and fourth season. Farrell was recruited for the newly created role of B.J. Hunnicutt, along with series lead Harry Morgan, who was already signed to replace McLean Stevenson for the fourth season. Farrell stayed with the series for its remaining eight years on the air. During that time, he wrote five episodes and directed four.

Since &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;, Farrell has guest-starred in &quot;Murder, She Wrote&quot;; &quot;Justice League&quot;; &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;; and many others. Farrell voiced Jonathan Kent in &quot;&quot; (1996) with wife Shelley Fabares voicing Martha Kent.

Farrell hosted several &quot;National Geographic Presents&quot; specials and starred in a number of television films, including 1983&#x27;s &quot;Memorial Day&quot;, which he co-produced. He did two one-man shows: &quot;JFK, a One Man Show&quot; for PBS and, on stage, a national tour of David W. Rintels&#x27; play &quot;Clarence Darrow&quot;.

In 1985, Farrell partnered with film and television producer Marvin Minoff to create Farrell/Minoff Productions, a production company. Together, Farrell and Minoff produced numerous television films. In 1986, the company had signed a deal with The Walt Disney Studios wherein the Farrell/Minoff company would develop motion pictures and television properties.

Farrell and Minoff executive-produced &quot;Dominick and Eugene&quot;, a 1988 Orion Pictures film that earned actor Tom Hulce a Golden Globe nomination for best actor. The pair also produced 1998&#x27;s &quot;Patch Adams&quot;, starring Robin Williams. Farrell and Minoff&#x27;s partnership lasted more than 25 years until Minoff&#x27;s death in November 2009.

===&quot;Providence&quot; (1999–2002)===
In 1999, Farrell was cast as veterinarian Jim Hansen, the father of the lead character Dr. Sydney Hansen, portrayed by Melina Kanakaredes, on the NBC-TV melodrama series &quot;Providence&quot;. In his portrayal of Sydney&#x27;s father, Farrell played opposite Concetta Tomei, who portrayed his wife, Lynda Hansen. Tomei&#x27;s character died during the first episode of the series, but continued to appear as a ghost/memory in vignettes of later episodes. Farrell appeared in 64 of the show&#x27;s 96 episodes.

Farrell appeared as Milton Lang, the father of Victor Lang (John Slattery), husband of Gabrielle Solis (Eva Longoria), on &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot; during the 2007–08 season.

Farrell was seen in the season 10 episode &quot;Persona&quot; of &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;. He appeared as the character Fred Jones in the season 8 episode &quot;Hunteri Heroici&quot; of &quot;Supernatural&quot;. In 2014 he was a supporting cast member on the Sundance TV Network criminal drama series &quot;The Red Road&quot;. He portrayed Lee Miglin, a real estate baron who fell victim to serial killer Andrew Cunanan, in FX&#x27;s anthology series &quot;American Crime Story&quot;: &quot;The Assassination of Gianni Versace&quot;. Most recently, he appeared in &quot;NCIS&quot;, playing the role of Judge Miles Deakin in the episode &quot;Judge, Jury...&quot; and &quot;...and Executioner.&quot;

==Activism==
Even before he was well-known, Farrell was an activist for many political and social causes. He was co-chair of the California Human Rights Watch for ten years, was on the Board of Advisors of the original Cult Awareness Network, and has been president of Death Penalty Focus for more than 10 years, being the first person to be awarded its Human Rights Award, subsequently named after him in 2006. He received PETA&#x27;s Humanitarian Award in 2001 and narrated a public service campaign for them about animal abuse.

In 1985, Farrell was in Central America, helping refugees from the civil war in El Salvador. A guerrilla commander, Nidia Diaz, had been taken prisoner. She needed surgery, but no Salvadoran doctor would help her, so Medical Aid for El Salvador recruited a foreign doctor. Farrell was present as an observer for Amnesty International but was, in his words, &quot;shanghaied into assisting with the surgery&quot; when the doctor said his help was needed. The in-prison surgery was successful, and Diaz went on to be one of the signatories of the Chapultepec Peace Accords, the peace treaty ending the war.

Farrell has been active in the Screen Actors Guild. In 2002 he was elected first vice president of the Guild in Los Angeles and served in the post for three years.

In 2006, Farrell appeared with Jello Biafra and Keith Gordon in the documentary &quot;Whose War?&quot;, examining the U.S. role in the Iraq War. He also served on the advisory board of the Military Religious Freedom Foundation.

In 2014, Farrell workshopped a play by George Shea that brought Charles David Keeling and his scientific work on atmospheric emissions to life.

In 2016, after the US presidential election of Donald Trump, Farrell appeared in a commercial to urge Republican electors to block Trump from becoming president by having 37 electors vote for John Kasich instead.

==Publications==

Farrell wrote an autobiography, &quot;Just Call Me Mike: A Journey to Actor and Activist&quot; (Akashic Books, ), published in 2007. The book covers his working-class childhood in West Hollywood, his break into show business, his personal life, and his increasing involvement in politics and the human rights movement in the United States, Cambodia, and Latin America. His second book, &quot;Of Mule and Man&quot; (2009, Akashic Books, ), is a journal of his five-week, 9,000-mile drive around the U.S. to promote the paperback edition of his first book.

==Personal life==
In 1963, Farrell married actress Judy Hayden, who was working as a high school English and drama teacher in Laguna Beach, California. They separated in 1980 and divorced in 1983. They have two children, Michael and Erin. On &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;, Hunnicutt&#x27;s daughter also was named Erin. Also on &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;, in the episode &quot;The Colonel&#x27;s Horse&quot; (season 5, episode 12), a phone call is placed to Hunnicutt&#x27;s father-in-law, Floyd Hayden, Hayden being the maiden name of Judy, Farrell&#x27;s wife. He lives in Quapaw, Oklahoma, Judy&#x27;s birthplace. Judy Farrell also acted on &quot;M*A*S*H&quot; from 1976 to 1983 as Nurse Able.

Since 1984, he has been married to actress Shelley Fabares.

At the start of &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;&#x27;s seventh season, Farrell grew a Walrus moustache for the B.J. Hunnicutt character, even though such a moustache below the upper lip was then, as now, a clear violation of Army uniform guidelines, especially when left untrimmed. The normally clean-shaven Farrell grew it out for the character, as fashion trends at the time made the moustache in general popular for the first time since the beginning of the 20th century, due in part to fellow actors such as Burt Reynolds and Tom Selleck, as well as The Mustache Gang of the Oakland Athletics of Major League Baseball. While Farrell retained the moustache for the B.J. character for the rest of the series and saw a rise in acting jobs because of it, Farrell himself quickly grew tired of it and did not want to be typecast with &quot;B.J.-like roles&quot; for the rest of his career.

==Selected filmography==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
== Accolades ==
==References==
==External links==
* (archived 2016)
* Death Penalty Focus
* Audio interview of Mike Farrell by Stephanie Miller about the Guantanamo Bay play on &quot;The Stephanie Miller Show&quot;
* Recording of Mike Farrell talking about his book and activities from Sacramento, CA on September 28, 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55994" start="0" end="26" title="Mike Farrell" label="Michael Joseph Farrell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="100" end="122" title="List of M*A*S*H characters#B.J. Hunnicutt" label="Captain B.J. Hunnicutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="154" end="161" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q782822" start="224" end="235" title="Patch Adams (film)" label="Patch Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="258" end="272" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752765" start="320" end="330" title="Providence (American TV series)" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247176" start="457" end="476" title="Death Penalty Focus" label="Death Penalty Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003641" start="908" end="933" title="South St. Paul, Minnesota" label="South St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q180919" start="1220" end="1232" title="Natalie Wood" label="Natalie Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882770" start="1253" end="1274" title="Hollywood High School" label="Hollywood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="1293" end="1319" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q289537" start="1582" end="1600" title="Lassie (1954 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Lassie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599825" start="1696" end="1712" title="Monkee Chow Mein" label="Monkee Chow Mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031053" start="1728" end="1739" title="The Monkees (TV series)" label="The Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q217627" start="1790" end="1802" title="The Graduate" label="The Graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517103" start="1856" end="1895" title="List of I Dream of Jeannie episodes" label="Genie, Genie, Who&amp;#x27;s Got the Genie?"/>
<link wikidata="Q127337" start="1911" end="1929" title="I Dream of Jeannie" label="I Dream of Jeannie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247850" start="2001" end="2008" title="Combat!" label="Combat!"/>
<link wikidata="Q862031" start="2090" end="2109" title="The Bill Cosby Show" label="The Bill Cosby Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2185" end="2188" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="2206" end="2223" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="2286" end="2289" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837224" start="2308" end="2331" title="The Interns (television series)" label="&amp;quot;The Interns&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182349" start="2350" end="2368" title="Broderick Crawford" label="Broderick Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="2406" end="2419" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="2423" end="2426" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q929354" start="2440" end="2460" title="The Man and the City" label="The Man and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="2501" end="2518" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063709" start="2541" end="2556" title="Robert Foxworth" label="Robert Foxworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759069" start="2566" end="2583" title="The Questor Tapes" label="The Questor Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071571" start="2679" end="2686" title="Banacek" label="Banacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247529" start="2700" end="2706" title="Mannix" label="Mannix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248656" start="2720" end="2738" title="Marcus Welby, M.D." label="Marcus Welby, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1196836" start="2752" end="2778" title="The Six Million Dollar Man" label="The Six Million Dollar Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612311" start="2796" end="2808" title="The New Land (TV series)" label="The New Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q95055" start="2855" end="2865" title="Jane Wyman" label="Jane Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="2948" end="2955" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="2968" end="2975" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798004" start="3033" end="3039" title="Maytag" label="Maytag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124857" start="3051" end="3071" title="Plymouth (automobile)" label="Plymouth automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q726033" start="3190" end="3202" title="Wayne Rogers" label="Wayne Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q355125" start="3360" end="3372" title="Harry Morgan" label="Harry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q961610" start="3408" end="3424" title="McLean Stevenson" label="McLean Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q833322" start="3644" end="3661" title="Murder, She Wrote" label="Murder, She Wrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q250036" start="3675" end="3689" title="Justice League (TV series)" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="3703" end="3723" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521223" start="3763" end="3776" title="Jonathan and Martha Kent" label="Jonathan Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q456187" start="3810" end="3825" title="Shelley Fabares" label="Shelley Fabares"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="3877" end="3896" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815380" start="3994" end="4006" title="Memorial Day (1983 film)" label="Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="4098" end="4101" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778430" start="4255" end="4268" title="Marvin Minoff" label="Marvin Minoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216535" start="4438" end="4461" title="Walt Disney Studios (division)" label="The Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237683" start="4599" end="4618" title="Dominick and Eugene" label="Dominick and Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q891732" start="4633" end="4647" title="Orion Pictures" label="Orion Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q315039" start="4671" end="4680" title="Tom Hulce" label="Tom Hulce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="4683" end="4695" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q782822" start="4764" end="4775" title="Patch Adams (film)" label="Patch Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="4792" end="4806" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q229584" start="5077" end="5095" title="Melina Kanakaredes" label="Melina Kanakaredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q465482" start="5218" end="5232" title="Concetta Tomei" label="Concetta Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5517" end="5528" title="List of Desperate Housewives characters#Victor Lang" label="Victor Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q374346" start="5530" end="5543" title="John Slattery" label="John Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q846155" start="5557" end="5572" title="Gabrielle Solis" label="Gabrielle Solis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163263" start="5574" end="5586" title="Eva Longoria" label="Eva Longoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="5598" end="5618" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5724" end="5761" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q130585" start="5870" end="5882" title="Supernatural (American TV series)" label="Supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072861" start="5985" end="5997" title="The Red Road (TV series)" label="The Red Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q47240099" start="6018" end="6028" title="Lee Miglin" label="Lee Miglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462125" start="6083" end="6097" title="Andrew Cunanan" label="Andrew Cunanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209262" start="6135" end="6155" title="American Crime Story" label="American Crime Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6169" end="6204" title="The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story" label="The Assassination of Gianni Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525" start="6248" end="6252" title="NCIS (TV series)" label="NCIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6320" end="6334" title="NCIS season 16#ep375" label="Judge, Jury..."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6351" end="6369" title="NCIS season 16#ep376" label="...and Executioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="6518" end="6536" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332569" start="6597" end="6619" title="Cult Awareness Network" label="Cult Awareness Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247176" start="6647" end="6666" title="Death Penalty Focus" label="Death Penalty Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151888" start="6802" end="6806" title="People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals" label="PETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="6895" end="6907" title="Cruelty to animals" label="animal abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="6990" end="7001" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7026" end="7036" title=":es:Nidia Díaz" label="Nidia Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="7222" end="7243" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740101" start="7455" end="7480" title="Chapultepec Peace Accords" label="Chapultepec Peace Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141037" start="7547" end="7566" title="Screen Actors Guild" label="Screen Actors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q334288" start="7712" end="7724" title="Jello Biafra" label="Jello Biafra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738056" start="7729" end="7741" title="Keith Gordon" label="Keith Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="7816" end="7824" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852157" start="7870" end="7907" title="Military Religious Freedom Foundation" label="Military Religious Freedom Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q572001" start="7974" end="7995" title="Charles David Keeling" label="Charles David Keeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="8102" end="8114" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q69319" start="8247" end="8258" title="John Kasich" label="John Kasich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033640" start="8383" end="8396" title="Akashic Books" label="Akashic Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304423" start="8894" end="8905" title="Judy Farrell" label="Judy Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908566" start="8969" end="8993" title="Laguna Beach, California" label="Laguna Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q494244" start="9091" end="9098" title="M*A*S*H (TV series)" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q456187" start="9567" end="9582" title="Shelley Fabares" label="Shelley Fabares"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963760" start="9659" end="9675" title="Walrus moustache" label="Walrus moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="9729" end="9738" title="moustache" label="moustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510848" start="9798" end="9821" title="Uniforms of the United States Army" label="Army uniform guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="10085" end="10098" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q213706" start="10103" end="10114" title="Tom Selleck" label="Tom Selleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078073" start="10127" end="10144" title="The Mustache Gang" label="The Mustache Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="10152" end="10169" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="10173" end="10194" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q444259" start="10392" end="10400" title="typecast" label="typecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608340" start="10647" end="10663" title="Stephanie Miller" label="Stephanie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766475" start="10703" end="10728" title="The Stephanie Miller Show" label="The Stephanie Miller Show"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89607" wikidata="Q1455241" url="?curid=89607" title="French and Saunders">
<text>French and Saunders is a British sketch comedy television series written by and starring comedy duo and namesake Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders that originally broadcast on BBC2 from 1987 to 1993, and later on BBC One until 2017. It is also the name by which the performers are known when they appear elsewhere as a double act. The show was given one of the highest budgets in BBC history to create detailed spoofs and satires of popular culture, movies, celebrities, and art. French and Saunders continued to film holiday specials for the BBC, and both have been individually successful starring in other shows.

In a 2005 poll to find &quot;The Comedian&#x27;s Comedian&quot;, the duo were voted among the top 50 comedy acts ever by fellow comedians and comedy insiders. Their last special, &quot;French and Saunders Christmas Celebrity Special&quot;, aired on 27 December 2005 on BBC One. In 2006, both French and Saunders announced their sketch show was dead and that they had moved on to more age-appropriate material. Their last time performing as a duo, the &quot;Still Alive&quot; tour, ran initially until late 2008, then resumed in Australia in summer 2009. In 2009, the duo were jointly awarded the BAFTA Fellowship.

==History==
===Background (1978–1987)===
Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders met in 1978 while they were studying drama at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama and began their career by collaborating on several comedy projects. They came to prominence in the early 1980s for performing at the London alternative comedy club The Comedy Store, which also gave its name to its television series &quot;The Comic Strip Presents...&quot; and the informal grouping of so-called &quot;alternative comedians&quot;. French and Saunders were featured on the live comedy album of &quot;The Comic Strip&quot; recorded by comedy entrepreneur Martin Lewis for his Springtime! label and released in 1981. The duo made their first mainstream television appearance in &quot;The Comic Strip Presents...&quot;, appearing in approximately 30 episodes each and writing material for the show.

French and Saunders began to establish themselves in what was referred to as the &quot;underground comedy&quot; scene, along with many other prolific actors and comedians they would work with during the next twenty-plus years. In 1983, they starred in an edition of Channel 4&#x27;s series &quot;The Entertainers&quot;, and later went on to appear as comedy relief on the weekly music programme &quot;The Tube&quot; on the same channel, for which French received her honour of being the first person to use the word &quot;blowjob&quot; on British television. In 1985, French and Saunders collaborated on the programme &quot;Girls on Top&quot;, which they once again (with Ruby Wax) wrote and starred in. Co-stars Tracey Ullman and Ruby Wax rounded out a set of four oddball roommates, and the show ran for two series. In 1986, French and Saunders made their first of many appearances on &quot;Comic Relief&quot;, and they signed a long-term contract with the BBC.

===&quot;French and Saunders&quot; (1987–2007)===

In 1987, French and Saunders created their eponymous sketch show, which lasted six series and nine specials until 2005. Compilations of previous material appeared until 2017. The show began humbly but established its own niche.

The first series was intentionally set up to look like a low-budget variety show in which the duo constantly attempted grandiose stunts and often failed miserably. A &quot;famous&quot; guest star would often be brought on but mistreated. Also featured during this series were a troupe of geriatric dancers called The Hot Hoofers and a bongos/keyboard music duo called Raw Sex, actually Comic Strip collaborators Simon Brint and Rowland Rivron in character as stepfather and stepson Ken and Duane Bishop respectively. Alison Moyet and Joan Armatrading each appeared in one episode. The dancing and music were included to fulfil the series&#x27; mandate as a light entertainment series to include &quot;a certain amount of variety&quot; rather than pure comedy (as the BBC&#x27;s budget for Light Entertainment was considerably higher than that of their Comedy department). The show-within-a-show premise was dropped with the second series in 1988.

As the show progressed, ratings skyrocketed, eventually prompting the BBC to move it from BBC2 to BBC1 in 1994. French and Saunders received higher and higher budgets to create elaborate parodies of mainstream culture. These ranged anywhere from re-creations of films (e.g., &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot;, &quot;Misery&quot;, &quot;Titanic&quot;, and &quot;What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?&quot;) to spoofs of popular music artists including Madonna, Bananarama, ABBA and The Corrs. Certain spoken phrases and sight gags referencing previously performed sketches (often from years before) were incorporated for loyal fans. In particular, there is a running gag suggesting French and Saunders are unable to affect accents accurately: this first appeared in their spoof of &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; when they break their character in the middle of an elaborate and expensive parody to argue about the authenticity of their Southern accent. Saunders goads French to try the accent by saying: &quot;How are you?&quot;, and French responds with an interpretation sounding more like a strong Northern Irish accent. Since then, the duo often break character in the middle of elaborate sketches to do an &quot;accent check&quot; and repeat these lines.

The show also contained numerous meta references: an awareness that the viewer was watching a parody. Unlike many parodies done straightforwardly for effect, French and Saunders use the viewer&#x27;s awareness of what is going on to stretch out the joke further. For example, in their parody of Peter Jackson&#x27;s fantasy film epic &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, an encounter between Frodo and Galadriel is thrown off after Saunders delivers her line: &quot;I have passed the test, and now I will diminish, and go to the West and remain Galadriel&quot;. French responds, &quot;You will what, sorry?&quot;, to which Saunders replies: &quot;I will diminish... I don&#x27;t understand, it&#x27;s in the book!&quot; Other characters that make a recurring appearance are the bald, fat, perverted old men (&quot;Begging for it, she is!&quot;); two perpetually overacting extras; and Star Pets (&quot;What a lovely dog, Lady Fortescue: I bet he do&#x27;s tricks&quot;).

The sixth and final series aired in 2004, returning to the first series&#x27; metafictional premise. In this series, the two lampooned themselves as incapable of getting any work done: Saunders later characterised it as &quot;a fairly accurate rendition of our writing process&quot; but asserted that, while they appeared to others to be procrastinating, they were actually generating writing ideas. The series also starred Liza Tarbuck as a heavily fictionalised version of herself, forced to be the fictional show&#x27;s producer despite her actual career goal of creating and producing game shows, and Lorna Brown as the production assistant, Abba. Maggie Steed appeared in two episodes as the duo&#x27;s agent, Mo, based on their real agent, Maureen Vincent, while Eileen Essell and Brenda Cowling appeared briefly in several episodes as Abba&#x27;s imagination of French and Saunders, respectively, as old women. The show ended with a final Christmas special in 2005. A compilation series, &quot;A Bucket o&#x27; French and Saunders&quot;, aired in 2007.

In 2008, the pair retired the show after performing a sketch with the singer Anastacia, in which French dressed in a similar outfit to the US star. French said she was left feeling &quot;humiliated&quot;.

===Post-show developments (2007–present)===
In Christmas 2010, French and Saunders were featured in three two-hour radio shows on BBC Radio 2. This was followed by further specials in 2011 for Easter and the Bank Holidays.

In 2020, the duo debuted a podcast titled &quot;French &amp; Saunders: Titting About&quot; on Audible. The podcast features the pair in relaxed, often nostalgic conversations about a new topic in each episode. Series 2 was released in 2021, and Series 3 in 2022. Series 4 was released in 2023.

In 2021, it was announced that Gold had commissioned a new one-off special titled &quot;French and Saunders: Funny Women&quot;. The special, filmed on the set of their original sketch series, features a discussion by French and Saunders and focuses on the history of women who have contributed to comedy. It was broadcast on Gold on 17 July that year.

==Cast==
In addition to French and Saunders themselves, the sketch series featured several regular and recurring cast members, who were chosen for their &quot;funny bones&quot; and willingness to &quot;be part of the gang&quot;.

Although the amount of music in the show decreased over time, Raw Sex remained regular cast members through series 4. Betty Marsden also appeared in series one as Madame, the show&#x27;s choreographer. Singer Kirsty MacColl appeared in one episode of series two and five episodes of series 3, sometimes performing jointly with Raw Sex.

For series 5, Mel and Sue served as assistant writers and appeared in four of the seven episodes. In series 6, the show returned to the show-within-a-show format of series 1, with Liza Tarbuck appearing in each episode as the fictional show&#x27;s producer and Lorna Brown as the PA.

The show also featured dozens of guest stars. Notably, Saunders&#x27; &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; co-stars Joanna Lumley, Julia Sawalha, and June Whitfield all guest-starred as themselves, with Whitfield appearing on the show three years before the beginning of &quot;Ab Fab&quot;. The spouses of the duo, Lenny Henry and Adrian Edmondson, both appeared on the show respectively, while the producer, Jon Plowman, made occasional uncredited cameos. Recurring &quot;Ab Fab&quot; actors Patrick Barlow, Harriet Thorpe, Helen Lederer, and Kathy Burke also appeared, as did French&#x27;s &quot;The Vicar of Dibley&quot; co-star Gary Waldhorn, and &quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot; regulars Maggie Steed, Rosie Cavaliero, and Pauline McLynn.

===Regular===
===Recurring===
*Kevin Allen (8 episodes, 1990–1996)
*Patrick Barlow (8 episodes, 1990–2003)
*Kathy Burke (7 episodes, 1988–1999)
*Sean Chapman (3 episodes, 1994–2002)
*Sidney Cole (4 episodes, 1993–1995)
*Brenda Cowling (5 episodes, 2004)
*Adrian Edmondson (4 episodes, 1988–2017)
*Eileen Essell (4 episodes, 2004)
*Mel Giedroyc (4 episodes, 1996)
*Lenny Henry (4 episodes, 1988–1996)
*Lulu (3 episodes, 1988–2017)
*Patsy Kensit (3 episodes, 1996)
*Kate Moss (4 episodes, 1996)
*Sue Perkins (4 episodes, 1996)
*Maggie Steed (3 episodes, 1998–2004)
*Harriet Thorpe (8 episodes, 1987–2003)
*Ian Tough (3 episodes, 1993–1996)
*Janette Tough (5 episodes, 1993–2005)
*Tim Wylton (4 episodes, 1993–2004)
*Jon Plowman (3 episodes, 2003–2017) (uncredited)
*Keturah Sorrell (5 episodes, 1987) (uncredited)

==Episodes==
&quot;French and Saunders&quot; first broadcast on 9 March 1987 on BBC2, with the first series comprising six episodes. With its popularity and high ratings, a second series commenced on 4 March 1988, followed by a Christmas special in late 1988. The third, fourth and fifth series, which broadcast from 1990 to 1996, consisting each of seven episodes, relied heavily on movie parodies, and some music parodies, alongside their own material, such as the sketch &quot;Modern Mother and Daughter&quot;, which spawned Saunders&#x27; popular sitcom &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; in 1992. Notable films parodied on the show included &quot;What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?&quot;, &quot;The Exorcist&quot;, &quot;Misery&quot;, &quot;The Silence of the Lambs&quot;, &quot;Thelma &amp; Louise&quot;, &quot;Pulp Fiction&quot;, and &quot;Braveheart&quot;. A second Christmas special was screened in 1994, between the fourth and fifth series. For the next several years, the series included only Christmas and Easter specials; in 1998, a new special, &quot;The Making of Titanic&quot;, was broadcast at Christmas and featured a spoof on the behind-the-scenes and making of James Cameron&#x27;s 1997 film &quot;Titanic&quot;, with Dawn French as Jack and Jennifer Saunders as Rose. Five further specials, including spoofs on the films &quot;Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace&quot; and &quot;Love Actually&quot;, were broadcast from 1999 to 2003, before the sixth and final series in 2004, and an additional Christmas special in 2005. Forty-eight episodes (not including the compilation episodes) were broadcast between 1987 and 2005.

The series additionally included compilation specials, starting in 1995 with the two-part &quot;French and Saunders Go To the Movies&quot;, which highlighted their movie parodies from the series. A second two-part compilation special, &quot;I Can&#x27;t Believe it&#x27;s Music&quot; and &quot;I Can&#x27;t Believe it&#x27;s Not Music&quot; from 2005, showcased their classic music parodies from singers such as Alanis Morissette, ABBA, The Corrs, Guns N&#x27; Roses, and Björk. In 2007, the compilation series &quot;A Bucket o&#x27; French and Saunders&quot;, which featured a mixture of new material and old clips, was broadcast to highlight the 20th anniversary of the series. However, this proved unpopular with viewers, and the initial seven-part series was edited to six episodes. On 25 December 2017, a new compilation special, &quot;300 Years of French and Saunders&quot;, marked the 30th anniversary of the series, and again consisted mainly of old clips, while new material featured spoofs of &quot;Gogglebox&quot; and &quot;Keeping Up with the Kardashians.&quot;

==Live shows==
French and Saunders toured rarely, with UK tours in 1990 and 2000. They began what was announced as their final tour at Blackpool Opera House on 29 February 2008 in the UK. The first leg of the show concluded in May 2008 before moving to Australia. The tour ended on 9 November in London. The tour included a selection of their favourite sketches and new material written specifically for the show. The tour was directed by Hamish McColl, set design by Lez Brotherstone, and lighting, video and visual effects by Willie Williams.

*&quot; Live 1990&quot;
*&quot; Live in 2000&quot;
*&quot;French and Saunders: Still Alive! The Farewell Tour&quot;

==Recurring sketches and characters==
*Sharon and Karen (1987–1988): A pair of naughty schoolgirls who call out &quot;Miss!&quot; every time things go wrong.
*The Extras (1987–2003): Unnamed extras who infuriate every director with their overacting, and every actor with their overfamiliarity.
*Jim and Jim (1987–1993): Also known as &quot;The Fat Men&quot;, the &quot;Dirty Old Men&quot;, or simply &quot;Men&quot;. Whether at the pub, in front of the telly, or trying out for panto, they think they&#x27;re God&#x27;s gift to women and sexually harass any woman they meet.
*Teen Talkers (1987–1988): Two chatty teenagers who discuss changes in the facilities in a series 1 episode and contraception in a series 2 episode.
*White Room (1988–2005): Dawn and Jennifer interact in a room with white walls and bubble-wrapped furniture. Dawn knocks at the door and usually announces herself as &quot;Dawn French, your comedy partner&quot; or &quot;Dawn French from teleovision&quot;, while Jennifer sits on the couch and tries to make her uncomfortable. The two sometimes impersonated celebrities or other characters within the sketch, and occasionally, it was used as a springboard to another sketch, such as a parody of &quot;Noel&#x27;s House Party&quot; or Dr. Tanya Byron&#x27;s intervention.
*&quot; History of Dance (1988–1996):&quot; French and Saunders try out different dancing styles (e.g., Irish jig, flappers, 90s clubbers, disco, sock hops), but the dancing always goes wrong in the end.
*Jackie and Leanne (1988–1996): Dramatic young women obsessed with mail-order catalogues and plan for events such as holidays and weddings far in advance.
*Pear Tree Farm (1988–2005): A farm whose owner (French) repeatedly changes its line of business, always assisted by her mentally disabled, unpaid employee (Saunders), who often unintentionally reveals unpleasant truths the owner has been hiding. Initially, the farm was home to Star Pets, which supplied animals to TV and film productions; subsequent businesses included an animal crematory and a children&#x27;s nursery. French&#x27;s character first appeared in series 2, but the farm and Saunders&#x27; character didn&#x27;t appear until series 3.
*Star Test (1990): A spoof of the show of the same name, serving as a platform to parody the interview subjects, which included Sonia, Bros, Wendy James of Transvision Vamp, and Tanita Tikaram.
*The Expert (1990–2000): A talk show host (Saunders) introduces Dawn as an &quot;expert&quot; on a subject such as the royal family or outer space, but Dawn constantly shows herself to have no knowledge in the area. The sketch appeared on TV only in series three but was revived for the 2000 live tour, wherein the show&#x27;s title was &quot;PMTV&quot;.
*The Fat Women (1990–1998): Living in a country house, they spend their days at the races, drinking whiskey, getting severe injuries and brushing them off as minor incidents. They also insult anybody who interferes in their business.
*The Sound of Music (1993): A segment hosted by Ken and Duane, in which they briefly discussed the history of music as a lead-in to music video parodies. Segments often opened with Ken reading the lyrics to a popular song in a monotone.
*Madonna (1993–2005): Often mentioned, particularly in White Room sketches, and occasionally parodied, such as in spoofs of &quot;&quot;, &quot;Into the Hollywood Groove&quot;, &quot;Me Against the Music&quot;, and &quot;The English Roses&quot;.
*The Stylists (1996–2004): Wardrobe stylist Daniel (Saunders) and hair and makeup artist Terry (French), chain-smoking, flamboyantly gay men who style celebrities (series 5) and assist the Old Masters (series 6).
*&quot;&#x27;Olde Elizabethan Shakespearean Times (1996): &quot; Two unhygienic women in Elizabethan England enjoy living a backward peasant way of life, whether cooking disgusting recipes using urine or gossiping about the locals at the pub.
*Junior and Emma (1996–1999): Public school girls who have been abandoned by their parents and stay at school during the holidays.
*Special Effects Specialists (1998–2004): Propsmen who excel in making the worst props ever used in such big-budget films as &quot;Titanic&quot;, &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, &quot;Star Wars&quot;, and &quot;Troy&quot;.
*Catherine Zeta-Jones (2003–2004): Always refers to herself as &quot;Catherine Spartacus-Zeta-Douglas-Jones&quot; and usually discusses differences between her lifestyle in Wales and in Hollywood.
*Jodie &amp; Jordan Solve Your Problems (2004): Hypersexual cam girls who provide advice to viewers, invariably suggesting they &quot;shag [someone&#x27;s] brains out&quot;.
*Mother and Daughter: A daughter (usually French) gets into an argument with her mother (usually Saunders), often over something insignificant.

==Lananeeneenoonoo==

Lananeeneenoonoo was a British spoof all-girl group consisting of comedians Dawn French, Jennifer Saunders and Kathy Burke. The group, and its name, was a spoof on the popular group Bananarama and was introduced during the 1988 Christmas special of &quot;French &amp; Saunders&quot;, in which Burke was a guest.

In 1989, along with Bananarama, they created a charity single called &quot;Help!&quot;, to raise money for Comic Relief. It was a cover version of the Beatles&#x27; song and was released on the London Records label, entering the UK Singles Chart on 25 February 1989 and reaching a high of No. 3. It remained in the chart for nine weeks.

===The Sugar Lumps===
French, Saunders and Burke returned for Comic Relief in 1997 as the Sugar Lumps, along with Llewella Gideon and Lulu, to parody the Spice Girls, with whom they performed a version of Who Do You Think You Are.

==Side projects and other appearances==
Saunders won international acclaim for writing and playing Edina Monsoon in her sitcom &quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot;, based on the &quot;French and Saunders&quot; sketch &quot;Modern Mother and Daughter&quot;. She also guest starred in the American sitcoms &quot;Roseanne&quot; and &quot;Friends&quot;, and voiced the wicked Fairy Godmother in the DreamWorks animated film &quot;Shrek 2&quot;. Saunders wrote and starred in another two BBC sitcoms, &quot;Jam and Jerusalem&quot; and &quot;The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle&quot;. Her other work includes being the face of Barclays Bank and BBC America.

French starred as Geraldine Granger in the highly successful sitcom &quot;The Vicar of Dibley&quot;, which received great critical acclaim. She also starred in four series of the comedy/crime show &quot;Murder Most Horrid&quot;, and played the Fat Lady in the film adaptation of &quot;Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban&quot;. She also voiced Mrs. Beaver in the film adaptation of C. S. Lewis&#x27; fantasy novel &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot;. French starred in two other BBC shows, &quot;Jam and Jerusalem&quot; and &quot;Lark Rise to Candleford&quot;. For many years, French has become popular for her appearances in the Terry&#x27;s Chocolate Orange adverts by saying her famous line: &quot;It&#x27;s not Terry&#x27;s, it&#x27;s mine!&quot; and voiced the W H Smith and Tesco adverts. In 2009, French released her autobiography &quot;Dear Fatty&quot;, referring to Saunders, to whom she gave the nickname &quot;Fatty&quot;. In 2021, French starred as a little ornament fairy for a M&amp;S Christmas food advert along with its confectionery products mascot, Percy Pig.

===Featuring French and Saunders===
*&quot;The Comic Strip Presents&quot; (1982–2012)
*&quot;The Young Ones&quot; (1982-1984) (appearing in the episodes &quot;Interesting&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;)
*&quot;Happy Families&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Girls on Top&quot; (1985–1986)
*&quot;Let Them Eat Cake&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Jam &amp; Jerusalem&quot; (2006–2009)
*&quot;Coraline&quot; (2009)
*&quot;Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie&quot; (2016)
*&quot;Death on the Nile&quot; (2022)

===Featuring French===

*&quot;Murder Most Horrid&quot; (1991–1999)
*&quot;The Vicar of Dibley&quot; (1994–2007)
*&quot;Wild West&quot; (2002–2004)
*&quot;Lark Rise to Candleford&quot; (2008–2011)
*&quot;Psychoville&quot; (2009–2011)
*&quot;Roger and Val Have Just Got In&quot; (2010–2012)
*&quot;The Wrong Mans&quot; (2013–2014)
*&quot;The Trouble with Maggie Cole&quot; (2020)

===Featuring Saunders===

*&quot;Absolutely Fabulous&quot; (1992–2012)
*&quot;Mirrorball&quot; (2000)
*&quot;The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle&quot; (2007)
*&quot;Dead Boss&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Blandings&quot; (2013–2014)

==Video and DVD releases==
===UK video===
*&quot;French and Saunders: The Video&quot; (Best of Series 1 &amp; 2) (1990)
*&quot;French and Saunders Live&quot; (4 Front Video) (1991)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Series 3&quot; (1993)
*&quot;French and Saunders at the Movies&quot; (Best of Series 4) (1994)

===UK DVD===
*&quot;French and Saunders Live&quot; (Universal) (2001)
*&quot;The Best of French and Saunders&quot; (or &quot;Gentlemen Prefer French and Saunders&quot;) (2002)
*&quot;French and Saunders at the Movies&quot; (also includes the 1999 Christmas Special) (2005)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Complete Series 1–6&quot; (2008)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Still Alive&quot; (2008)

===USA video===
*&quot;French and Saunders at the Movies&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Gentlemen Prefer French and Saunders&quot; (1997)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Ingenue Years&quot; (1998)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Living in a Material World&quot; (1998)

===USA DVD===
*&quot;Gentlemen Prefer French and Saunders&quot; (2002)
*&quot;French and Saunders at the Movies&quot; (2002)
*&quot;French and Saunders: The Ingenue Years&quot; (2003)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Living in a Material World&quot; (2003)
*&quot;French and Saunders on the Rocks&quot; (2005)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Back with a Vengeance&quot; (2005)

===Australian video===
*&quot;French and Saunders: Series 3 – Complete and Un-edited(ish) – (Part One)&quot; (1993)
*&quot;French and Saunders: The Best of Series 4&quot; (1994)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Series 3 – Complete and Un-edited(ish) – (Part Two)&quot; (1996) 
*&quot;French and Saunders: Live&quot; (2002)

===Australian DVD===
*&quot;French and Saunders: Live&quot; (2003)
*&quot;French and Saunders at the Movies&quot; (with 1999 Christmas Special) (2005)
*&quot;The Best of French and Saunders&quot; (2005)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Complete Series 1–6&quot; (2008)
*&quot;French and Saunders: Still Alive – The Farewell Tour&quot; (2008)
*&quot;French And Saunders: Series One Episodes 1–3 (Comedy Bites)&quot; (4 March 2010)
*&quot;Dawn French Bundle&quot; (2011)

==International broadcasters==
==References==
==External links==
*French and Saunders at British Film Institute &quot;Screen Online&quot;
*French and Saunders at the BBC
*
*French and Saunders receive the BAFTA Fellowship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="33" end="46" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="113" end="124" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="129" end="146" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="176" end="180" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="213" end="220" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141470" start="319" end="329" title="double act" label="double act"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="380" end="383" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="411" end="417" title="Parody" label="spoofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="458" end="469" title="celebrity" label="celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="886" end="893" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q787148" start="1213" end="1229" title="BAFTA Fellowship" label="BAFTA Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="1273" end="1284" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="1289" end="1306" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q981195" start="1357" end="1397" title="Royal Central School of Speech and Drama" label="Royal Central School of Speech and Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1531" end="1537" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="1538" end="1556" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520352" start="1562" end="1578" title="The Comedy Store, London" label="The Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="1636" end="1663" title="The Comic Strip" label="The Comic Strip Presents..."/>
<link wikidata="Q16151827" start="1866" end="1878" title="Martin Lewis (humorist)" label="Martin Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581194" start="1887" end="1898" title="Springtime!" label="Springtime!"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="2375" end="2384" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770679" start="2510" end="2518" title="The Tube (1982 TV series)" label="The Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122" start="2631" end="2638" title="oral sex" label="blowjob"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564659" start="2733" end="2745" title="Girls on Top (British TV series)" label="Girls on Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q130549" start="2822" end="2835" title="Tracey Ullman" label="Tracey Ullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q460549" start="2840" end="2848" title="Ruby Wax" label="Ruby Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="3002" end="3014" title="Comic Relief (charity)" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3068" end="3071" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="3689" end="3695" title="Bongo drum" label="bongos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518339" start="3766" end="3777" title="Simon Brint" label="Simon Brint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372181" start="3782" end="3796" title="Rowland Rivron" label="Rowland Rivron"/>
<link wikidata="Q237820" start="3871" end="3883" title="Alison Moyet" label="Alison Moyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="3888" end="3904" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546170" start="4011" end="4030" title="light entertainment" label="light entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4392" end="4396" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="4400" end="4404" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q658041" start="4583" end="4602" title="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise" label="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q725552" start="4616" end="4622" title="Misery (film)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="4636" end="4643" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26644" start="4661" end="4693" title="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962 film)" label="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="4746" end="4753" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="4755" end="4765" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="4767" end="4771" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192915" start="4776" end="4785" title="The Corrs" label="The Corrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="5081" end="5099" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="5230" end="5238" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4307154" start="5588" end="5602" title="meta reference" label="meta reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="5850" end="5863" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="5895" end="5916" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q177329" start="5945" end="5950" title="Frodo Baggins" label="Frodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204274" start="5955" end="5964" title="Galadriel" label="Galadriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="6426" end="6432" title="Extra (acting)" label="extras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660436" start="6949" end="6961" title="Liza Tarbuck" label="Liza Tarbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q578109" start="7048" end="7056" title="Television producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116309960" start="7130" end="7141" title="Lorna Brown (actress)" label="Lorna Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867219" start="7149" end="7169" title="production assistant" label="production assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730317" start="7177" end="7189" title="Maggie Steed" label="Maggie Steed"/>
<link wikidata="Q128599" start="7294" end="7307" title="Eileen Essell" label="Eileen Essell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206338" start="7312" end="7326" title="Brenda Cowling" label="Brenda Cowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34584" start="7663" end="7672" title="Anastacia" label="Anastacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="8043" end="8050" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q366651" start="8110" end="8117" title="Audible (service)" label="Audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q964303" start="8342" end="8346" title="Gold (British TV channel)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q850381" start="9012" end="9025" title="Betty Marsden" label="Betty Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q444671" start="9103" end="9117" title="Kirsty MacColl" label="Kirsty MacColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810910" start="9245" end="9256" title="Mel and Sue" label="Mel and Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660436" start="9411" end="9423" title="Liza Tarbuck" label="Liza Tarbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q116309960" start="9492" end="9503" title="Lorna Brown (actress)" label="Lorna Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867219" start="9511" end="9513" title="Production assistant" label="PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="9592" end="9611" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q254886" start="9627" end="9640" title="Joanna Lumley" label="Joanna Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q272567" start="9642" end="9655" title="Julia Sawalha" label="Julia Sawalha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361617" start="9661" end="9675" title="June Whitfield" label="June Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175896" start="9826" end="9837" title="Lenny Henry" label="Lenny Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="9842" end="9858" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968290" start="9920" end="9931" title="Jon Plowman" label="Jon Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897723" start="10004" end="10018" title="Patrick Barlow" label="Patrick Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664360" start="10020" end="10034" title="Harriet Thorpe" label="Harriet Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702657" start="10036" end="10049" title="Helen Lederer" label="Helen Lederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q444306" start="10055" end="10066" title="Kathy Burke" label="Kathy Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="10109" end="10128" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="The Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098635" start="10143" end="10156" title="Gary Waldhorn" label="Gary Waldhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="10168" end="10187" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730317" start="10203" end="10215" title="Maggie Steed" label="Maggie Steed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368885" start="10217" end="10232" title="Rosie Cavaliero" label="Rosie Cavaliero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372751" start="10238" end="10252" title="Pauline McLynn" label="Pauline McLynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q561356" start="10286" end="10297" title="Kevin Allen (director)" label="Kevin Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897723" start="10323" end="10337" title="Patrick Barlow" label="Patrick Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q444306" start="10363" end="10374" title="Kathy Burke" label="Kathy Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q552379" start="10400" end="10412" title="Sean Chapman" label="Sean Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206338" start="10475" end="10489" title="Brenda Cowling" label="Brenda Cowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160202" start="10510" end="10526" title="Adrian Edmondson" label="Adrian Edmondson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128599" start="10552" end="10565" title="Eileen Essell" label="Eileen Essell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810704" start="10586" end="10598" title="Mel Giedroyc" label="Mel Giedroyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175896" start="10619" end="10630" title="Lenny Henry" label="Lenny Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="10656" end="10660" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q229920" start="10686" end="10698" title="Patsy Kensit" label="Patsy Kensit"/>
<link wikidata="Q212531" start="10719" end="10728" title="Kate Moss" label="Kate Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634236" start="10749" end="10760" title="Sue Perkins" label="Sue Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730317" start="10781" end="10793" title="Maggie Steed" label="Maggie Steed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664360" start="10819" end="10833" title="Harriet Thorpe" label="Harriet Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744947" start="10859" end="10868" title="Ian Tough" label="Ian Tough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744947" start="10894" end="10907" title="Janette Tough" label="Janette Tough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458875" start="10933" end="10943" title="Tim Wylton" label="Tim Wylton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15968290" start="10969" end="10980" title="Jon Plowman" label="Jon Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q41750367" start="11019" end="11034" title="Keturah Sorrell" label="Keturah Sorrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="11148" end="11152" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787376" start="11548" end="11574" title="Modern Mother and Daughter" label="Modern Mother and Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="11632" end="11651" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q26644" start="11717" end="11749" title="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962 film)" label="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"/>
<link wikidata="Q274167" start="11763" end="11775" title="The Exorcist (film)" label="The Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q725552" start="11789" end="11795" title="Misery (film)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q133654" start="11809" end="11833" title="The Silence of the Lambs (film)" label="The Silence of the Lambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q658041" start="11847" end="11866" title="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise" label="Thelma &amp;amp; Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q104123" start="11880" end="11892" title="Pulp Fiction" label="Pulp Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="11910" end="11920" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="12244" end="12257" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="12281" end="12288" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12411" end="12452" title="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace" label="Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="12469" end="12482" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="13125" end="13142" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="13144" end="13148" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192915" start="13150" end="13159" title="The Corrs" label="The Corrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="13161" end="13179" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42455" start="13185" end="13190" title="Björk" label="Björk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993042" start="13722" end="13731" title="Gogglebox" label="Gogglebox"/>
<link wikidata="Q152108" start="13748" end="13779" title="Keeping Up with the Kardashians" label="Keeping Up with the Kardashians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13923" end="13944" title="Winter Gardens, Blackpool#Opera House Theatre" label="Blackpool Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645381" start="14227" end="14240" title="Hamish McColl" label="Hamish McColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q367778" start="14316" end="14331" title="Willie Williams (lighting designer)" label="Willie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501973" start="14392" end="14443" title="French and Saunders Still Alive" label="French and Saunders: Still Alive! The Farewell Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q658371" start="14642" end="14648" title="Extra (acting)" label="extras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7046803" start="15675" end="15698" title="Noel&amp;#x27;s House Party" label="Noel&amp;#x27;s House Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q430816" start="15712" end="15723" title="Tanya Byron" label="Tanya Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600932" start="16690" end="16711" title="Star Test (TV series)" label="show of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q437107" start="16784" end="16789" title="Sonia (singer)" label="Sonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q990686" start="16791" end="16795" title="Bros (British band)" label="Bros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559305" start="16797" end="16808" title="Wendy James" label="Wendy James"/>
<link wikidata="Q180976" start="16812" end="16828" title="Transvision Vamp" label="Transvision Vamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q236114" start="16834" end="16848" title="Tanita Tikaram" label="Tanita Tikaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734852" start="17193" end="17197" title="GMTV" label="PMTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="17677" end="17684" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292939" start="17820" end="17845" title="Hollywood (Madonna song)" label="Into the Hollywood Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q837719" start="17859" end="17879" title="Me Against the Music" label="Me Against the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290931" start="17897" end="17914" title="The English Roses" label="The English Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q435989" start="18111" end="18121" title="Old Master" label="Old Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="18224" end="18243" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan England"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="18640" end="18647" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="18661" end="18682" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="18696" end="18705" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186587" start="18723" end="18727" title="Troy (film)" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47664" start="18736" end="18756" title="Catherine Zeta-Jones" label="Catherine Zeta-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q108297" start="18814" end="18823" title="Spartacus (film)" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="18829" end="18836" title="Michael Douglas" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027930" start="18992" end="19001" title="Webcam model" label="cam girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="19349" end="19360" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="19362" end="19379" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q444306" start="19384" end="19395" title="Kathy Burke" label="Kathy Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="19455" end="19465" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956148" start="19633" end="19647" title="charity single" label="charity single"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19661" end="19666" title="Help! (song)#Bananarama version" label="Help!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="19693" end="19705" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="19716" end="19729" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="19733" end="19744" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="19780" end="19794" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="19795" end="19800" title="record label" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="19815" end="19831" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q96278967" start="20038" end="20053" title="Llewella Gideon" label="Llewella Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229716" start="20058" end="20062" title="Lulu (singer)" label="Lulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="20074" end="20089" title="the Spice Girls" label="the Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20129" end="20153" title="Who Do You Think You Are (Spice Girls song)#Music video" label="Who Do You Think You Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338110" start="20255" end="20268" title="Edina Monsoon" label="Edina Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="20289" end="20308" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787376" start="20374" end="20400" title="Modern Mother and Daughter" label="Modern Mother and Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="20461" end="20469" title="Roseanne" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="20486" end="20493" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="20546" end="20570" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks animated film"/>
<link wikidata="Q485983" start="20577" end="20584" title="Shrek 2" label="Shrek 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="20653" end="20670" title="Jam and Jerusalem" label="Jam and Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878704" start="20687" end="20722" title="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle" label="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="20772" end="20785" title="Barclays Bank" label="Barclays Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876747" start="20790" end="20801" title="BBC America" label="BBC America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981860" start="20822" end="20839" title="Geraldine Granger" label="Geraldine Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="20878" end="20897" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="The Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937667" start="21007" end="21025" title="Murder Most Horrid" label="Murder Most Horrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102448" start="21089" end="21129" title="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21172" end="21187" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="21191" end="21202" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485093" start="21229" end="21291" title="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587491" start="21378" end="21401" title="Lark Rise to Candleford (TV series)" label="Lark Rise to Candleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704013" start="21478" end="21507" title="Terry&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Orange" label="Terry&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548712" start="21614" end="21623" title="W H Smith" label="W H Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="21628" end="21633" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q714491" start="21839" end="21846" title="Marks &amp;amp; Spencer" label="M&amp;amp;S"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167522" start="21915" end="21924" title="Percy Pig" label="Percy Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="21970" end="21994" title="The Comic Strip Presents" label="The Comic Strip Presents"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="22020" end="22034" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="The Young Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804892" start="22114" end="22118" title="Time (The Young Ones)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q746044" start="22133" end="22147" title="Happy Families (1985 TV series)" label="Happy Families"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564659" start="22168" end="22180" title="Girls on Top (British TV series)" label="Girls on Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532967" start="22206" end="22223" title="Let Them Eat Cake (TV series)" label="Let Them Eat Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395707" start="22244" end="22263" title="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem" label="Jam &amp;amp; Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="22283" end="22303" title="Coraline (film)" label="&amp;quot;Coraline&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22318" end="22348" title="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie" label="Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q56816969" start="22369" end="22386" title="Death on the Nile (2022 film)" label="Death on the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937667" start="22432" end="22450" title="Murder Most Horrid" label="Murder Most Horrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="22476" end="22495" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="The Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000845" start="22521" end="22530" title="Wild West (TV series)" label="Wild West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587491" start="22556" end="22579" title="Lark Rise to Candleford (TV series)" label="Lark Rise to Candleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107270" start="22605" end="22616" title="Psychoville" label="Psychoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357758" start="22642" end="22672" title="Roger and Val Have Just Got In" label="Roger and Val Have Just Got In"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080777" start="22698" end="22712" title="The Wrong Mans (UK TV series)" label="The Wrong Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409668" start="22738" end="22766" title="The Trouble with Maggie Cole" label="The Trouble with Maggie Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="22814" end="22833" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Absolutely Fabulous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874670" start="22859" end="22869" title="Mirrorball (TV pilot)" label="Mirrorball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878704" start="22890" end="22925" title="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle" label="The Life and Times of Vivienne Vyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245106" start="22946" end="22955" title="Dead Boss" label="Dead Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925032" start="22976" end="22985" title="Blandings (TV series)" label="Blandings"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="25307" end="25312" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89608" wikidata="Q4292726" url="?curid=89608" title="Mygdon (brother of Amycus)">
<text>In Greek mythology, King Mygdon (Ancient Greek: Μύγδων) of the Bebryces, people who lived in Bithynia, in northern Asia Minor. He was the son of Poseidon and the Bithynian nymph Melia and thus brother of Amycus, also a Bebrycian king.

== Mythology ==
According to Apollodorus, Mygdon was killed by Heracles on the way to Pontus to complete his ninth labour, which was to fetch the belt of Queen Hippolyte of the Amazons. After Heracles killed Mygdon, he gave his former lands to Lycus, who renamed the place Heraclea in honour of Heracles.. . .in a battle between him [i.e Lycus] and the king of the Bebryces Hercules sided with Lycus and slew many, amongst others King Mygdon, brother of Amycus. And he took much land from the Bebryces and gave it to Lycus, who called it all Heraclea.

== Note ==
== References ==
* Apollodorus, &quot;The Library&quot; with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
* William Smith. &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology&quot;. &quot;s.v. Mygdon.&quot; London (1848).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4292726" start="25" end="31" title="Mygdon (brother of Amycus)" label="Mygdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="33" end="46" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38665497" start="63" end="71" title="Bebryces" label="Bebryces"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="93" end="101" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="115" end="125" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="145" end="153" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="162" end="170" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414119" start="178" end="183" title="Melia (consort of Poseidon)" label="Melia"/>
<link wikidata="Q697942" start="204" end="210" title="Amykos" label="Amycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="299" end="307" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="322" end="328" title="Pontus (region)" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="345" end="357" title="Labours of Hercules#Ninth: Belt of Hippolyta" label="ninth labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q134560" start="382" end="386" title="belt (clothing)" label="belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q210303" start="396" end="405" title="Hippolyte" label="Hippolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="413" end="420" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566891" start="480" end="485" title="Lycus (mythology)" label="Lycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="509" end="517" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="819" end="830" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="1132" end="1145" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="1153" end="1208" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89609" wikidata="Q1647552" url="?curid=89609" title="Mygdon (king of Phrygia)">
<text>In Thracian mythology, King Mygdon (Ancient Thracian: Μύγδων in Greek; &quot;gen&quot;.: Μύγδονος) of Phrygia, was a son of Acmon and father of Coroebus by his wife Anaximene.

== Mythology ==
Mygdon led a force of Phrygians against the Amazons alongside his aides Otreus (another Phrygian leader) and King Priam of Troy, one generation before the Trojan War. Priam mentions this to Helen of Troy in Book 3 of the &quot;Iliad&quot;. A part of the Phrygians are said to have been called after him Mygdonians.Ere now have I journeyed to the land of Phrygia, rich in vines, and there I saw in multitudes the Phrygian warriors, masters of glancing steeds, even the people of Otreus and godlike Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarius. For I, too, being their ally, was numbered among them on the day when the Amazons came, the peers of men. —Homer. &quot;Iliad&quot;, Book 3, lines 186I do not know how it is plausible that, after Priam had fought against them [i.e. Amazons] on the side of the Phrygians during the reign of Mygdon, the Amazons later would have come to Ilion as allies —Philostratus the Elder. &quot;Heroica&quot;, lines 749

== Notes ==

== References ==
* Euripides, &quot;The Rhesus of Euripides&quot; translated into English rhyming verse with explanatory notes by Gilbert Murray, LL.D., D.Litt, F.B.A., Regius Professor of Greek in the University of Oxford. Euripides. Gilbert Murray. New York. Oxford University Press. 1913. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Euripides, &quot;Euripidis Fabulae.&quot; &quot;vol. 3&quot;. Gilbert Murray. Oxford. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 1913. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;The Iliad&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;Homeri Opera&quot; in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920. . Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece&quot; with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
*Pausanias, &quot;Graeciae Descriptio.&quot; &quot;3 vols&quot;. Leipzig, Teubner. 1903. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Aeneid.&quot; Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Publius Vergilius Maro, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*William Smith. &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology&quot;. &quot;s.v. Mygdon.&quot; London (1848).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4492323" start="3" end="21" title="Thracian mythology" label="Thracian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647552" start="28" end="34" title="Mygdon (king of Phrygia)" label="Mygdon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36" end="52" title="Ancient Thracian" label="Ancient Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="64" end="69" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="102" end="109" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q420264" start="124" end="129" title="Acmon of Phrygia" label="Acmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784620" start="144" end="152" title="Coroebus" label="Coroebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="165" end="174" title="Anaximene" label="Anaximene"/>
<link wikidata="Q149386" start="215" end="224" title="Phrygians" label="Phrygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="237" end="244" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887143" start="265" end="271" title="Otreus" label="Otreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="307" end="312" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="316" end="320" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="348" end="358" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q164061" start="383" end="396" title="Helen of Troy" label="Helen of Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="420" end="425" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="741" end="750" title="Sakarya River" label="Sangarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="859" end="864" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q691292" start="1104" end="1126" title="Philostratus of Lemnos" label="Philostratus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1192" end="1201" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1513" end="1522" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1684" end="1689" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="1691" end="1712" title="Iliad" label="&amp;quot;The Iliad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="2053" end="2062" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="2459" end="2481" title="Virgil" label="Publius Vergilius Maro"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="2489" end="2495" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="2783" end="2796" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="2804" end="2859" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89610" wikidata="Q6937667" url="?curid=89610" title="Murder Most Horrid">
<text>Murder Most Horrid is a British black comedy anthology series starring Dawn French. It was broadcast on BBC Two for four series runs, in 1991, 1994, 1996 and 1999.

Created by Paul Smith, who also co-created &quot;Colin&#x27;s Sandwich&quot; (with Terry Kyan, as noted below) and has written for &quot;The Brittas Empire&quot;, among other programmes, the series starred French as a different character in each episode. Many episodes were directed by Bob Spiers, who also worked with French on &quot;The Comic Strip Presents...&quot; and &quot;French and Saunders&quot;.

== Format ==
Most episodes parodied the thriller and murder mystery genres with one episode lampooning the trials and tribulations of being a children&#x27;s presenter in general, and &quot;Blue Peter&quot; in particular. In 1998, this episode (&quot;Murder at Tea Time&quot;) was repeated to celebrate the 40th anniversary of &quot;Blue Peter&quot;, as part of a section entitled &quot;Spoof Peter&quot;, which also featured (among others) the &quot;Python&quot; skit &quot;How to Do It&quot;.

Each episode was stand-alone, and the episodes were written by different writers or writing teams with several contributing multiple episodes across the four series. Among these writers, the pairing of series-creator Paul Smith with Terry Kyan (who had previously collaborated on &quot;Not the Nine O&#x27;Clock News&quot; and &quot;Alas Smith and Jones&quot;) is particularly notable. The two would subsequently create and write &quot;Bonjour la Classe&quot;, starring Nigel Planer.

Other series writers included &quot;Private Eye&quot; editor and &quot;Have I Got News For You&quot; stalwart Ian Hislop, &quot;Press Gang&quot; creator and &quot;Doctor Who&quot; showrunner Steven Moffat, award-winning children&#x27;s author Anthony Horowitz, Nick Newman and John O&#x27;Farrell.

Episodes in series 1 mostly opened with French selecting and reading from a book, usually a quotation actually or allegedly from Shakespeare; series 2 onward dropped this opening. The series&#x27; theme song, which featured at the end of the episode, was sung by Ruby Turner. The lyrics changed between episodes, the penultimate line always a word rhyming with &quot;horrid&quot;, sometimes humorously forced. The murders ranged from the straightforward to the bizarre, with the murder weapon shown on a pedestal during the end credits.

==Episodes==
===Series 1 (1991)===
===Series 2 (1994)===
===Series 3 (1996)===
===Series 4 (1999)===
== Reception ==
Reviewing the DVD release, &quot;Empire&quot; wrote: &quot;Dawn French&#x27;s first solo effort has been eclipsed by the wider success of her &quot;Vicar of Dibley&quot;, and of comedy partner Jennifer Saunders&#x27; &quot;Ab Fab&quot;. But this arguably sees French on her best form&quot;.

=== Awards ===
* &quot;Murder Most Horrid&quot; won the 1994 British Comedy Award for Best TV Comedy Drama

==Home media==
===VHS===
Two videos of the series were released by the BBC in 1996, through BBC Worldwide/Talkback (the former of which became 2 | entertain). Both were released on 3 June 1996, the first containing three episodes from series one and the second, three episodes from series two. These two series were not repeated on British television as often as the later series and, as a result, episodes not featured on the videos released by the BBC (The Case of the Missing, He Died A Death, Mrs Hat and Mrs Red, A Severe Case of Death, We All Hate Granny and Smashing Bird) have proven fairly difficult to view.

*Murder Most Horrid: &quot;The Girl from Ipanema/A Determined Woman/Murder at Tea Time&quot; (BBCV5854) EAN: 5032680800767
*Murder Most Horrid: &quot;Overkill/Lady Luck/Mangez Merveillac&quot; (BBCV5855) EAN: 5014503585525

===DVD (Region 2)===
*Murder Most Horrid: Volume 1 was released by FremantleMedia on 10 March 2008. The second series was released on 10 September 2012, with the third on 8 April 2013 and the fourth being 28 October 2013.
*Murder Most Horrid: The Complete Collection was released 18 November 2013 by FremantleMedia.

===Streaming===
As of November 2023, the first two series of the show are currently available to stream in the United States through Freevee, and in the United Kingdom through BritBox.

==References==
==External links==
* Comedy Guide
*&quot;Murder Most Horrid&quot; at Phill.co.uk Comedy Guide
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="32" end="44" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23653" start="45" end="61" title="anthology series" label="anthology series"/>
<link wikidata="Q236309" start="71" end="82" title="Dawn French" label="Dawn French"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="104" end="111" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153682" start="176" end="186" title="Paul Smith (television writer)" label="Paul Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144833" start="214" end="235" title="Colin&amp;#x27;s Sandwich" label="Colin&amp;#x27;s Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129014" start="302" end="320" title="The Brittas Empire" label="The Brittas Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907839" start="451" end="461" title="Bob Spiers" label="Bob Spiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268051" start="500" end="527" title="The Comic Strip Presents..." label="The Comic Strip Presents..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1455241" start="544" end="563" title="French and Saunders" label="French and Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="612" end="620" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="625" end="639" title="murder mystery" label="murder mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247639" start="762" end="772" title="Blue Peter" label="Blue Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="1023" end="1029" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044417" start="1354" end="1384" title="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News" label="Not the Nine O&amp;#x27;Clock News"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357730" start="1401" end="1421" title="Alas Smith and Jones" label="Alas Smith and Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942111" start="1504" end="1521" title="Bonjour la Classe" label="Bonjour la Classe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232106" start="1538" end="1550" title="Nigel Planer" label="Nigel Planer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="1589" end="1600" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="1624" end="1647" title="Have I Got News For You" label="Have I Got News For You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655550" start="1663" end="1673" title="Ian Hislop" label="Ian Hislop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646235" start="1681" end="1691" title="Press Gang" label="Press Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="1716" end="1726" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q461003" start="1744" end="1757" title="Steven Moffat" label="Steven Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q279305" start="1796" end="1812" title="Anthony Horowitz" label="Anthony Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7027600" start="1814" end="1825" title="Nick Newman" label="Nick Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018672" start="1830" end="1849" title="John O&amp;#x27;Farrell (author)" label="John O&amp;#x27;Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1981" end="1992" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q538788" start="2115" end="2126" title="Ruby Turner" label="Ruby Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="2540" end="2546" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360590" start="2655" end="2670" title="The Vicar of Dibley" label="Vicar of Dibley"/>
<link wikidata="Q235415" start="2700" end="2717" title="Jennifer Saunders" label="Jennifer Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q332554" start="2730" end="2736" title="Absolutely Fabulous" label="Ab Fab"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="2860" end="2880" title="British Comedy Awards" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2978" end="2981" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071905" start="2999" end="3012" title="BBC Worldwide" label="BBC Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679723" start="3013" end="3021" title="Talkback Productions" label="Talkback"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633317" start="3050" end="3063" title="2 Entertain" label="2 | entertain"/>
<link wikidata="Q520445" start="3817" end="3831" title="Fremantle (company)" label="FremantleMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97575822" start="4200" end="4207" title="Freevee" label="Freevee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681965" start="4243" end="4250" title="BritBox" label="BritBox"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89611" wikidata="Q244847" url="?curid=89611" title="United States men's national basketball team">
<text>The USA Basketball Men&#x27;s National Team, commonly known as Team USA and the United States men&#x27;s national basketball team, is the basketball team representing the United States. It is the most successful men&#x27;s team in international competition, winning medals in all twenty Olympic tournaments it has entered, including seventeen golds. In the professional era, the team has won the Olympic gold medal in 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, 2016, 2020, and 2024. Two of its gold medal-winning teams were inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in August 2010: the 1960 team, which featured six Hall of Famers (4 players, 2 coaches), and the 1992 &quot;Dream Team&quot;, featuring 14 Hall of Famers (11 players, 3 coaches). The team is currently ranked first in the FIBA World Rankings.

Traditionally composed of amateur players, the US dominated the first decades of international basketball, winning a record seven consecutive Olympic gold medals. However, by the end of the 1980s, American amateurs faced increasing difficulty against seasoned professionals from the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia.

In 1989, FIBA modified its rules and allowed USA Basketball to field teams with National Basketball Association players. The first such team, known as the &quot;Dream Team&quot;, won the gold medal at the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, being superior in all matches. With the introduction of NBA players, the team was able to spark a second run of dominance in the 1990s.

Facing increased competition, the US failed to win a medal at the 2002 FIBA World Championship, finishing sixth. The 2004 Olympic team, being depleted by a number of withdrawals, lost three games on its way to a bronze medal, a record that represented more losses in a single year than the country&#x27;s Olympic teams had suffered in all previous Olympiads combined.

Determined to put an end to these failures, USA Basketball initiated a long-term project aimed at creating better, more cohesive teams. The US won its first seven games at the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan before losing against Greece in the semi-finals; ending the competition with the bronze medal. The team won gold two years later—at the 2008 Summer Olympics—in a dominant fashion. This success was followed up at the 2010 FIBA World Championship, where despite fielding a roster featuring no players from the 2008 Olympic team, the US did not lose a single game en route to defeating host Turkey for the gold medal.

The Americans continued this streak of dominance in the 2010s by going undefeated and capturing gold at the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 FIBA World Cup. At the 2016 Summer Olympics, the team, led by Mike Krzyzewski for a record third time, won its 15th gold medal, making him the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history. After Krzyzewski stepped down in 2016, Team USA lost to France in the quarter-finals of the 2019 FIBA World Cup, finishing seventh overall. However, Team USA would avenge this loss in the 2020 Summer Olympics, defeating France 87–82 in the final to capture the team&#x27;s fourth straight gold medal and 16th overall. The team repeated as champions in the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, once again defeating France 98–87 in the final.

==History==
===1936–1968===

The United States joined FIBA at the end of 1934 under the supervision of the Amateur Athletic Union. The US men were dominant from the first Olympic tournament to hold basketball, held in Berlin in 1936, going 5–0 to win the gold, and joined by continental neighbors Canada and Mexico on the medal platform. Through the next six tournaments, the United States went undefeated, collecting gold while not losing a single contest in the games held in London, Helsinki, Melbourne, Rome, Tokyo, and Mexico City. Participation in these tournaments was limited to amateurs, but the US teams during this period featured players who would later go on to become superstars in professional basketball, including all-time greats Bill Russell, Oscar Robertson, Jerry West, and Jerry Lucas; the latter three competed on the 1960 Rome team often credited as the best US roster until the formation of the 1992 Dream Team.

Alex Groza and Ralph Beard, both briefly NBA stars, made the 1948 squad as Kentucky Wildcats, with 3-time Oklahoma State All-American and 6-time AAU All-American, and Hall of Famer Bob Kurland leading the way. The 1952 team included big man Clyde Lovellette of the University of Kansas, a future Hall of Famer and NBA star. Kurland once again led the team to victory.

The 1956 team was led by San Francisco Dons teammates Bill Russell and K. C. Jones, and defeated its opponents by an unsurpassed average margin of 53.5 points per game.

The 1960 team included nine future NBA players, including four consecutive NBA Rookie(s) of the Year; Robertson (1961 NBA Rookie of the Year), Lucas (1964 NBA Rookie of the Year), Terry Dischinger (1963 NBA Rookie of the Year), and Walt Bellamy (1962 NBA Rookie of the Year) but also Hall of Famer Jerry West and NBA All-Star(s), Darrall Imhoff (1967 NBA All Star), Bob Boozer (1968 NBA All Star), Adrian Smith (1966 NBA All Star game MVP) and Jay Arnette. They defeated their opponents by an average margin of 42.4 points per game.

===1972–1988===
The 1972 Olympic men&#x27;s basketball gold medal game, marking the first ever loss for the US in Olympic play, ranks among the most controversial events in Olympic history. The United States rode their seven consecutive gold medals and 63–0 Olympic record to Munich for the 1972 Summer Olympics. The team won its first eight games in convincing fashion, setting up a final against the Soviet Union, holding a 6–0 advantage over the Soviets in Olympic play.

With three seconds left in the gold medal game, American forward Doug Collins sank two free throws after being hit hard by a Soviet player to put the Americans up 50–49. Immediately following Collins&#x27; free throws, the Soviets inbounded the ball and failed to score. Soviet coaches claimed that they had requested a timeout before Collins&#x27; foul shots. The referees ordered the clock reset to three seconds and the game&#x27;s final seconds replayed. The horn sounded as a length-of-the-court Soviet pass was being released from the inbounding player, the pass missed its mark, and the American players began celebrating.

Nevertheless, the final three seconds were replayed for a third time. This time, the Soviets&#x27; Alexander Belov and the US&#x27;s Kevin Joyce and Jim Forbes went up for the pass, and Belov caught the long pass from Ivan Edeshko near the American basket. Belov then laid the ball in for the winning points as the buzzer sounded. The US players voted unanimously to refuse their silver medals, and at least one team member, Kenny Davis, has directed in his will that his heirs are never to accept the medals, even posthumously. It remains to this day a possibility that game officials were bribed by the Communist party.

After the controversial loss in Munich, 1976 saw Dean Smith coach the US to a 7–0 record and its eighth Olympic gold medal in Montreal. The success at this tournament pushed the US&#x27;s all-time Olympic record to an impressive 78–1.

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan prompted the United States and 66 other countries to boycott the 1980 Olympics, held in Moscow. The 1980 US team, which featured a number of future NBA players, was the youngest American national team ever assembled. This team featured: Mark Aguirre, Rolando Blackman, Sam Bowie, Michael Brooks, Bill Hanzlik, Alton Lister, Rodney McCray, Isiah Thomas, Darnell Valentine, Danny Vranes, Buck Williams and Al Wood. Unable to compete in the Olympics due to the boycott, it instead participated in the &quot;Gold Medal Series&quot;, a series of games against NBA all-star teams in various US cities, recording a 5–1 record. It was coached by Dave Gavitt.

Michael Jordan, Patrick Ewing, and Chris Mullin, future members of the 1992 Dream Team, made their Olympic debuts in 1984. Jordan led the team with 17.1 points per game, and Bob Knight coached the team to an 8–0 record and another Olympic gold.

At the 1987 Pan American Games, held at Indianapolis, the US basketball team was defeated in the final match by Brazil. Oscar Schmidt led his teammates to an achievement: after a 54:68 halftime score, Brazil beat the US 120 to 115. The 3-pointer line — introduced by FIBA just 3 years before — had become tactically relevant. Although not a major competition, Indianapolis &#x27;87 brought some important facts: for the first time in basketball history, the US was defeated at home; for the first time, in a final; for the first time, by a team that scored more than 100 points. This defeat would bring changes to the sport soon.
The 1988 US team had a roster of collegians aged 20–23 that included future NBA all-stars David Robinson, Danny Manning, and Mitch Richmond. The team came up short, winning the bronze medal. The American team lost to the gold medal winner Soviet Union in the semifinals, but then regrouped and went on to beat Australia 78–49 in the bronze medal game. Dan Majerle led the team in scoring, averaging 14.1 points per game. This was the last time the American Olympic Team consisted exclusively of non-NBA (college) players.

===1992–2000===
The decade started with a semifinal loss to Yugoslavia in the 1990 FIBA World Championship, followed by another semifinal defeat to Puerto Rico in the 1991 Pan American Games in Havana. The 1990 championship marked the last time that the US was represented by college players at a major international tournament (World Championship &amp; Olympics).
The decades-long use of &quot;shamateurs&quot; by the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia and other international teams prompted FIBA to modify its rules and allow NBA players in the 1992 Olympics and beyond. The team assembled by USA Basketball for the tournament in Barcelona in 1992 was one of the most illustrious collections of talent assembled in the history of international sport. Of the twelve players on the team, ten were named in 1996 among the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History, the NBA&#x27;s official list of the 50 greatest players of the league&#x27;s first 50 years. Magic Johnson and Larry Bird served as co-captains.

Because of this star line-up, the team&#x27;s games usually featured opposing teams asking for pregame photos and autographs with their US opponents. As expected, the US team ran away with the gold metal; they were so much better than the competition that head coach Chuck Daly did not call a single timeout during the tournament. The 1992 Dream Team won by an average of 43.8 points (second most, behind the 1956 US team). The only time the US was remotely threatened was against Croatia, which was beaten by 32. Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen became the first players to win both NBA championship and Olympic gold medal in the same year, having played for the Chicago Bulls.

Regarding drug-testing the athletes, according to USA Basketball spokesman Craig Miller, &quot;Since 1990, all of our teams have been tested in competition. I believe since around 1988 we have also been subject to out-of-competition testing. We have been 100 percent fully compliant with USADA and WADA.&quot;
The United States fielded another team composed of NBA players in the 1994 World Championship, held in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. This was an entirely new roster, as USA Basketball elected to showcase stars who were not present at the 1992 Olympics. Composed primarily of younger NBA players, the team lacked the widespread appeal of its predecessor but nevertheless continued its dominance. Those players were Derrick Coleman, Joe Dumars, Kevin Johnson, Larry Johnson, Shawn Kemp, Dan Majerle, Reggie Miller, Alonzo Mourning, Shaquille O&#x27;Neal, Mark Price, Steve Smith and Dominique Wilkins. Coached by Don Nelson of the Golden State Warriors, this team easily captured the gold medal in tournament play. The team was referred to as the &quot;Dream Team II&quot;.

The third team composed of NBA players participated in the 1996 Summer Olympics held in Atlanta. The star quality of the team was impressive as it featured five members of the original Dream Team (Barkley, Malone, Pippen, Robinson, and Stockton), plus two other members of the NBA 50 Greatest Players list, Hakeem Olajuwon and Shaquille O&#x27;Neal. Lenny Wilkens coached the team.

The Americans won another gold medal with an average margin of victory of 31.8 points per game. They captured the gold medal after defeating Yugoslavia 95–69. With Atlanta being home to the Hawks, these games were the first Olympics to take place in a city with an NBA team since the league started allowing its players to compete in the Olympics. The team was commonly referred to as the &quot;Dream Team III&quot;.

The 1998 World Championship in Athens, Greece was different from the previous teams, as none of its players were current members of NBA teams. Because of a labor dispute that led to a lockout, no active NBA players were permitted to compete in the tournament. The 12 NBA players picked before the lockout were Tim Duncan, Tim Hardaway, Vin Baker, Gary Payton, Terrell Brandon, Kevin Garnett, Tom Gugliotta, Grant Hill, Allan Houston, Christian Laettner, Glen Rice, and Chris Webber.

The replacement team was composed largely of players from American colleges, the minor-league Continental Basketball Association, or European pro leagues. The unheralded roster captured a bronze medal, considered a solid achievement given its lack of top-notch talent. The team was nicknamed the &quot;Dirty Dozen&quot; for its work ethic and teamwork. Undrafted free agent Brad Miller became a two-time NBA All-Star. Some of the other team members—including Trajan Langdon, Kiwane Garris, David Wood and Michael Hawkins—had brief spells in the NBA. All went on to have careers in Europe, with Langdon being named to the Euroleague&#x27;s All-Decade Team for the 2000s.

During the late 1990s, international basketball began to gather attention as more and more foreign players became stars in the NBA. Therefore, the 2000 US team had the enormous task of proving that American basketball could remain the best in the world. The new team that was assembled again featured NBA players, but this time few of them were considered to be true superstars, as several elite players elected not to participate.

The US team participated in the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia and was coached by Rudy Tomjanovich. It won its first two games by lopsided margins, but faced more difficult competition thereafter. In a preliminary game against Lithuania, the US team won 85–76, marking the first time a team of professional American players failed to win by double digits. Two games later, in a 106–94 victory over France, Vince Carter pulled off one of the most famous dunks in basketball history, jumping over the French center Frédéric Weis on his way to the basket. (The French media would dub Carter&#x27;s feat &quot;&quot;—&quot;the dunk of death&quot;.)

A shock came in the semifinals when the United States defeated Lithuania by the close score of 85–83. Lithuanian star (and future NBA player, first with the Indiana Pacers and later with the Golden State Warriors) Šarūnas Jasikevičius failed to get a potential game-winning 3-point shot off in time.

The closeness of the semifinal game was so shocking that NBC took the unusual step of showing the gold medal game live rather than on tape delay. (The game started around 2 p.m. Sydney time on Sunday, October 1, which is late Saturday evening in the United States. NBC originally planned to show the game almost 24 hours later during its Sunday prime time broadcast.) The US won the gold medal against France in a close game, 85–75. Though the US went undefeated on its way to the gold medal, the team began to lose its aura of invincibility for the first time.

===2002–2004===
The 2002 team competed in the World Championship in Indianapolis, Indiana, United States. Coached by George Karl, the team finished a surprisingly disappointing sixth in the competition. During the tournament, Argentina defeated the US in the second preliminary round group stage, thus becoming the first team ever to defeat a US team composed of NBA players. Yugoslavia knocked out the US in the quarterfinals, becoming the first team ever to defeat US team of NBA players in knockout stage. Then Spain repeated the outcome in the 5th place playoff. To a greater degree than in 2000, a number of top NBA players declined to participate, forcing USA Basketball to resort to picking mostly second-tier players.
George Karl had a dispute with Paul Pierce, one of the few superstars on the team, which led to Karl benching Pierce, the team&#x27;s leading scorer, in Team USA&#x27;s final game. The group has been considered one of sport&#x27;s greatest flops, as they failed to produce as previous teams had. The United States lost 3 games in the tournament to countries with current or future NBA stars, like Argentina (led by Manu Ginóbili), Yugoslavia (led by Peja Stojaković and Vlade Divac) and Spain (led by Pau Gasol).

Two NBA superstars, Ray Allen and Jason Kidd, accepted roles to play on the World Championship team, but were unable to play on that team due to injuries. Many other superstars, including Kobe Bryant, Shaquille O&#x27;Neal, and Kevin Garnett, turned down invitations to play in that tournament.
The close outcome of 2000 and the humiliating results of 2002 prompted a number of NBA superstars to agree to join the team for the FIBA Americas Championship 2003, dubbed as the Dream Team IV, which the squad was required to participate in to qualify for the 2004 Summer Olympics. The team easily cruised to a first-place finish, earning it a spot in Athens, Greece, the following summer.

However, the dominant team that competed in 2003 could not be kept together. Nine of its 12 players elected not to participate in Athens. The new team consisted of some young NBA stars early in their careers, such as Dwyane Wade, LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony. Only Richard Jefferson, Tim Duncan and Allen Iverson were part of the 2003 FIBA Americas San Juan gold medal team. The team was coached by Larry Brown.

After struggles in several exhibition matches, the vulnerability of the 2004 team was confirmed when Puerto Rico defeated them 92–73, from which they earned the nickname &quot;Nightmare team&quot; (as mock opposed to the Dream Team concept), in the first game of the Olympic tournament in Athens. The 19 point defeat was the most lopsided loss for the US in the history of international competition. After the game, Larry Brown had strong comments about his coaching performance: &quot;I&#x27;m humiliated, not for the loss – I can always deal with wins and losses – but I&#x27;m disappointed because I had a job to do as a coach, to get us to understand how we&#x27;re supposed to play as a team and act as a team, and I don&#x27;t think we did that&quot;.

After winning close games against Greece and Australia, The US fell to Lithuania, dropping to 2–2 in the Olympic tournament. Even after an 89–53 win over Angola, the Americans entered the knockout rounds in fourth place due to goal average, the lowest seed of their group. The Americans faced undefeated Spain in their quarterfinal game, winning 102–94.

However, the semifinal match saw the team defeated by Argentina 89–81, ending the United States&#x27; hold on the gold medal. The US did rebound to capture the bronze medal by defeating Lithuania. Still, it marked only the second time that an American team failed to officially win gold (excluding the 1980 Moscow Olympics boycott and ignoring the 1972 debacle), and the first time for an American team composed of NBA players.

===2006–2016===
Following the disappointments in 2002 and 2004, USA Basketball appointed Jerry Colangelo to be solely responsible for selecting the team. Colangelo made it clear that he would ask players for a three-year commitment—the 2006 FIBA World Championship and the 2008 Summer Olympics. In the 2006 Worlds, the team was eliminated by Greece in the semifinal, losing the game 101–95. The head coach was Duke University&#x27;s Mike Krzyzewski, with assistants Jim Boeheim, Mike D&#x27;Antoni, and Nate McMillan. While some prominent players, such as Tim Duncan and Kevin Garnett, stated that they did not plan to play for the team, superstars Dwyane Wade, Kobe Bryant and LeBron James publicly announced their commitment for the 2006 Worlds and the ensuing 2008 Olympics. Wade, James and Carmelo Anthony were named captains of the 2006 US World Championship Team.
The United States Team, dubbed Dream Team V or the Redeem Team, dominated Group B in pool play, defeating China, Angola, Greece, world champion Spain, and Germany by an average of 32.2 points. After finishing first in their group, the US earned the right to play the fourth-place finishers in Group A, Australia. The United States soundly defeated Australia 116–85 in the quarterfinal. Next up for the Americans in the semifinals was the 2004 Olympic gold medalist Argentina, led by Manu Ginóbili – the team that had beaten them in the semifinals four years prior. However, Ginóbili was hobbled by an ankle injury and only played sparing minutes in the first half. Behind Carmelo Anthony&#x27;s 21 points, the US defeated Argentina 101–81 to reach the gold medal game.

On August 24, the United States defeated Spain 118–107 to capture the Olympic gold medal with the electrifying spark by Team USA leading scorer Dwyane Wade adding 27 points with four 3-point shots and 100% shooting inside the line. The victory ended an eight-year drought at major international competitions (Olympics &amp; World Championships) with the first win since 2000.

Due to winning gold at the 2008 Olympics, the US automatically qualified for the World Championships. The US had not won the FIBA World Championship since 1994. It was initially believed that there would be only 2–3 spots available with most players returning from the 2008 Olympic team. However, by early July 2010, all ten invited players declined to participate, due to injury, free agency, rest, or personal commitments. Due to the roster being filled with 12 new players and the lack of star power, the team was dubbed the &quot;B Team&quot;. Also, the coaches were criticized for selecting too many guards and inexperienced players, and not enough tall players.

However, the team won all five of its preliminary games, four of those by double digits (the exception being the win against Brazil by 2 points). The success continued in the knockout stage with victories by 55, 10 and 15. In the 2010 FIBA World Championship final, the US beat host nation Turkey by 17 points and won the gold medal. Tournament MVP Kevin Durant broke several Team USA scoring records (most points in a tournament-205, most points in a single game-38, and average points per game-22.8). In addition, Lamar Odom became the first player to win the NBA and FIBA World championships in the same year.

Team USA executive director Jerry Colangelo has said he&#x27;s open to anyone from the 2010 team to play in future tournaments.
The US team clinched a berth in the 2012 Olympics in London by winning the 2010 World Championship. The Olympic team lost some players to injuries who might have made the team and appeared to be short on big men. Their roster featured five players returning from the 2008 Olympic team and five others from the 2010 World Championship team.

The US went undefeated but appeared vulnerable at times in winning five exhibition games. They finished the tournament with a perfect 8–0 record, defeating opponents by an average of 32 points while trailing in the fourth quarter only once. The Americans often played with a small lineup that emphasized speed, quickness, and outside shooting. The team set an Olympic single-game record with 156 points scored against Nigeria in the preliminary round. In a rematch of the 2008 final, Team USA again narrowly defeated Spain to capture the gold.

This was announced as the final Olympic Games for Kobe Bryant. By winning the gold medal, the US automatically qualified for the 2014 FIBA World Cup.

The United States had automatically qualified for the World Cup by virtue of the gold medal won by their 2012 Olympic team. The Americans were considered favorites to win the World Cup. The roster was filled with two players returning from the 2012 Olympic team, three from the 2010 FIBA Championship Team, while seven other NBA players made their senior international debuts. The 2014 roster featured four players or larger, the most of any US team since Mike Krzyzewski began coaching the team in 2006. The team was also the youngest American team since 1992 when NBA players were first allowed on the team; the average player was 24.08 years old, roughly a half-year younger than their 2010 team.

The team advanced to the knockout phase after starting the tournament 5–0 during the group stage. They went undefeated 9–0 in the tournament, winning by an average margin of 33.0 points. The United States was just the third country in World Cup history to repeat as champions. Combined with their 2010 World Championship along with gold by their 2008 and 2012 Olympic teams, they also became the first country in FIBA basketball history to win four consecutive major titles. The United States defeated Serbia in the World Cup Final by 37 points and clinched a berth for the 2016 Summer Olympics.

Multiple withdrawals (largely triggered by a freak injury to Paul George in a pre-2014 World Cup scrimmage) left the 2016 US team with just two players with prior Olympic experience (Durant and Anthony). The Americans seemed vulnerable in the preliminary round, narrowly defeating Australia, Serbia, and France by a combined 16 points. However, the team gained momentum in the quarterfinal match against Argentina, winning 105–78. The US team then defeated Spain in the semifinals setting up a rematch versus Serbia in the gold medal game. The Americans proved their superiority, easily defeating their rival by 30 points. The team averaged 100.9 points (with an average margin of victory at 22.5 points) a game with Anthony (he won a record third straight Olympic gold medal) and Durant as top scorers. Krzyzewski stepped down as the most decorated coach in USA Basketball history, coaching three Olympic gold medal teams and winning two FIBA World Cups.

===2017–present===
In 2017, the United States would win a record 7th championship in the FIBA AmeriCup. In 2019, the team struggled and finished in 7th place at the FIBA World Cup. Despite featuring many young NBA players, it was a huge shock and disappointment. The team competed in the 2019 Military World Games and finished with the silver medal behind Team Lithuania. At the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo, the United States reclaimed their glory by winning the fourth consecutive gold medal. Led by top scorers Kevin Durant, Jayson Tatum, and Devin Booker, the team was able to dominate the tournament and defeat France 87–82 in the final, despite losing to them early on in the group stage.

Team USA played two exhibition games in Abu Dhabi in the run-up to the 2023 FIBA World Cup. It was the first time that the men&#x27;s national team played in the United Arab Emirates. The team was coached by nine-time NBA champion Steve Kerr, who won five titles as a player (three with Chicago Bulls and two with San Antonio Spurs) and four as head coach (with Golden State Warriors). They ultimately finished fourth at the World Cup, behind Germany, Serbia, and Canada.

After 2023&#x27;s fourth-place result at the FIBA World Cup, Hill and Kerr set out to convince more experienced players to play in the 2024 Summer Olympics. This included Lebron James, who had missed the last two Olympics; Stephen Curry, who had never played in the Olympics; and Kevin Durant. Returning Olympians would be Bam Adebayo, Jrue Holiday, Anthony Davis, and Jayson Tatum, while returning FIBA players included Anthony Edwards and Tyrese Haliburton. The team, dubbed &quot;The Avengers&quot; by the media, would be the oldest U.S. men&#x27;s basketball team, averaging 30 years and 9 months. Although six-time all-star Kawhi Leonard was initially drafted onto the roster, he was replaced by Derrick White due to injury. Team USA would play five exhibition games before the Olympics; although they convincingly beat Canada and Serbia, they were forced into a close game by Australia, who nearly overcame a 25-point deficit, and were at risk of losing to both South Sudan and Germany. Durant would not play all five exhibition games due to a strained calf. During preliminary rounds of Olympic play, Team USA would go undefeated against Serbia, South Sudan, and Puerto Rico, earning the No. 1 seed entering the quarter-finals. Once in the quarterfinals, the U.S. would convincingly defeat Brazil 122–87, with Booker leading the Americans with a team-high 18 points, before moving onto a second rematch vs Serbia in the semifinals. Here, Team USA won 95–91 after overcoming a 17-point deficit, with Curry scoring 36 points. In the final, the Americans faced France for the second straight Olympics, with Curry scoring 24 points to lead the team to a 98–87 win. This win was Team USA&#x27;s fifth consecutive Olympic gold medal in men&#x27;s basketball.

==Honors==
Olympic Games
* Gold medalists (17): 1936, 1948, 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, 1968, 1976, 1984, 1992, 1996, 2000, 2008, 2012, 2016, 2020, 2024
* Silver medalists: 1972
* Bronze medalists: 1988, 2004

FIBA World Cup
* Champions: 1954, 1986, 1994, 2010, 2014
* Runners-up: 1950, 1959, 1982
* Third place: 1974, 1990, 1998, 2006

FIBA AmeriCup
* Champions: 1992, 1993, 1997, 1999, 2003, 2007, 2017
* Runners-up: 1989
* Third place: 2022

===Other awards===
Pan American Games
* Gold medalists: 1951, 1955, 1959, 1963, 1967, 1975, 1979, 1983
* Silver medalists:: 1987, 1995, 1999
* Bronze medalists: 1991, 2011, 2015, 2019

Goodwill Games
* Gold medalists: 1986, 1998, 2001
* Silver medalists: 1990
* Bronze medalists: 1994

World University Games
* Gold medalists: 1965, 1967, 1973, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1997, 1999, 2005, 2015, 2019
* Silver medalists: 1970, 1985, 1987, 2017
* Bronze medalists: 1983, 2001, 2009

==Competitive record==
===Olympic Games===
The US team has achieved unparalleled success in the Olympic games. While historically at a disadvantage to the Eastern Bloc countries that had used their best and most experienced professional players listed as soldiers or workers in a profession to subvert the amateur rules, the US team (typically composed of AAU or collegiate players) did surprisingly well, winning nine out of eleven Olympic tournaments they had entered before the introduction of NBA players. The US is the only Western country that achieved success in a team sport during the Eastern Bloc dominance. Canada&#x27;s results in ice hockey and Western European teams&#x27; results in soccer significantly deteriorated after the introduction of the Eastern Bloc countries and their quasi-professional players in the late 1940s and early 1950s. In 1992, the US team was represented by the NBA players for the first time and defeated its opponents by an average of 44 points en route to the gold medal against Croatia. The Americans have continued to dominate the Olympic tournaments ever since, excluding underachieving performance at the 2004 Summer Olympics.
===FIBA Basketball World Cup===
Prior to the introduction of the NBA players, the United States was usually represented by military, industrial or collegiate players. European and South American countries, meanwhile, were allowed to use their best players. In 1950 and 1954, AAU teams Denver Chevrolets (in 1950) and Peoria Caterpillars (1954) were the US representatives; in 1959, the United States sent an Air Force team; in 1963 and 1967, the team was composed of AAU, armed forces and college ranks; in 1970 and 1974 (with the 1974 team being the youngest and least experienced team in history), the US fielded exclusively collegians; in 1978, an Athletes In Action (AIA) team was the American representative; in 1982, 1986, and 1990, the team was again made up of collegiate players. Starting with 1994 and with the exception of 1998, when the US used players from the European leagues and college players, the team was made up of NBA players.
===FIBA AmeriCup===
Prior to the implementation of a new FIBA competition system in 2017, the US team used different players depending on the circumstances. In 1992, 1999, 2003 and 2007, the Americans sent in NBA players as they needed to qualify for the Olympics. In 1989 and 2005, the US also used the tournament for qualification purposes but sent in either college players (in 1989 NBA players weren&#x27;t allowed) or NBA Development League, CBA and European leagues players (in 2005 the US team didn&#x27;t need to win gold in order to qualify for the World Championship). In 1993, 1997 and 2001, the US team entered the tournament without any specific purpose and was represented by CBA players in 1993 and 1997, and by junior players in 2001. In 1980, 1984, 1988, 1995, 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2015, the American team didn&#x27;t enter the tournament. In 2017, the US participated for the first time in ten years with a squad of NBA G League players and American professionals playing in European leagues, winning the gold medal.
== Head-to-head competitive record ==
The following tables summarizes the all-time competitive record for the United States men&#x27;s national basketball team, broken down by confederation. Competitive results are inclusive of games in the Olympic Games, FIBA Basketball World Cup, FIBA AmeriCup, and qualifying campaigns for these competitions. This record excludes the results of international friendlies or exhibitions, along with minor tournaments such as the Pan American Games, World University Games, and Goodwill Games. The United States has played competitive games against 57 current and former national teams, with the latest result, a win, coming against France on August 10, 2024, in the 2024 Olympics. The last competitive was a 2025 FIBA AmeriCup qualification matchup against Bahamas on February 23, 2025.
&quot;Through Bahamas vs United States on February 23, 2025&quot;

=== Overall (378-56) ===
=== Africa (19–0) ===
=== Americas (183–30) ===
=== Asia (31–0) ===
=== Europe (125–26) ===
=== Oceania (20–0) ===
==Team==
===Current roster===

On April 17, 2024, the U.S. roster for the 2024 Summer Olympics was announced. On July 10, 2024, Kawhi Leonard withdrew from the team due to injury and was replaced by Derrick White.
===Medal leaders===
====Olympics====
Until 1992, there were few players who got the opportunity to compete in multiple Olympics. Unlike their seasoned and veteran counterparts from Europe, US players usually participated in a single Olympics (with Bob Kurland, Bill Hougland, and Burdette Haldorson being lone exceptions) and after winning a medal turned pro. Consequently, prior to 1992, US teams were assembled from scratch every four years. After the introduction of NBA players, US teams became more cohesive, and players often chose to compete in more than one Olympic tournament. 
====World Cup====
====AmeriCup====
==See also==

*United States men&#x27;s national under-19 basketball team
*United States men&#x27;s national under-17 basketball team
*United States men&#x27;s national 3x3 team
*United States women&#x27;s national basketball team
*United States women&#x27;s national under-19 basketball team
*United States women&#x27;s national under-17 basketball team
*United States women&#x27;s national 3x3 team
*USA Basketball
*Basketball in the United States

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==
* FIBA profile
* US Olympic Basketball Team Rosters and Stats</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="4" end="43" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="USA Basketball Men&amp;#x27;s National Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="63" end="71" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Team USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q244847" start="80" end="129" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="138" end="148" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="171" end="184" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="418" end="422" title="Basketball at the 1992 Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s Tournament" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005505" start="424" end="428" title="Basketball at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005491" start="430" end="434" title="Basketball at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q27933" start="436" end="440" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q749036" start="442" end="446" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q18416654" start="448" end="452" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080780" start="454" end="458" title="Basketball at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799290" start="464" end="468" title="Basketball at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="527" end="568" title="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570088" start="589" end="598" title="1960 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="1960 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="671" end="693" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="&amp;quot;Dream Team&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388410" start="790" end="809" title="FIBA Men&amp;#x27;s World Ranking" label="FIBA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q810377" start="1095" end="1107" title="Soviet Union national basketball team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q931531" start="1112" end="1122" title="Yugoslavia national basketball team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="1134" end="1138" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500386" start="1170" end="1184" title="USA Basketball" label="USA Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="1205" end="1236" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q622644" start="1330" end="1350" title="Basketball at the 1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="1354" end="1363" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q587978" start="1568" end="1596" title="2002 FIBA World Championship" label="2002 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957591" start="1619" end="1636" title="2004 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="2004 Olympic team"/>
<link wikidata="Q241329" start="2047" end="2075" title="2006 FIBA World Championship" label="2006 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q331640" start="2107" end="2113" title="Greece national basketball team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q27933" start="2221" end="2241" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211438" start="2301" end="2329" title="2010 FIBA World Championship" label="2010 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612172" start="2393" end="2410" title="2008 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="2008 Olympic team"/>
<link wikidata="Q734632" start="2473" end="2479" title="Turkey national basketball team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q749036" start="2609" end="2629" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q810339" start="2634" end="2653" title="2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2014 FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18416654" start="2662" end="2682" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="2701" end="2716" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630359" start="2922" end="2941" title="2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2019 FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080780" start="3018" end="3038" title="Basketball at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799290" start="3186" end="3206" title="Basketball at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="3320" end="3324" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="3373" end="3395" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="Amateur Athletic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q159193" start="3494" end="3498" title="Basketball at the 1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q733210" start="3744" end="3750" title="Basketball at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q594714" start="3752" end="3760" title="Basketball at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q723635" start="3762" end="3771" title="Basketball at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q733305" start="3773" end="3777" title="Basketball at the 1960 Summer Olympics" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q367123" start="3779" end="3784" title="Basketball at the 1964 Summer Olympics" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q589623" start="3790" end="3801" title="Basketball at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q137003" start="3997" end="4012" title="50 Greatest Players in NBA History" label="all-time greats"/>
<link wikidata="Q242185" start="4013" end="4025" title="Bill Russell" label="Bill Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17717" start="4027" end="4042" title="Oscar Robertson" label="Oscar Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q311195" start="4044" end="4054" title="Jerry West" label="Jerry West"/>
<link wikidata="Q366505" start="4060" end="4071" title="Jerry Lucas" label="Jerry Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q259401" start="4203" end="4213" title="Alex Groza" label="Alex Groza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558776" start="4218" end="4229" title="Ralph Beard" label="Ralph Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392428" start="4278" end="4295" title="Kentucky Wildcats men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Kentucky Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082344" start="4309" end="4323" title="Oklahoma State Cowboys basketball" label="Oklahoma State"/>
<link wikidata="Q649604" start="4384" end="4395" title="Bob Kurland" label="Bob Kurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q714191" start="4444" end="4460" title="Clyde Lovellette" label="Clyde Lovellette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414000" start="4597" end="4615" title="San Francisco Dons men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="San Francisco Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q719836" start="4643" end="4654" title="K. C. Jones" label="K. C. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625050" start="4922" end="4938" title="Terry Dischinger" label="Terry Dischinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q735251" start="4974" end="4986" title="Walt Bellamy" label="Walt Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q311195" start="5040" end="5050" title="Jerry West" label="Jerry West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565032" start="5072" end="5086" title="Darrall Imhoff" label="Darrall Imhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502090" start="5108" end="5118" title="Bob Boozer" label="Bob Boozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419803" start="5140" end="5152" title="Adrian Smith (basketball)" label="Adrian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q971713" start="5186" end="5197" title="Jay Arnette" label="Jay Arnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="5567" end="5587" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q919954" start="5816" end="5828" title="Doug Collins (basketball)" label="Doug Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q714318" start="6481" end="6496" title="Alexander Belov" label="Alexander Belov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331737" start="6515" end="6526" title="Kevin Joyce (basketball)" label="Kevin Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567189" start="6531" end="6541" title="James Forbes (basketball)" label="Jim Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331717" start="6807" end="6818" title="Kenneth Davis (basketball)" label="Kenny Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="6987" end="7002" title="Communist party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202584" start="7054" end="7064" title="Dean Smith" label="Dean Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q719502" start="7128" end="7139" title="Basketball at the 1976 Summer Olympics" label="in Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="7245" end="7275" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="7329" end="7336" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q8450" start="7341" end="7354" title="1980 Summer Olympics" label="1980 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q714640" start="7513" end="7525" title="Mark Aguirre" label="Mark Aguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q280376" start="7527" end="7543" title="Rolando Blackman" label="Rolando Blackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373712" start="7545" end="7554" title="Sam Bowie" label="Sam Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q647498" start="7556" end="7570" title="Michael Brooks (basketball)" label="Michael Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442329" start="7572" end="7584" title="Bill Hanzlik" label="Bill Hanzlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350312" start="7586" end="7598" title="Alton Lister" label="Alton Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424414" start="7600" end="7613" title="Rodney McCray (basketball)" label="Rodney McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q298512" start="7615" end="7627" title="Isiah Thomas" label="Isiah Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q954582" start="7629" end="7646" title="Darnell Valentine" label="Darnell Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335565" start="7648" end="7660" title="Danny Vranes" label="Danny Vranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q742119" start="7662" end="7675" title="Buck Williams" label="Buck Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607559" start="7680" end="7687" title="Al Wood" label="Al Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311041" start="7914" end="7925" title="Dave Gavitt" label="Dave Gavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="7928" end="7942" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q271933" start="7944" end="7957" title="Patrick Ewing" label="Patrick Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q289398" start="7963" end="7975" title="Chris Mullin (basketball)" label="Chris Mullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q888594" start="8102" end="8112" title="Bob Knight" label="Bob Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797248" start="8294" end="8307" title="Oscar Schmidt" label="Oscar Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211876" start="8894" end="8908" title="David Robinson" label="David Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q964580" start="8910" end="8923" title="Danny Manning" label="Danny Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q375767" start="8929" end="8943" title="Mitch Richmond" label="Mitch Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159115" start="9156" end="9167" title="Dan Majerle" label="Dan Majerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q376052" start="9405" end="9433" title="1990 FIBA World Championship" label="1990 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892247" start="9494" end="9517" title="Basketball at the 1991 Pan American Games" label="1991 Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q931531" start="9760" end="9770" title="Yugoslavia national basketball team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46199" start="9810" end="9814" title="FIBA" label="FIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="9845" end="9848" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q622644" start="9864" end="9877" title="Basketball at the 1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q137003" start="10138" end="10172" title="50 Greatest Players in NBA History" label="50 Greatest Players in NBA History"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="10178" end="10181" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q134183" start="10267" end="10280" title="Magic Johnson" label="Magic Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190152" start="10285" end="10295" title="Larry Bird" label="Larry Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="10834" end="10848" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193637" start="10853" end="10867" title="Scottie Pippen" label="Scottie Pippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587787" start="10905" end="10921" title="1992 NBA Finals" label="NBA championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="10985" end="10998" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q427605" start="11381" end="11404" title="1994 FIBA World Championship" label="1994 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="11414" end="11430" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500386" start="11476" end="11490" title="USA Basketball" label="USA Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q929320" start="11721" end="11736" title="Derrick Coleman" label="Derrick Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q348598" start="11738" end="11748" title="Joe Dumars" label="Joe Dumars"/>
<link wikidata="Q203286" start="11750" end="11763" title="Kevin Johnson (basketball)" label="Kevin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q463635" start="11765" end="11778" title="Larry Johnson (basketball, born 1969)" label="Larry Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q150510" start="11780" end="11790" title="Shawn Kemp" label="Shawn Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159115" start="11792" end="11803" title="Dan Majerle" label="Dan Majerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q270966" start="11805" end="11818" title="Reggie Miller" label="Reggie Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q310968" start="11820" end="11835" title="Alonzo Mourning" label="Alonzo Mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="11837" end="11858" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127125" start="11860" end="11870" title="Mark Price" label="Mark Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q463200" start="11872" end="11883" title="Steve Smith (basketball)" label="Steve Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q311533" start="11888" end="11905" title="Dominique Wilkins" label="Dominique Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q375600" start="11918" end="11928" title="Don Nelson" label="Don Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="11936" end="11957" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="12139" end="12159" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="12168" end="12175" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="12387" end="12402" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="12407" end="12428" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316161" start="12430" end="12443" title="Lenny Wilkens" label="Lenny Wilkens"/>
<link wikidata="Q931531" start="12604" end="12614" title="Yugoslavia national basketball team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159893" start="12653" end="12658" title="Atlanta Hawks" label="Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q810341" start="12885" end="12908" title="1998 FIBA World Championship" label="1998 World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12912" end="12926" title="Athens, Greece" label="Athens, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356672" start="13035" end="13072" title="1998–99 NBA lockout" label="a labor dispute that led to a lockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="13191" end="13201" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q352319" start="13203" end="13215" title="Tim Hardaway" label="Tim Hardaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q440111" start="13217" end="13226" title="Vin Baker" label="Vin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q309872" start="13228" end="13239" title="Gary Payton" label="Gary Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455879" start="13241" end="13256" title="Terrell Brandon" label="Terrell Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189240" start="13258" end="13271" title="Kevin Garnett" label="Kevin Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309496" start="13273" end="13286" title="Tom Gugliotta" label="Tom Gugliotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q311895" start="13288" end="13298" title="Grant Hill" label="Grant Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q554027" start="13300" end="13313" title="Allan Houston" label="Allan Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q433148" start="13315" end="13333" title="Christian Laettner" label="Christian Laettner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361178" start="13335" end="13344" title="Glen Rice" label="Glen Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q314415" start="13350" end="13362" title="Chris Webber" label="Chris Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="13459" end="13493" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="Continental Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q386995" start="13739" end="13750" title="Brad Miller (basketball)" label="Brad Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740530" start="13769" end="13781" title="NBA All-Star" label="NBA All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q512356" start="13824" end="13838" title="Trajan Langdon" label="Trajan Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254947" start="13840" end="13853" title="Kiwane Garris" label="Kiwane Garris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631653" start="13855" end="13865" title="David Wood (basketball)" label="David Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345897" start="13870" end="13885" title="Michael Hawkins (basketball)" label="Michael Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q185982" start="13986" end="13996" title="Euroleague" label="Euroleague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734767" start="14004" end="14019" title="ULEB Euroleague 2001–10 All-Decade Team" label="All-Decade Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="14337" end="14340" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="14501" end="14514" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="14518" end="14524" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q557526" start="14555" end="14571" title="Rudy Tomjanovich" label="Rudy Tomjanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="14700" end="14709" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q499328" start="14871" end="14877" title="France national basketball team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q241261" start="14879" end="14891" title="Vince Carter" label="Vince Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q499328" start="14972" end="14978" title="France national basketball team" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q222052" start="14979" end="14985" title="center (basketball)" label="center"/>
<link wikidata="Q930587" start="14986" end="14999" title="Frédéric Weis" label="Frédéric Weis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170329" start="15276" end="15290" title="Indiana Pacers" label="Indiana Pacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157376" start="15310" end="15331" title="Golden State Warriors" label="Golden State Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q316252" start="15333" end="15353" title="Šarūnas Jasikevičius" label="Šarūnas Jasikevičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089093" start="15477" end="15480" title="Olympics on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817258" start="15554" end="15564" title="broadcast delay" label="tape delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="15765" end="15775" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q587978" start="16029" end="16047" title="2002 FIBA World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q121647" start="16740" end="16751" title="Paul Pierce" label="Paul Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q213132" start="17124" end="17137" title="Manu Ginóbili" label="Manu Ginóbili"/>
<link wikidata="Q277780" start="17159" end="17174" title="Peja Stojaković" label="Peja Stojaković"/>
<link wikidata="Q94846" start="17179" end="17190" title="Vlade Divac" label="Vlade Divac"/>
<link wikidata="Q193052" start="17210" end="17219" title="Pau Gasol" label="Pau Gasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q208623" start="17243" end="17252" title="Ray Allen" label="Ray Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221341" start="17257" end="17267" title="Jason Kidd" label="Jason Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="17411" end="17422" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="17424" end="17445" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q189240" start="17451" end="17464" title="Kevin Garnett" label="Kevin Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736899" start="17650" end="17681" title="FIBA Americas Championship 2003" label="FIBA Americas Championship 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="17778" end="17798" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="17870" end="17876" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q31683" start="18126" end="18137" title="Dwyane Wade" label="Dwyane Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="18139" end="18151" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q129041" start="18156" end="18171" title="Carmelo Anthony" label="Carmelo Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q377693" start="18178" end="18195" title="Richard Jefferson" label="Richard Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="18197" end="18207" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190094" start="18212" end="18225" title="Allen Iverson" label="Allen Iverson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736899" start="18248" end="18270" title="2003 Tournament of the Americas" label="FIBA Americas San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380013" start="18312" end="18323" title="Larry Brown (basketball)" label="Larry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347419" start="18427" end="18438" title="Puerto Rican National Basketball Team" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="18593" end="18611" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q331640" start="19119" end="19125" title="Greece national basketball team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="19156" end="19165" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q499338" start="19494" end="19503" title="Argentina national basketball team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687804" start="19958" end="19973" title="Jerry Colangelo" label="Jerry Colangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241329" start="20105" end="20133" title="2006 FIBA World Championship" label="2006 FIBA World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q189816" start="20142" end="20162" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171772" start="20279" end="20294" title="Duke Blue Devils men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="20302" end="20317" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q530705" start="20335" end="20346" title="Jim Boeheim" label="Jim Boeheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q708639" start="20348" end="20366" title="Mike D&amp;#x27;Antoni" label="Mike D&amp;#x27;Antoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343136" start="20372" end="20385" title="Nate McMillan" label="Nate McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193020" start="20425" end="20435" title="Tim Duncan" label="Tim Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189240" start="20440" end="20453" title="Kevin Garnett" label="Kevin Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q31683" start="20518" end="20529" title="Dwyane Wade" label="Dwyane Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q25369" start="20531" end="20542" title="Kobe Bryant" label="Kobe Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="20547" end="20559" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q129041" start="20663" end="20678" title="Carmelo Anthony" label="Carmelo Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q862262" start="20845" end="20850" title="China national basketball team" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q542052" start="20852" end="20858" title="Angola national basketball team" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q331640" start="20860" end="20866" title="Greece national basketball team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q241329" start="20868" end="20882" title="2006 FIBA World Championship" label="world champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q209979" start="20883" end="20888" title="Spain national basketball team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164592" start="20894" end="20901" title="Germany national basketball team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="21041" end="21050" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80385" start="21177" end="21203" title="Basketball at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="2004 Olympic gold medalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q213132" start="21222" end="21235" title="Manu Ginóbili" label="Manu Ginóbili"/>
<link wikidata="Q426993" start="21879" end="21883" title="Basketball at the 2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q427605" start="22041" end="22045" title="1994 FIBA World Championship" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777012" start="22785" end="22819" title="2010 FIBA World Championship final" label="2010 FIBA World Championship final"/>
<link wikidata="Q734632" start="22845" end="22851" title="Turkey national basketball team" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29545" start="22904" end="22916" title="Kevin Durant" label="Kevin Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q296403" start="23071" end="23081" title="Lamar Odom" label="Lamar Odom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687804" start="23197" end="23212" title="Jerry Colangelo" label="Jerry Colangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q194209" start="23333" end="23346" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294850" start="23913" end="23925" title="Small ball (basketball)" label="small lineup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298873" start="24056" end="24063" title="Nigeria national basketball team" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q209979" start="24155" end="24160" title="Spain national basketball team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q810339" start="24312" end="24331" title="2014 FIBA World Cup" label="2014 FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4627140" start="24439" end="24456" title="2012 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="2012 Olympic team"/>
<link wikidata="Q810339" start="24509" end="24518" title="2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q434909" start="24790" end="24805" title="Mike Krzyzewski" label="Mike Krzyzewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q369529" start="24890" end="24894" title="1992 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q734719" start="25537" end="25543" title="Serbia national basketball team" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18043277" start="25551" end="25566" title="2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup Final" label="World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q17759500" start="25609" end="25629" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q973121" start="25693" end="25704" title="Paul George" label="Paul George"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515634" start="25749" end="25761" title="2016 United States men&amp;#x27;s Olympic basketball team" label="2016 US team"/>
<link wikidata="Q209979" start="26089" end="26094" title="Spain men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q25174339" start="26678" end="26691" title="2017 FIBA AmeriCup" label="FIBA AmeriCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630359" start="26754" end="26768" title="2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q21058610" start="26877" end="26902" title="2019 Military World Games" label="2019 Military World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q74122396" start="26925" end="26937" title="Basketball at the 2019 Military World Games" label="silver medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q326843" start="26945" end="26959" title="Lithuania men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Team Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q32644268" start="26968" end="26981" title="Basketball at the 2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29545" start="27097" end="27109" title="Kevin Durant" label="Kevin Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21623063" start="27111" end="27123" title="Jayson Tatum" label="Jayson Tatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q20031362" start="27129" end="27141" title="Devin Booker" label="Devin Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q499328" start="27199" end="27205" title="France men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830087" start="27350" end="27369" title="2023 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2023 FIBA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q523630" start="27510" end="27520" title="Steve Kerr" label="Steve Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q995653" start="27887" end="27907" title="2024 Summer Olympics" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q352159" start="27975" end="27988" title="Stephen Curry" label="Stephen Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21620668" start="28075" end="28086" title="Bam Adebayo" label="Bam Adebayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q622213" start="28088" end="28100" title="Jrue Holiday" label="Jrue Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q317008" start="28102" end="28115" title="Anthony Davis" label="Anthony Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60951627" start="28173" end="28188" title="Anthony Edwards (basketball)" label="Anthony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q63190352" start="28193" end="28210" title="Tyrese Haliburton" label="Tyrese Haliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q926248" start="28381" end="28394" title="Kawhi Leonard" label="Kawhi Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q783548" start="28577" end="28583" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q734719" start="28588" end="28594" title="Serbia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="28634" end="28643" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729889" start="28720" end="28731" title="South Sudan men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164592" start="28736" end="28743" title="Germany men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347419" start="28922" end="28933" title="Puerto Rico men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q649678" start="29049" end="29055" title="Brazil men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q159193" start="29561" end="29565" title="Basketball at the 1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q733210" start="29567" end="29571" title="Basketball at the 1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q594714" start="29573" end="29577" title="Basketball at the 1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q723635" start="29579" end="29583" title="Basketball at the 1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q733305" start="29585" end="29589" title="Basketball at the 1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q367123" start="29591" end="29595" title="Basketball at the 1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q589623" start="29597" end="29601" title="Basketball at the 1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29603" end="29607" title="Basketball at the 1976 Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s Tournament" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29609" end="29613" title="Basketball at the 1984 Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s Tournament" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29615" end="29619" title="Basketball at the 1992 Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s Tournament" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005505" start="29621" end="29625" title="Basketball at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005491" start="29627" end="29631" title="Basketball at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q27933" start="29633" end="29637" title="Basketball at the 2008 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q749036" start="29639" end="29643" title="Basketball at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q18416654" start="29645" end="29649" title="Basketball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q39080780" start="29651" end="29655" title="Basketball at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799290" start="29657" end="29661" title="Basketball at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q156746" start="29682" end="29686" title="Basketball at the 1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29707" end="29711" title="Basketball at the 1988 Summer Olympics#Men&amp;#x27;s Tournament" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q80385" start="29713" end="29717" title="Basketball at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q375654" start="29747" end="29751" title="1954 FIBA World Championship" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q282446" start="29753" end="29757" title="1986 FIBA World Championship" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q427605" start="29759" end="29763" title="1994 FIBA World Championship" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q211438" start="29765" end="29769" title="2010 FIBA World Championship" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q810339" start="29771" end="29775" title="2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q645158" start="29790" end="29794" title="1950 FIBA World Championship" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q220952" start="29796" end="29800" title="1959 FIBA World Championship" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q368603" start="29802" end="29806" title="1982 FIBA World Championship" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q810335" start="29822" end="29826" title="1974 FIBA World Championship" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q376052" start="29828" end="29832" title="1990 FIBA World Championship" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q810341" start="29834" end="29838" title="1998 FIBA World Championship" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q241329" start="29840" end="29844" title="2006 FIBA World Championship" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985121" start="29873" end="29877" title="1992 Tournament of the Americas" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736891" start="29879" end="29883" title="1993 Tournament of the Americas" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736895" start="29885" end="29889" title="1997 Tournament of the Americas" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736897" start="29891" end="29895" title="1999 Tournament of the Americas" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736899" start="29897" end="29901" title="2003 Tournament of the Americas" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q178595" start="29903" end="29907" title="2007 FIBA Americas Championship" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q25174339" start="29909" end="29913" title="2017 FIBA AmeriCup" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736890" start="29928" end="29932" title="1989 Tournament of the Americas" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q39081601" start="29948" end="29952" title="2022 FIBA Americup" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376430" start="30010" end="30014" title="Basketball at the 1951 Pan American Games" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376125" start="30016" end="30020" title="Basketball at the 1955 Pan American Games" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376419" start="30022" end="30026" title="Basketball at the 1959 Pan American Games" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376132" start="30028" end="30032" title="Basketball at the 1963 Pan American Games" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376101" start="30034" end="30038" title="Basketball at the 1967 Pan American Games" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892252" start="30040" end="30044" title="Basketball at the 1975 Pan American Games" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892246" start="30046" end="30050" title="Basketball at the 1979 Pan American Games" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892251" start="30052" end="30056" title="Basketball at the 1983 Pan American Games" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892260" start="30078" end="30082" title="Basketball at the 1987 Pan American Games" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892254" start="30084" end="30088" title="Basketball at the 1995 Pan American Games" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892255" start="30090" end="30094" title="Basketball at the 1999 Pan American Games" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892247" start="30115" end="30119" title="Basketball at the 1991 Pan American Games" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892265" start="30121" end="30125" title="Basketball at the 2011 Pan American Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515177" start="30127" end="30131" title="Basketball at the 2015 Pan American Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q65973365" start="30133" end="30137" title="Basketball at the 2019 Pan American Games – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197764" start="30172" end="30176" title="1986 Goodwill Games" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558587" start="30178" end="30182" title="1998 Goodwill Games" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558601" start="30184" end="30188" title="2001 Goodwill Games" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558594" start="30209" end="30213" title="1990 Goodwill Games" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558597" start="30234" end="30238" title="1994 Goodwill Games" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079042" start="30281" end="30285" title="Basketball at the 1965 Summer Universiade" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043554" start="30287" end="30291" title="Basketball at the 1967 Summer Universiade" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867669" start="30293" end="30297" title="Basketball at the 1973 Summer Universiade" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867672" start="30299" end="30303" title="Basketball at the 1977 Summer Universiade" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867674" start="30305" end="30309" title="Basketball at the 1979 Summer Universiade" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867675" start="30311" end="30315" title="Basketball at the 1981 Summer Universiade" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867681" start="30317" end="30321" title="Basketball at the 1989 Summer Universiade" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867684" start="30323" end="30327" title="Basketball at the 1991 Summer Universiade" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867685" start="30329" end="30333" title="Basketball at the 1993 Summer Universiade" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867686" start="30335" end="30339" title="Basketball at the 1995 Summer Universiade" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q974634" start="30341" end="30345" title="Basketball at the 1997 Summer Universiade" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867691" start="30347" end="30351" title="Basketball at the 1999 Summer Universiade" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867706" start="30353" end="30357" title="Basketball at the 2005 Summer Universiade" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720579" start="30359" end="30363" title="Basketball at the 2015 Summer Universiade – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q64811236" start="30365" end="30369" title="Basketball at the 2019 Summer Universiade – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867668" start="30390" end="30394" title="Basketball at the 1970 Summer Universiade" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867679" start="30396" end="30400" title="Basketball at the 1985 Summer Universiade" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867680" start="30402" end="30406" title="Basketball at the 1987 Summer Universiade" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q30945485" start="30408" end="30412" title="Basketball at the 2017 Summer Universiade – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867677" start="30433" end="30437" title="Basketball at the 1983 Summer Universiade" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867698" start="30439" end="30443" title="Basketball at the 2001 Summer Universiade" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q4079040" start="30445" end="30449" title="Basketball at the 2009 Summer Universiade – Men" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q27664727" start="30807" end="30810" title="List of AAU men&amp;#x27;s basketball champions" label="AAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="30814" end="30824" title="College basketball" label="collegiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q461503" start="31069" end="31075" title="Canada men&amp;#x27;s national ice hockey team" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31083" end="31090" title="Ice hockey at the Olympic Games#Men" label="results"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="31094" end="31104" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31138" end="31145" title="Football at the Summer Olympics#Results" label="results"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="31149" end="31155" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80385" start="31602" end="31622" title="Basketball at the 2004 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q842793" start="32996" end="33018" title="NBA G League" label="NBA Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q204348" start="33020" end="33023" title="Continental Basketball Association" label="CBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973896" start="33300" end="33314" title="National Junior College Athletic Association" label="junior players"/>
<link wikidata="Q208137" start="33849" end="33862" title="Basketball at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q26001" start="33864" end="33889" title="FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q810304" start="33891" end="33904" title="FIBA AmeriCup" label="FIBA AmeriCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q230186" start="34073" end="34091" title="Pan American Games" label="Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188158" start="34093" end="34115" title="World University Games" label="World University Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q849939" start="34121" end="34135" title="Goodwill Games" label="Goodwill Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799290" start="34310" end="34323" title="Basketball at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2024 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117032239" start="34352" end="34384" title="2025 FIBA AmeriCup qualification" label="2025 FIBA AmeriCup qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q115799290" start="34712" end="34732" title="Basketball at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s tournament" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q926248" start="34766" end="34779" title="Kawhi Leonard" label="Kawhi Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122669" start="34837" end="34850" title="Derrick White" label="Derrick White"/>
<link wikidata="Q649604" start="35100" end="35111" title="Bob Kurland" label="Bob Kurland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566231" start="35113" end="35126" title="Bill Hougland" label="Bill Hougland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463519" start="35132" end="35150" title="Burdette Haldorson" label="Burdette Haldorson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873532" start="35489" end="35547" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national under-19 basketball team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national under-19 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q25067883" start="35549" end="35607" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national under-17 basketball team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national under-17 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q65050638" start="35609" end="35651" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q787993" start="35653" end="35704" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="United States women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865878" start="35706" end="35766" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national under-19 basketball team" label="United States women&amp;#x27;s national under-19 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865879" start="35768" end="35828" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 basketball team" label="United States women&amp;#x27;s national under-17 basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158988" start="35830" end="35874" title="United States women&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 team" label="United States women&amp;#x27;s national 3x3 team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500386" start="35876" end="35890" title="USA Basketball" label="USA Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q28403407" start="35892" end="35923" title="Basketball in the United States" label="Basketball in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89612" wikidata="Q2497276" url="?curid=89612" title="Blue Angel (band)">
<text>Blue Angel was an American band, that featured Cyndi Lauper before her rise to fame as a solo singer. The lineup also included John Turi on keyboards and saxophone, Arthur &quot;Rockin&#x27; A&quot; Neilson (guitar), Lee Brovitz (bass guitar) and Johnny Morelli (drums). Lauper and Turi wrote the bulk of their material, and the group also covered pop standards, such as Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil&#x27;s &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Be Strong&quot; (which Lauper covered again on a 1994 album). Blue Angel were briefly popular on the New York club scene.

The band reformed without Lauper in 1987, under the name Boppin&#x27; the Blues. Lauper joined them on stage for a one-time performance at New York&#x27;s Lone Star Cafe, singing a Big Mama Thornton song and &quot;That&#x27;s Alright Mama&quot;. They have since disbanded.

==Discography==
Their only album, &quot;Blue Angel&quot;, was released in 1980. It featured a sparse punk rock and new wave-styled cover in primary red, and floating band member photos. The album&#x27;s sales were better overseas than in the United States. The only track to hit top 40 was &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Be Strong&quot;, which reached No. 37 in the Netherlands. Another song from the album, &quot;Maybe He&#x27;ll Know&quot;, was re-recorded by Lauper on her second solo album, &quot;True Colors&quot;, in 1986.

Blue Angel recorded a second album for Polydor in 1980; it was never released owing to a change in management at PolyGram Germany, and they, along with other artists, were dropped from the label. The band continued to gig around New York until 1982; their final concert took place that fall at Studio 54.

===Albums===
*&quot;Blue Angel&quot; (1980)

===Singles===
===Re-releases===
After Lauper&#x27;s solo success, &quot;Blue Angel&quot; was re-released in LP and cassette formats in multiple countries. The yellow-covered Australian re-release uses a larger photo of Cyndi and includes &quot;Blue Angel featuring&quot; in small print above &quot;Cyndi Lauper&quot; in large print. The Japanese re-release also includes &quot;featuring Cyndi Lauper&quot;, though the rest of the cover remains unchanged from the original release. In 2005, a 5000-copy compact disc pressing was released by Hip-O Select Records.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2497276" start="0" end="10" title="Blue Angel (band)" label="Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="47" end="59" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="140" end="149" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="154" end="163" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="208" end="214" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q139444" start="217" end="228" title="Shadows of Knight" label="Lee Brovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="230" end="241" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="263" end="268" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q809067" start="371" end="381" title="Barry Mann" label="Barry Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q461008" start="386" end="398" title="Cynthia Weil" label="Cynthia Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317459" start="412" end="436" title="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Be Strong" label="I&amp;#x27;m Gonna Be Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671395" start="705" end="719" title="Lone Star Cafe" label="Lone Star Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q237527" start="731" end="748" title="Big Mama Thornton" label="Big Mama Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016244" start="764" end="788" title="That&amp;#x27;s All Right" label="That&amp;#x27;s Alright Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919571" start="864" end="874" title="Blue Angel (Blue Angel album)" label="Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="925" end="934" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="939" end="947" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1180" end="1191" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299957" start="1315" end="1326" title="True Colors (Cyndi Lauper album)" label="True Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="1457" end="1465" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q607212" start="1638" end="1647" title="Studio 54" label="Studio 54"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919571" start="1670" end="1680" title="Blue Angel (Blue Angel album)" label="Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="2197" end="2209" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767810" start="2235" end="2255" title="Hip-O Select Records" label="Hip-O Select Records"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89613" wikidata="Q439578" url="?curid=89613" title="Luis Cernuda">
<text>Luis Cernuda Bidón (September 21, 1902 – November 5, 1963) was a Spanish poet, a member of the Generation of &#x27;27. During the Spanish Civil War, in early 1938, he went to the UK to deliver some lectures and this became the start of an exile that lasted till the end of his life. He taught in the universities of Glasgow and Cambridge before moving in 1947 to the US. In the 1950s he moved to Mexico. While he continued to write poetry, he also published wide-ranging books of critical essays, covering French, English and German as well as Spanish literature. He was frank about his homosexuality at a time when this was problematic and became something of a role model for this in Spain. His collected poems were published under the title &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;.

==Biography==

===Seville and early life===
Cernuda was born in the Barrio Santa Cruz, Calle Conde de Tójar 6 (now Acetres), in Seville in 1902, the son of a colonel in the Regiment of Engineers. He had two older sisters. The recollections and impressions of childhood contained in his poems, and the prose poems collected in &quot;Ocnos&quot;, suggest that he was always a solitary, introverted, and timid child whose unhappiness in the family led to his living vicariously through books and through his strong visual impressions of his native city. His first encounter with poetry came at the age of 9 when he glanced through a copy of Bécquer&#x27;s &quot;Rimas&quot; that had been lent to his sisters by their cousins Luisa and Brígida de la Sota. Despite the fact that he later testified that this left no more than a dormant impression upon him, he began to write poetry himself during his studies at the Escolapios School in Seville from 1915 to 1919 around the age of 14. In 1914, the family moved into the Engineers&#x27; Barracks in the Prado, on the outskirts of Seville. In 1918, they moved to Calle del Aire, where he would later write the poems of &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;. 

In 1919 he began to study Law at the University of Seville, where, during his first year, he attended classes in Spanish Language and Literature given by Pedro Salinas. His extreme shyness prevented him from mentioning his literary activities until Salinas&#x27; notice was caught by a prose poem published in a student magazine. He gave Cernuda encouragement and urged him to read both classical Spanish poetry and modern French literature. It was at Salinas&#x27; suggestion that Cernuda sent his first collection of poetry, &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, to Manuel Altolaguirre and Emilio Prados, who had begun, late in 1926, to publish a magazine called &quot;Litoral&quot;. As was the practice in those days, many such magazines published collections of poetry as supplements.

His father died in 1920 and he continued to live at home with his mother and sisters. In 1923 he did military service in the Regiment of Cavalry. In 1924, as he was reaching the end of his undergraduate course, he participated in a series of meetings with a small group of fellow students in Salinas&#x27;s house. These stimulated his poetic vocation and helped to guide his readings of French literature.

He became a Bachelor of Law in September 1925 but was undecided about what to do next. He thought about joining the diplomatic service but decided not to on discovering that it would entail a move to Madrid. In October, Salinas arranged for him to make the acquaintance of Juan Ramón Jiménez in the gardens of the Alcázar of Seville.

In January 1926, he made his first trip to Madrid, where Salinas was instrumental in arranging introductions to, among others, Ortega y Gasset - who had published some of his poems in his &quot;Revista de Occidente&quot; in December 1925 - Juan Chabás, Melchor Fernández Almagro, and Enrique Díez-Canedo; At the time his first book was being unfavourably received around April 1927, he was again in Madrid. Although he later described himself at that time as &quot;inexperto, aislado en Sevilla&quot;, he was in reality already known to a number of the influential Spanish literati of the period. His indecision about a choice of career continued through 1926-27. In December 1927, the Góngora tercentenary celebrations reached a climax with a series of poetry readings and lectures at the Arts Club of Seville by people such as García Lorca, Dámaso Alonso, Rafael Alberti, Jorge Guillén, José Bergamín and others. Although he took no direct part in the proceedings, he did get the chance to read some of his poems and he made the acquaintance of Lorca.

===Madrid and France===

His mother died in July 1928 and, at the start of September, Cernuda left Seville. He spent a few days in Málaga with Altolaguirre, Prados and José María Hinojosa before moving to Madrid. Although he had a law degree, he had no intention of making practical use of it. He was starting to realise that poetry was the only thing that really mattered to him. He renewed acquaintance with Pedro Salinas and met Vicente Aleixandre. Salinas arranged for him to become the Spanish &quot;lector&quot; at the University of Toulouse. He took up post in November and stayed there for an academic year. The experience of living on his own in a foreign city led him to a crucial realisation about himself: his almost crippling shyness, his unhappiness in a family setting, his sense of isolation from the rest of humanity, had all been symptoms of a latent homosexuality which now manifested itself and which he accepted, in a spirit of defiance. This led to a decisive change in the type of poetry he wrote. He also discovered a love of jazz and films, which seems to have activated an interest in the USA.

Between his return from Toulouse in June 1929 to 1936, Cernuda lived in Madrid and participated actively in the literary and cultural scene of the Spanish capital. At the start of 1930, he found a job in a bookshop owned by León Sánchez Cuesta. All through this period, he worked with many organisations attempting to create a more liberal and tolerant Spain. For example, between 1932 and 1935, he participated in the &quot;Misiones Pedagógicas&quot; - a cultural outreach organisation set up by the Spanish Republic. He also contributed articles to radical journals such as &quot;Octubre&quot;, edited by Alberti and his wife María Teresa León, which demonstrates his political commitment at that time, although there is no evidence that he formally joined the Communist Party. In June 1935, he took lodgings in Calle Viriato, Madrid, above the flat of Altolaguirre and his wife Concha Méndez.

In February 1936, he participated with Lorca and Alberti in an homage to the Galician writer Valle-Inclán. Since &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, he had only managed to publish one collection - &quot;Donde habite el olvido&quot; - in 1934, and a few individual poems. This difficulty in getting published gave Cernuda the chance to revise and reflect on his work. It also occurred to him in the meantime that he could bring all his poetry together under the title &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;. In April 1936, José Bergamín published the book in his journal &quot;Cruz y Raya&quot;. Subsequent editions added new poems as separate books under this collective title. On April 21, there was a celebratory dinner, attended by Lorca, Salinas, Pablo Neruda, Altolaguirre, Alberti, Aleixandre and Bergamín himself.

===Spanish Civil War===

When the Spanish Civil War broke out, a friend of his, Concha de Albornoz, arranged for him to join her in Paris as secretary to her father, the ambassador Alvaro de Albornoz. He remained there from July to September 1936, but after that he returned to Madrid along with the ambassador and his family. Alvaro de Albornoz was a founding figure of the Spanish Second Republic and his daughter was a prominent figure in the artistic world of Madrid.

For perhaps the only time in his life Cernuda felt the desire to be useful to society, which he tried to do by serving on the Republican side. He was hopeful that there was a possibility of righting some of the social injustices that he saw in Spanish society. From October 1936 to April 1937, he participated in radio broadcasts with A. Serrano Plaja in the Sierra de Guadarrama, north of Madrid. In April 1937, he moved to Valencia and began to write poems that would be collected in &quot;Las Nubes&quot;. He also came into contact with Juan Gil-Albert and the other members of the editorial team behind the periodical &quot;Hora de España&quot; and began to work with them. In June, the representative of the Ministry of Education made objections to a poem to be published in that journal on the subject of Lorca&#x27;s murder and he had to remove a stanza that made explicit mention of the subject&#x27;s homosexuality, which was neither common knowledge at that time nor was it acceptable to the Communist Party, who exerted pressure to censor it. This poem, &quot;A un poeta muerto (F.G.L.)&quot; was later published in &quot;Las Nubes&quot; with the censored stanza restored. In later life, Cernuda reflected that this attempt to be socially committed had been futile: &quot;the flow of events made me see, little by little, how instead of that chance of life for a young Spain, there was only the criminal game being played by a party that many people joined for personal gain.&quot; He was motivated by his innate rebelliousness and disgust at Spanish society rather than by real political commitment.

He played the role of Don Pedro in a performance of Lorca&#x27;s play &quot;Mariana Pineda&quot; during the Second Congress of Anti-Fascist Intellectuals in Valencia in 1937. At this time, he met Octavio Paz. In October, he returned to Madrid, where he remained until February 1938, working on the periodical &quot;El Mono Azul&quot;, edited by Alberti and María Teresa León.

===Exile in Britain===

In 1935 at a salon hosted by Carlos Morla Lynch, a diplomat, diarist, amateur musician and closet homosexual working in the Chilean Embassy in Madrid, Cernuda met an English poet called Stanley Richardson, nine years younger than him, who was making a brief visit to the country. Richardson had already met Altolaguirre and Concha Méndez in London. They enjoyed some kind of intense but short-lived relationship, commemorated in a poem dated 20–22 March 1935 and included in &quot;Invocaciones&quot;, before Richardson returned home. In February 1938, Richardson arranged for him to give a series of lectures in Oxford and Cambridge. At the time, Cernuda thought that he would be away from Spain for one or two months, however this was to be the start of an exile that would last for the rest of his life. The lectures never took place. Richardson was well-connected, however, and arranged a party for him, attended by celebrities such as the Duchess of Atholl, Gavin Henderson, 2nd Baron Faringdon, the Chinese ambassador, Rebecca West and Rose Macaulay. Even by then, the situation in Spain meant that it was not advisable for Cernuda to return and so Richardson suggested that he should join a colony of evacuated Basque children at Eaton Hastings on Faringdon&#x27;s estate.

After a few months in England, penniless and barely able to speak English, he went to Paris with the intention of returning to Spain. But he stayed on in Paris on receiving news of what was happening in his native land. In August 1938, Richardson and Cernuda met again in Paris but, to judge from various of Cernuda&#x27;s letters of the time, the intensity of their relationship had greatly weakened. In September 1938 Richardson secured him a position as Spanish assistant in Cranleigh School. In January 1939 he became the &quot;lector&quot; at the University of Glasgow. Richardson was to die on 8 March 1941 in an air raid while dancing at the Ritz. Cernuda wrote an elegy for him which was included in &quot;Como quien espera el alba&quot; in 1942. There is a poignant postlude. In August 1944, while walking around Cambridge, Cernuda noticed a framed photograph of Richardson hanging in the window of a Red Cross shop. On the back was part of the name of his godmother. Cernuda bought it.

Neither Glasgow nor Scotland appealed to him, which is perhaps noticeable in the downbeat tone of the poems he wrote there. From 1941 onward, he spent his summer vacations in Oxford, where, despite the ravages of the war, there were plenty of well-stocked bookshops. In August 1943, he moved to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he was much happier. In Seville he used to attend concerts and music had always been very important to him. The artistic life of Cambridge and London made it easier for him to develop his musical knowledge. Mozart was the composer whose music meant the most to him and he devoted a poem to him in his last collection, &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;.

In 1940, while Cernuda was in Glasgow, Bergamín brought out in Mexico a second edition of &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;, this time including section 7, &quot;Las nubes&quot;. A separate edition of this collection appeared in a pirated edition in Buenos Aires in 1943. He had been afraid that the situation in Spain after the end of the Civil War would create such an unfavourable climate for writers who had gone into exile like him, that his work would be unknown to future generations. The appearance of these two books was a ray of hope for him.

In July 1945, he moved to a similar job at the Spanish Institute in London. He regretted leaving Cambridge, despite the range and variety of theatres, concerts and bookshops in the capital. He began to take his holidays in Cornwall because he was tired of the big city and urban life. So, in March 1947, when his old friend Concha de Albornoz, who had been working at Mount Holyoke College, Massachusetts, wrote to offer him a post there, he accepted with alacrity. He managed to secure a passage on a French liner from Southampton to New York, where he arrived on September 10. He was coming from a country that was impoverished, still showing many signs of war damage and subject to rationing so the shops of New York made it seem as if he were arriving in an earthly paradise. He also responded favourably to the people and wealth of Mount Holyoke where, &quot;for the first time in my life, I was going to be paid at a decent and fitting level&quot;.

===US and Mexico===

Although he was happy in Mount Holyoke, at the end of the 1947-48 year, a student advised him not to stay there and he himself began to wonder whether it was a beneficial force on his poetry. In the summer of 1949 he paid his first visit to Mexico and was so impressed that Mount Holyoke began to seem irksome. This can be seen in the collection of prose &quot;Variaciones sobre tema mexicano&quot;, which he wrote in the winter of 1949-50. He began to spend his summers in Mexico and in 1951, during a 6-month sabbatical, he met X (identified by Cernuda only as Salvador), the inspiration for &quot;Poemas para un cuerpo&quot;, which he started to write at that time. This was probably the happiest period of his life.
Scarcely had he met X than his Mexican visa expired and he returned to the US via Cuba. It became impossible for him to continue living in Mount Holyoke: the long winter months, the lack of sun, the snow all served to depress him. On his return from vacation in 1952, he resigned from his post, giving up a worthy position, a decent salary, and life in a friendly and welcoming country that offered him a comfortable and convenient lifestyle. He had always had a restless temperament, a desire to travel to new places. Only love had the power to overcome this need and make him feel at home in a place, to overcome his sense of isolation. In this, there is perhaps a clue as to one of the reasons that he was attracted to the surrealists - the belief in the overwhelming power of love. In addition, he always had a powerful attraction to beautiful young men. He also had a constant urge to go against the grain of any society in which he found himself. This helped him not to fall into provincial ways during his youth in Seville, whose inhabitants thought they were living at the centre of the world rather than in a provincial capital. It also helped to immunise him against the airs and graces of Madrid or any other place in which he lived.

In November 1952, he settled in Mexico with his old friends Concha Méndez and Altolaguire(although since they had separated in 1944 and later divorced, Cernuda actually stayed with Concha). Between 1954 and 1960 he was a lecturer at the National Autonomous University of Mexico. In 1958, the third edition of &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot; was published in Mexico. For this edition Cernuda wrote an essay &quot;Historial de un libro&quot; which considers his work in order &quot;to see not so much how I made my poems but rather, as Goethe said, how they made me&quot;. In 1958, Altolaguirre died and Cernuda took on the job of editing his poetry. His two sisters died in 1960.

In June 1960, he lectured at UCLA and became friendly with Carlos Otero, who was presenting a doctoral thesis on Cernuda&#x27;s poetry that year. This stay seems to have revitalised Cernuda and, on his return to Mexico, he began to write poetry again. The poems he wrote in the autumn and winter of 1960-61 form the nucleus of his final collection, &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, which he completed in San Francisco a few months later. From August 1961 to June 1962, he gave courses at San Francisco State College. After a brief return to Mexico, he made his third and final visit to California in September 1962, where he was a visiting professor at UCLA until June 1963. He spent the summer of 1963 in Mexico and, although he had an invitation to lecture at the University of Southern California, he declined it in August, because of the need to undergo a medical in order to extend his visa. He died in Concha Mėndez&#x27;s house of a heart attack on November 5, 1963. He was buried in the Panteón Jardín, in Mexico City. He never married and had no children.

==Poetry==

Luis Cernuda was one of the most dedicated poets amongst the members of the Generation of 1927. Salinas, Guillén, Diego and Dámaso Alonso were as well known for their teaching activities and their critical writings as for their poetry. Altolaguirre and Prados are probably remembered more for their printing work than for their literary output. Alberti enjoyed fame for his political activism and Lorca was possibly as gifted in drama and music as he was in poetry. Cernuda drifted into university teaching simply as a way of earning a living and never held a prestigious post. Everything in his life was incidental to his work as a poet. His published criticism is valuable for the insights it gives into his development as a poet - he tends to discuss the authors and works that had most influence on his poetry and thinking. The development of his poetry from first to last is dictated by the development of his character and not by literary fashion - although his personal crisis, depicted in &quot;Un río, un amor&quot;, does coincide with the personal crises experienced by Alberti, Lorca and Aleixandre. The collective title he chose for his poetry, &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;, refers to the conflict that is its primary theme. He wrote:

Desire led me towards the reality that offered itself to my eyes as if only through possession of it might I be able to achieve certainty about my own life. But since I have only ever achieved a precarious grip on it, there comes the opposite tendency, that of hostility to the ironic attractiveness of reality...And so, in my view, the essence of the problem of poetry is the conflict between reality and desire, between appearance and truth, permitting us to achieve some glimpse of the complete image of the world that we do not know.

A significant stage of his development occurred in 1923-24, when he was doing military service. Every afternoon, along with the other recruits, he had to ride round the outskirts of Seville. One afternoon, he had an epiphanic experience as if he were seeing things for the first time. He also felt an uncontrollable need to describe this experience. This led to the writing of a whole series of poems which have not survived.

Another crucial phase of his development was his residence in Great Britain between 1938 and 1947. He learned English and read widely in English literature. He seems to have had a sense that he was predestined to read English poetry and that it corrected and completed something that was lacking both in his poetry and in himself. He began to see his work in the classroom as analogous to the writing of poetry - the poet should not simply try to communicate the effect of an experience but to direct the reader to retrace the process by which the poet had come to experience what he is writing about. His attitude to Britain was ambivalent. He learned a lot from the literature and greatly admired certain aspects of the national character, as displayed in wartime, but found it hard to summon up affection for the country and its people. He tried to sum up his ambivalent feelings in the poem &quot;La partida&quot;, but he considered that he failed to do justice to the theme.

===Collections===

====Primeras poesías (1924–1927)====

This was the title that Cernuda gave in &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot; to the revised version of his first published work &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, which had been published by &quot;Litoral&quot; in April 1927. The collection was dedicated to Salinas, and Cernuda sent a copy to him in Madrid, where he was spending the university vacation. Cernuda later recalled that this book was greeted by a stream of hostile reviews that tended to concentrate on a perceived lack of novelty and on its indebtedness to Guillén. It also really stung him that Salinas merely sent back a brief acknowledgement of receipt of the book. He dealt with the apparent debt to Guillén in an open letter published in &quot;Ínsula&quot; in 1948, in which he points out that in 1927 Guillén had yet to publish a collection. During the 1920s, Guillén had published individual poems in various magazines - including 12 in two separate editions of the &quot;Revista de Occidente&quot; in 1924 and 1925 - but, he argues, this is scarcely sufficient evidence to demonstrate significant influence, given that in December 1925 he himself had had 9 poems published in &quot;Revista de Occidente&quot;. His conclusion is that both of them shared an interest in pure poetry and were influenced by the works of Mallarmé - in the case of Guillén this influence was transmitted via Valéry. Villena, writing in 1984, sees these poems as the result of the spread in the 1920s of the ideal of &quot;pure poetry&quot; as espoused by figures such as Valéry, Juan Ramón Jiménez, and Ortega y Gasset in his influential essay &quot;La deshumanización del arte&quot;. The young poets of the era, including Guillén, Aleixandre, Altolaguirre, Prados, Lorca and Cernuda, were all influenced by this blend of classical purity and refined playfulness and Guillén was the ring-leader. It was not so much a case of influence as a common, shared aesthetic. The reviews were not all hostile. José Bergamín, for example, published a favourable review and Guillén himself sent him a letter praising the work and urging him to ignore the reviews. Juan Guerrero Ruiz, the secretary of Juan Ramón Jiménez, also sent him a letter full of praise. Nevertheless, he was never able to forget the criticism that this work had engendered. He was too thin-skinned for that.

The revision process removed ten poems and also some of the stylistic elements that might have triggered comparisons to Guillén - such as the use of exclamations and the rhetorical device apostrophe - but in reality the poets are very different in tone. Guillén reaches out joyfully and confidently to reality whereas Cernuda is more hesitant - the world might be an exciting place but something holds him back. Like Guillén, Cernuda uses strict metrical forms in this collection, such as the &quot;décima&quot; and the sonnet, and there is also an intellectual quality far removed from the folkloric elements that were being used by poets such as Alberti and Lorca, but the emotional restraint is far removed from the world of &quot;Cántico&quot;. The change of title suggests a recent desire to strip artifice away from his poetry, presumably this refers to the reference in the title to the street where he had grown up - the Calle del Aire - which had baffled Francisco Ayala, one of the negative reviewers. There are already poems that reject the real world in favour of a love that will lead to oblivion. The poet wants to find a place to hide from the world of reality, fully aware that such a retreat or escape can only be temporary. The overriding mood is one of adolescent melancholy. The debt to Juan Ramón Jiménez is also strong. :)

====Egloga, Elegía, Oda (1927–1928)====

After the set-back of the critical reception of &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, Cernuda decided to cultivate precisely those things that had been criticised, especially the lack of novelty. He wrote an eclogue, heavily influenced by his favourite Spanish poet Garcilaso. This was published in the first issue of a magazine called &quot;Carmen&quot; and was received very favourably by Salvador de Madariaga. This was followed by an elegy and then by an ode. Although he came to recognise that writing these poems had helped his technical fluency, he realised that there was something essential that these formal exercises did not allow him to express. However, he was encouraged to learn that it was possible to write poems of much greater length than was customary at that time, which was an important discovery for him. In &quot;Historial de un libro&quot;, he states that at this time he was trying to find an objective correlative for what he was experiencing - one of the many indications of the influence of TS Eliot on his work, although this is a rationalisation after the fact because he had yet to read Eliot.

This small group of poems can be read as Cernuda&#x27;s participation in the Góngora tercentenary celebrations - except that he chose to evoke the memories of Garcilaso&#x27;s eclogues and Luis de León&#x27;s odes possibly as a way to signal his individuality and his independence from fashion. However, their influence is evident only on the form of these poems - the subject-matter is more obviously influenced by Mallarmé. The languorous mood recalls &quot;L&#x27;après-midi d&#x27;un Faune&quot;. There are hints of the poet&#x27;s admiration for Greek mythology and also of his interest in male physical beauty which would be developed in later collections. Luis de León was a lasting interest. His essay included in &quot;Poesía y literatura&quot; shows that Cernuda considered him to be a kindred spirit; someone for whom poetry was a refuge or means of escape from the trials and difficulties of everyday life; someone who was always trying to find a way to gain access to a realm of harmony.

====Un río, un amor (1929)====

Cernuda started work on this collection during his period in Toulouse. He visited Paris in the Easter vacation of 1929 and was bowled over by the museums and the book-stalls. He spent his days soaking up the sights. One day, back in Toulouse, he wrote &quot;Remordimiento en traje de noche&quot; and discovered a style that enabled him to express poetic needs that he had not been able to communicate up till then. He had not written any poetry since before his arrival in Toulouse in 1928 but he produced the first 3 poems of the new collection in quick succession. His dissatisfaction with the conventions of fashionable poetry had been freed by contact with surrealism. For Cernuda, surrealism was more than a literary phenomenon: it a was the expression of an attitude against conformity. The poems in this collection break with the concept of pure poetry. He retains the precision and elegance of his language but infuses it with more passion and intensity. He continued work on this collection after his return to Madrid.

The influence of the Surrealists is shown by the complexity of the free-flowing imagery, some of it inspired by random discoveries such as the title of a jazz record (as a jazz fan, he used to scour record catalogues and was intrigued by titles such as &quot;I want to be alone in the South&quot;), the name of an American city such as Durango or Daytona, a title card from a silent film, or an image from a talking picture such as White Shadows in the South Seas which he had seen in Paris. The metrical schemes and rhyme patterns of the first two collections are largely abandoned. This was the first collection in which he made use of what he calls free verse. In reality, this amounts to ignoring classical Spanish verse forms and rhyme schemes, such as &quot;letrillas&quot; - in fact, from this point on Cernuda rarely uses full rhyme or even assonance - even though he often felt a need to write in a lyrical style. A few of the poems in this book are written in alexandrine quatrains and most have some kind of metrical pattern, which makes them unusual in the context of the Surrealist movement. In a poem such as &quot;¿Son todos felices?&quot;, Cernuda makes it clear what attracted him to the Surrealists, their protest against society and the pressure to conform. In this poem, honour, patriotism and duty are seen as worthless in comparison to the suffering they inflict on the rebel or non-conformist. Just being alive and living according to the rules is equivalent to being dead. It is noteworthy that this poem contains the first unequivocal expression of homoerotic attraction in his poetry. The collection, like its successor, remained unpublished until 1936, when they were gathered into the first edition of &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;.

====Los placeres prohibidos (1931)====

The poems gathered in this and the previous collection came to Cernuda fully formed. The poems that eventually got published were the same as the first drafts, which was very different from his experience with his first two collections. It is a book of love, rebellion and beauty.

The poet&#x27;s homosexuality is made defiantly manifest in this collection. However, the title of the work suggests that there were other &quot;forbidden pleasures&quot; and he explores various ways of defying the norms of bourgeois behaviour. It is the product of an intensive period of literary production between April and June 1931, when Alfonso XIII abdicated and the Spanish Republic was proclaimed. In &quot;Diré cómo nacisteis&quot;, Cernuda launches a war cry against a society in decay that represses and imprisons people who transgress the social norms of love. And in the next poem, &quot;Telarañas cuelgan de la razón&quot;, he sets up the other major mood of the collection, an elegiac mood of sorrow. The poems in this book draw a distinction between the poet&#x27;s freedom of imagination and the accepted rules of life that confine and limit his freedom. The predominant tone is one of desolation, recalling the transitory nature of love and the emptiness it leaves in its wake. In &quot;De qué país&quot;, Cernuda looks at a newborn child and depicts the betrayal of his sense of wonder and innocence by the way the adult world imposes artificial codes of behaviour and a sense of guilt when the code is transgressed. It is a theme that is explored many times in his oeuvre.

====Donde habite el olvido (1932–1933)====

This book resulted from a love affair that ended badly. When the collection was first published, by the &quot;Signo&quot; publishing house, nobody noticed the significance of a large &quot;S&quot; in the form of a snake on the inside back cover. Derek Harris identified the other man as Serafín Fernández Ferro a young man from a poor family in La Coruña who led a picaresque life and insinuated himself into the artistic circles of Madrid in early 1931, aged 16. Biographical data for him is scanty, fragmented and often confusing. In 1945, he appeared in Malraux&#x27;s film and then emigrated to Mexico, where he died in 1954. Cernuda probably met him in April 1931 and fell head over heels in love. This led to the flood of creativity that resulted in &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot;, the majority of which was written between April 13 and 30. The relationship quickly soured. Serafín was both promiscuous and bisexual, which led to jealousy on the part of Cernuda, he used to ask his lover for money and was generally manipulative. There were occasional violent rows between them. Some of the atmosphere of their relationship is described in &quot;Aprendiendo olvido&quot;, one of the prose poems included in &quot;Ocnos&quot;. By June 1932, their relationship was finished.

In later years, Cernuda was embarrassed by the candour with which he wrote about it in &quot;Donde habite&quot;, attributing this to the slowness of his emotional development, and admitted that this section of his oeuvre was one of the least-satisfying for him.

In this collection, Cernuda steps away from surrealism, feeling that what was lying around hidden in the depths of his subconscious had been dredged sufficiently. Instead of what he had come to see as the artifice and triviality of hermetic images deriving from the flow of thoughts through the poet&#x27;s mind, he turned to the example of the 19thc. poet Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer, who produced tightly controlled poetry on the subject of lost love. Cernuda continued to eschew rhyme and assonance but, like Bécquer&#x27;s &quot;Rimas&quot; the stanzas are short and self-contained and their language is restrained. Sometimes, the poems return to the world of the &quot;Primeras poesías&quot;.

The first poem alludes obliquely to Serafín, the archangel who is named explicitly in a later poem &quot;Mi arcángel&quot;. The &quot;leit-motiv&quot; of the angel recurs in &quot;II&quot; and in &quot;XII&quot;, among others. In &quot;III&quot;, the theme is the emptiness left by the passing of love - just as in &quot;Telarañas cuelgan de la razón&quot; from &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot; - but rendered in a much simpler, more lyrical fashion. &quot;IV&quot; shows how the dreams and aspirations of youth are destroyed when they soar too high - probably a reference to the myth of Icarus. &quot;VII&quot; returns to the enclosed world of the early poems, suggesting that despite all his experiences the poet is still an unfulfilled dreamer. &quot;XII&quot; suggests that love alone makes life real. It persists as a universal force even though it might have died in a particular individual. The ideas behind surrealism are still present, although the presentation of them is markedly different.

This love affair had a lasting effect on Cernuda. He alludes to it in &quot;Apologia pro vita sua&quot; in &quot;Como quien espera el alba&quot; and also in a short story written in 1937, right in the midst of the Civil War - &quot;Sombras en el salón&quot;.

====Invocaciones (1934–1935)====

This collection was originally called &quot;Invocaciones a las gracias del mundo&quot; but Cernuda later shortened it to make it seem less pompous. Tired with the habitual brevity of poems in the tradition of Antonio Machado or Jiménez, he starts to write much longer poems than hitherto. When he started work on these poems, he realised that their subject-matter needed greater length for him to be able to express everything he needed to say about them. He cast off all the remaining traces of &quot;pure&quot; poetry. He also notes, however, that there is a tendency to ramble at the beginning of certain poems in this book as well as a degree of bombast.

His principal subject-matter is still essentially himself and his thoughts but he starts to view things in a more objective way: the poetry is more analytical. For example, in &quot;Soliloquio del farero&quot;, the poet finds an escape from desperation in an enclosed and solitary world very similar to that of his earliest poems. The poem is addressed to his &quot;friend&quot; - solitude - and he develops the idea that he has been chosen to serve mankind in some way by being separated from them, just like a lighthouse-keeper. Other poems in the collection allude to Greek mythology or a golden age of innocence that has been lost. Early in 1935, at the height of his relationship with Stanley Richardson, Cernuda dedicated &quot;Por unos tulipanes amarillos&quot; to him.

====Las nubes (1937–1940)====

This collection was written during the Spanish Civil War and amidst all the disruption and uncertainty in Cernuda&#x27;s life as he went into exile, drifting from Madrid, to London, to Paris, to Cranleigh and finally to Glasgow. It is a book about war and exile and how both of these connect with Spain. It is his most Spanish collection a nd a pivotal collection in his output. Meditations about his isolation in foreign countries and about Spain, particularly about his growing feeling that nothing in Spain was going to change for the better and that intolerance, ignorance and superstition were winning the struggle, are the major themes. There is a dichotomy in the way he views Spain. On the one hand is Spain the stepmother of whom he is ashamed, stuck in the past, jealous, intolerant, violent and now wrecked by war, as depicted in &quot;Elegía española I&quot;. On the other hand is an idealised version of Spain, now destroyed, to which Cernuda feels allegiance. It is a mix of a lost Eden of the south (the Spain of his Andalusian background), a tolerant, creative, great and respected nation and of the most positive and creative aspects of Golden Age Spain. This Spain is depicted in &quot;El ruiseñor sobre la piedra&quot;, &quot;Elegía española II&quot; and other poems. Exile is a theme that Cernuda will keep developing for the rest of his poetic career. Physical exile reminds the poet that he is also a spiritual exile in the world, a cursed figure because every poet belongs to a purer realm of experience, as he had already started to write about in &quot;Invocaciones&quot;. &quot;Scherzo para un elfo&quot; and &quot;Gaviotas en el parque&quot; are just two of the explorations of this theme

Stylistically, there is an increased concentration on clarity and simplicity of diction and his control over his means of expression is growing. He often uses combinations of 7 and 11 syllable lines, the basic form of the &quot;silva&quot;, a very important form for poets of both the Spanish Golden Age and the Generation of 1898. The collections prior to &#x27;Las Nubes&#x27; were intimate and abstract. In &quot;Invocaciones&quot; he adds symbolic elements but now his poetry takes on greater amplitude with the addition of reflections on culture, mythology, history and his biography. He starts to write dramatic monologues and to work towards a more conversational style of poetry, under the influences of Wordsworth and Browning.

When he left Madrid in February 1938, he took eight new poems with him. In London, he wrote six more. He wrote &quot;Lázaro&quot; while Chamberlain and Hitler were negotiating over Czechoslovakia, and the poem is written in a mood of melancholy calm, trying to express the disenchanted surprise that a dead man might feel on being brought back to life. Cernuda was feeling a growing sense of detachment and this is one of the first examples of his characteristic use of a &quot;Doppelgänger&quot; to express, in this case, his sense of alienation and lifelessness.

During his stay with the colony of evacuated Basque children at Eaton Hastings, he befriended a boy called Iñaki who had quickly mastered English and showed such promise that Lord Faringdon was prepared to finance his education at a private school - an offer refused by the boy on political grounds, according to the story told by Cernuda to his fellow émigré Rafael Martínez Nadal. Shortly afterwards, the boy fell ill and was taken to the Radcliffe Infirmary. On March 27, he was close to death. He refused the last sacraments and turned away from the crucifix held out by a priest. He wanted to see Cernuda, however, and asked him to read a poem. He then turned to the wall and died. This was the inspiration for the poem &quot;Niño muerto&quot;, written in May 1938.

A key poem in the collection is &quot;A Larra, con unas violetas (1837-1937)&quot;, in which he identifies himself with Mariano José de Larra, the brilliant, satirical journalist of 19thc. Madrid. Larra was a fierce critic of the governments of his day and of the state of Spanish society but was at heart very patriotic. Cernuda sees in Larra a kindred spirit, embittered, misunderstood, isolated and unsuccessful in love.

====Como quien espera el alba (1941–1944)====

This work was begun during his 1941 vacation in Oxford, continued in Glasgow and completed at Cambridge in 1944. The autumn, winter and spring of 1941-2 was one of the most fertile periods of his life and it seems that this collection was one of his favourites. He read widely in English poetry and criticism and made acquaintance with the writings of TS Eliot, Dr Johnson, Coleridge, Matthew Arnold and Keats&#x27;s letters amongst others. He also began to read Goethe and Kierkegaard. Whilst this extensive reading does not show through specifically in any poem, his handling of longer poems is more assured. There are poems that suggest a nostalgia for the Seville of his youth - not an emotion that Cernuda often displays, but a longing for bright sunshine and warmth is easily explicable in the circumstances. It is only in such indirect ways that a reader can sense what was happening around him. Glasgow was bombed 5 times by the Luftwaffe in the Blitz and suffered extensive damage but it would be impossible to gather this from reading Cernuda. However, this collection does include &quot;Por otros tulipanes amarillos&quot; an elegy to his former lover Stanley Richardson dead in an air raid on London, which echoes an earlier tribute published in &quot;Invocaciones&quot;.

In an extended poem, &quot;Noche del hombre y su demonio&quot;, he reflects on the course of his life and the possibility of being remembered after his death. The &quot;demonio&quot; attacks the concept of the poet&#x27;s vocation and suggests that Cernuda might sometimes have been tempted to try to live a normal life. However, the poet fights back by saying that his poetic vocation is what justifies his life and gives it whatever meaning it might have. Even though he might be wrong or suffering from a delusion, his poetry is absolutely necessary to him and he must commit to it totally.

&quot;Góngora&quot; is another poem that takes a historical figure and projects the poet&#x27;s own psychological state onto him. The poem seems to be a development from a set of notes he made in 1937 and collected under the title &quot;Góngora y el gongorismo&quot;. He sees Góngora as a victim of society and surveys the humiliation and incomprehension from which he suffered when alive, the lack of respect accorded to him by critics and his eventual rehabilitation from neglect in 1927. In these notes, he briefly discusses a recently published work on Góngora by Dámaso Alonso, which discusses the two types of poetry that Góngora wrote - complex and elaborate works such as &quot;Polifemo&quot; or the &quot;Soledades&quot; as against artless ballads and sonnets. In Cernuda&#x27;s view, however, there is only one poet and the critic ought to try to resolve these two opposing tendencies and demonstrate them as aspects of a single truth. It is characteristic of Cernuda to resist the way society tries to appropriate and sanitise the poet, while showing disdain to him while he was alive. He expresses this resistance with great power and bitter irony in the poem&lt;poem&gt;
Ventaja grande es que esté ya muerto
Y que de muerto cumpla los tres siglos, que así pueden
Los descendientes mismos de quienes le insultaban
Inclinarse a su nombre, dar premio al erudito,
Sucesor del gusano, royendo su memoria.&lt;/poem&gt;

(it is a great advantage that he is now dead and that he lasted three centuries dead, for now the very descendants of those who insulted him may bow to his name, give a prize to the scholar, successor to the worm, gnawing away at his memory)

The title of the collection alludes to the atmosphere of Britain during the Second World War when &quot;it was only possible to hope for an end to the world&#x27;s retreat into a primitive world of darkness and terror, in the middle of which England was like the ark in which Noah survived the flood.&quot;

====Vivir sin estar viviendo (1944–1949)====

Begun in Cambridge, continued in London and completed in America, this is very similar to the previous collection in that it contains a mix of introspective and self-analytical works and shorter impressionist poems. As a result of his reading of Hölderlin, Cernuda had started to use enjambement. His increasing use of this device gave his poetry a duality of rhythm - the rhythm of the individual line and the rhythm of the phrase. Since he tended not to use rhyme or even assonance and was not very interested in writing poetry with a marked metrical pattern, the rhythm of the line tends to be swamped by that of the phrase, resulting in an effect that is often close to prose. It is a rhythm of ideas rather than a metrical rhythm. And yet, the influence of Hölderlin dates back to the period when he was writing &quot;Invocaciones&quot; in the mid-1930s, which gives a sense of how profound the influence was. The German poet gave him an example of &quot;a poetic language using long sense periods in extensive poems that develop a theme in depth&quot; and over time the reader can see Cernuda absorbing and building on this example.

The first eight poems were written in Cambridge and he added another 13 which he wrote during holidays in Cornwall. The title alludes to the state of mind in which he found himself at that time - living vicariously in foreign countries where he scarcely knew anybody. His voracious reading was taking the place of living. He could see nothing ahead of him but death. A typical poem from this collection is &quot;El César&quot;, which is another use of the &quot;Doppelgänger&quot; motif. The aged Emperor Tiberius in retirement in his palace on Capri ponders his solitude and voluntary separation from the world and people. His feeling of misanthropy is almost idealised. He reflects on his power, his age, the blood he has shed, the rumours that circulate about him, his regrets and guilty feelings, what it is like to be an old man desirous of youthful flesh. It is a complex poem: Caesar is a projection of Cernuda&#x27;s thoughts and yet he is also a figure in his own right, reflecting on his own life story.

====Con las horas contadas (1950–1956)====

This collection was started in Mount Holyoke during the winter of 1950 and completed in Mexico. One of the most noteworthy things about this book is that it contains a group of 16 poems - &quot;Poemas para un cuerpo&quot; - about an intensely physical affair he had with an unidentified man in Mexico. The title of the collection suggests not merely Cernuda&#x27;s obsession with the passing of time but also the sense of strangeness he felt whilst living this amorous adventure - an old man in love as he describes himself. As already stated, this was one of the happiest periods in his life. Some of the poems refer to the experiences he felt during the affair but the majority are reflections after the affair ended, attempts to explain and fix this experience of intense love. There are obvious parallels with &quot;Donde habite el olvido&quot; but these later poems are not bitter, resentful or disillusioned. Cernuda &quot;is primarily concerned to investigate the relationship between himself and the experience of love, so much so in fact that the loved one has only a secondary importance in the poems&quot;. However, he is, unlike Serafín Fernández Ferro or Stanley Richardson, present in the poems rather than a shadow or absence. The poems lack sensuality. Poem &quot;IV Sombra de mí&quot;, for example, &quot;is a meditation on the relationship between the lover and the beloved. The loved one is again the visible image of the lover&#x27;s desire but nonetheless necessary for without him love could not have been exteriorised.&quot; What we get is a sense of the poet&#x27;s gratitude for having been given the chance to experience love. It is interesting that although Cernuda later expressed his affection for these poems he acknowledges that they give cause to one of the most serious objections that can be made to his work: that he was not always able to maintain the distance between the man who suffers and the poet who creates.

The bulk of the poems in the collection are shorter than in previous books and start to incorporate assonance more frequently in an attempt to concentrate the thematic material rather than explore it at length and also to seem more purely lyrical, even though these urges were not the result of a conscious decision.

Among the other interesting poems is the one that opens the collection, &quot;Aguila y rosa&quot;, a very sober, restrained account of the unfortunate marriage of Philip II and Mary Tudor, and Philip&#x27;s stay in Britain. At times, it could be that Cernuda is projecting his own feelings onto the king. Brief and ultimately tragic as their married life was, at least the love she experienced gave Mary some recompense for her unhappy life. With this poem, Cernuda completed a trilogy of works about Philip II. The first was &quot;El ruiseñor sobre la piedra&quot; in &quot;Las nubes&quot;, followed by &quot;Silla del rey&quot; from &quot;Vivir sin estar viviendo&quot;. Both of these poems evoke the building of the monastery-palace at El Escorial. In the first poem, the monastery becomes a symbol of the visionary, idealist, eternal Spain that Cernuda loved. It is an image of beauty, the creation of a sensibility that despises the practical and is diametrically opposed to the utilitarian environment of Glasgow, the place where he lives in exile. The nightingale singing its song, just to please itself, is a symbol for Cernuda the poet and it becomes fused with his conception of El Escorial. &quot;Silla del rey&quot; depicts Philip watching the construction of his palace from his seat in the hills above. Cernuda takes as a starting point the king&#x27;s thoughts of the building as the expression of his faith and centralising political ideas. This develops into a reflection on his work, time and society and leads to a declaration that he is creating a haven from the world, protected by spiritual power from temporal change. Reality and desire have become one. The king is an outlet for Cernuda himself.

&quot;El elegido&quot; is an objective account of the choosing, preparation and killing of an Aztec sacrificial victim. It is recounted in very simple language but it clearly picks up on the thoughts behind the soliloquy in &quot;Invocaciones&quot;. The poem presents an allegory of the choosing, beguilement and final destruction of the poet by life or the &quot;daimonic&quot; power.

====Desolación de la Quimera (1956–1962)====

Cernuda&#x27;s last book of poems is a summing up of his career. It was published in Mexico in November 1962. It mingles poems in the style of his first book with epigrammatic works and extended reveries in his mature style. In &quot;Niño tras un cristal&quot;, he completes a cycle of poems about the unawareness and hope of a child before its corruption by the world - a theme present right from the start of his poetic career. In addition there are poems that are derived from song-titles or catch-phrases - &quot;Otra vez, con sentimiento&quot; - and historical poems about figures such as Mozart, Verlaine and Rimbaud, Keats, Goethe, Ludwig of Bavaria. There is also a poem about a painting by Titian,&quot;&quot;Ninfa y pastor&quot;, por Ticiano&quot;. It is as if Cernuda has a need to base his experiences of life on a foundation of cultural references. Stylistically, this is an extreme collection. There no lyrical flights, no expansive metaphors. However, in the view of Luis Antonio de Villena, this dry language is exactly right for these ironic, cutting but perfectly chiselled poems.

It is clear that he knew that his life was coming to a close and he wanted to settle his accounts. This is shown by the titles of poems such as &quot;Antes de irse&quot;, &quot;Dos de noviembre&quot;, &quot;Del otro lado&quot;, &quot;Epílogo&quot; and &quot;Despedida&quot;. There are direct links to previous collections. For example, &quot;Epílogo&quot; is explicitly related to the &quot;Poemas para un cuerpo&quot;, and &quot;Pregunta vieja, vieja respuesta&quot; links back to &quot;Donde habite el olvido&quot;.

He also returns to the theme of Spain, which had first appeared in &quot;Las nubes&quot;, analysing what he admires and dislikes. In &quot;Díptico español&quot;, he shows his contempt for the intolerance, stupidity and cruelty of the Spanish society of his era. He is a Spaniard despite himself: he has no choice in the matter. However, he is proud of Spanish culture as exemplified by the works of Benito Pérez Galdós and Miguel de Cervantes: he is nostalgic not so much for the reality of Spain as for the idealised world created by Spanish literature. There are poems about other poets he knew, sometimes splenetic in tone. As usual, the major theme is that of the impossibility of finding happiness in a world where desire and reality diverge - cf &quot;Hablando a Manona&quot;, &quot;Luna llena en Semana Santa&quot;, or &quot;Música cautiva&quot;. However, he does find some kind of consolation in the realm of art - listening to Mozart&#x27;s music, or considering the world of Goethe compared with that of Napoleon&#x27;s drunken soldiers. Also, by this time, he had gathered some degree of fame in Spain and there were signs that people were responding to his writings. In &quot;Peregrino&quot;, he reacts to enquiries about whether he might return to his homeland in a characteristically grumpy way which shades into a tone of resolute stoicism as he explains that he is driven to keep moving forward and can never return to the past.

===Influences===

It was at the urging of Pedro Salinas that Cernuda began to read classical Spanish poets such as Garcilaso, Luis de León, Góngora, Lope de Vega, Quevedo and Calderón de la Barca. He also urged him to learn French and to read modern French literature, in particular André Gide and the poetry of Baudelaire, Mallarmé and Rimbaud. Cernuda also became acquainted with the poetry of Pierre Reverdy and counts him as a major influence over the poems in his first collection, &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, for his qualities of spareness, purity and reticence. No contemporary critic recognised this influence. In &quot;Un río, un amor&quot;, &quot;Destierro&quot; echoes Reverdy&#x27;s poetry in its evocation of a solitary existence in a hostile urban world. He also read Lautréamont&#x27;s &quot;Les Chants de Maldoror&quot; and &quot;Préface a un livre futur&quot;, although their influence emerged at a later time when Cernuda began to explore the French Surrealist movement.

Just before he completed &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, in March 1926, the Madrid book-seller León Sánchez Cuesta had already delivered to him a copy of &quot;Le Libertinage&quot; by Louis Aragon. In the time just after the publication of &quot;Perfil del aire&quot;, he began to read other books by the leaders of the Surrealist movement - André Breton, Paul Eluard, Louis Aragon and René Crevel. He strongly identified with their boldness and their sense of alienation from their society and this emerges clearly in his third and fourth collections.

While he was halfway through writing the poems of &quot;Invocaciones&quot;, he began to read Hölderlin, which he describes as one of his greatest experiences in poetry. He had grown tired of the very restricted range of literature championed by the French surrealists and was starting to interest himself in English and German poetry. In order to read them, he began to learn these languages. He was enthralled by the depth and poetic beauty that he discovered in Hölderlin and discovered not just a new vision of the world but also a new means of poetic expression. In a note that he wrote to accompany some translations of Hölderlin, Cernuda describes him as imbued with the force of pagan myths, &quot;a living echo of pagan forces now buried&quot;. He thinks that Hölderlin&#x27;s metaphysical lyricism is closer to Keats rather than Blake &quot;although at times, in his fragments which have such dark transcendence, he is not so far from the prophetic songs of the latter.&quot; There is a strong sense of Cernuda identifying himself with Hölderlin as he describes his alienation from the world he lived in. For him, &quot;the secret forces of earth are the only realities, far from the conventions that govern society.&quot; He also notes an occasion in which the poet was discovered one day in rapture at the feet of some Classical statues in a Paris park. In &quot;Invocaciones&quot; there are two poems that explicitly invoke ancient Greek gods and they seem to link closely to this reference. In &quot;Himno a la tristeza&quot;, sadness is seen as something gifted by the gods to mankind, as in Hölderlin&#x27;s &quot;Die Heimat&quot; and, more directly, in &quot;A las estatuas de los dioses&quot;, Cernuda portrays how &quot;although forgotten and humiliated in an alien, degraded world, the gods still represent an age of joy, innocence, and harmony, when love was still possible.&quot; For Cernuda, Hölderlin is as much a kindred spirit as an influence: they share a pantheistic vision of Nature, a sense of tragic destiny (the &quot;poder daimónico&quot; described by Cernuda in many poems and essays), the same conviction that society was hostile to the Poet, the same nostalgia for a lost Golden Age of harmony. Before he even read Hölderlin, these themes emerge in the &quot;Egloga&quot;, the &quot;Oda&quot;, and &quot;De qué país&quot; from &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot;.

During his stay in Paris in 1936, he bought a copy of the Greek Anthology in a French translation. He was stimulated by the concise and penetrating style of these poems and epigrams.

After his move to Great Britain in September 1938, Cernuda continued the exploration of English literature that he had begun the previous spring. While he was reading Eliot, Blake, Keats, Shakespeare&#x27;s plays, he was struck by their lack of verbal ornamentation compared with Spanish and French poetry. He discovered that a poet could achieve a deeper poetic effect by not shouting or declaiming, or repeating himself, by avoiding bombast and grandiloquence. As in those epigrams in the Greek anthology, he admired the way that concision could give a precise shape to a poem. He learned to avoid two literary vices, the pathetic fallacy and &quot;purple patches&quot;, avoiding undue subjectivity or features that did not fit in with the overall conception of the poem. The tendencies had been there, to gradually increasing extent, in his poetry from the outset but his reading confirmed him on this route. He also read Browning and learned how to take a dramatic, historic or legendary situation and to project his own emotional state onto it, in order to achieve greater objectivity, as in poems such as &quot;Lázaro&quot;, &quot;Quetzalcóatl&quot;, &quot;Silla del Rey&quot;, or &quot;El César&quot;.

In a study of Cernuda&#x27;s influences, E.M. Wilson suggests that, soon after his arrival in England, he began to emulate the way that T.S. Eliot borrows and alludes to works by other writers. He provides examples of such possible borrowings from Rodrigo Caro, Baudelaire, Luis de León and Quevedo. He also suggests that Lope de Vega and George Herbert were the sources for another 2 poems, &quot;Divertimento&quot; and &quot;La poesía&quot;. Eliot&#x27;s influence is also suggested in an essay by Octavio Paz - &quot;La palabra edificante&quot;. One significant borrowing from Eliot is the title of his last collection of poetry, &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, which alludes to a line from &quot;Burnt Norton&quot;&lt;poem&gt;The loud lament of the disconsolate chimera&lt;/poem&gt;in itself an allusion to a sermon by John Donne.
At Mount Holyoke he started to read &quot;Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker (The Fragments of the Presocratics)&quot; by Hermann Diels with the help of an English translation. In Mexico, he read John Burnet&#x27;s &quot;Early Greek Philosophy&quot;. These fragments of pre-Socratic thought seemed to him the most profound and poetic philosophical works he had ever read. The world of ancient Greece is often recalled in his poetry. It reminded him of his childhood reading of a book of Greek mythology which, even at that early age, had been sufficient to make his religious beliefs seem sad and depressing. He tried to express something of that experience in &quot;El poeta y los mitos&quot; in &quot;Ocnos&quot;.

===Poetics: the role of the poet and poetry===

Cernuda&#x27;s poetry shows a continual process of stripping away artifice and fashionable stylistic traits or mannerisms. This accounts in part for the abrupt changes in style and tone between various collections. He was also convinced that a poet needs to gain as much variety of experience and knowledge as possible, otherwise his work will be pallid and restricted. A poet&#x27;s work should reflect his growth, his intellectual and emotional development.

When he describes things, it is his individual perception of them that he is trying to convey, what they mean to him, rather than their objective existence. However, after his early collections, he rarely uses the first-person. He frequently tries to create a sense of distance from his poetry by using the &quot;tú&quot; form but the person he is addressing is usually himself. The effect of this is that much of his poetry seems to be a self-conscious interior monologue. In part, this is because he was always conscious of a difference between the Cernuda who lived and suffered and the Cernuda who wrote poetry. In part, it is also probably a result of his natural reticence and caution against disclosing too much of himself, despite the fact that personal history lies behind much of his output. Whereas Browning might use a figure such as Fra Lippo Lippi or Andrea del Sarto to live imaginatively what he would not present as his own experience, Cernuda&#x27;s characters have Cernuda&#x27;s voice and present versions or aspects of his own thoughts and feelings.

He was convinced that he was driven by an inner daimon to write poetry and that the poet is in touch with a spiritual dimension of life that normal people are either blind to or shut off from. it is a topic which he alludes to frequently in his critical writings. His urge to write poetry was not under his control. Reading some lines of poetry, hearing some notes of music, seeing an attractive person could be the external influence that led to a poem but what was important was to try to express the real, deep-lying poetic impulse, which was sometimes powerful enough to make him shiver or burst into tears.

Although he was a self-absorbed person, dedicated to the art of writing poetry, he was vulnerable enough to need to know that he had an audience. After November 1947, when an edition of &quot;Como quien espera el alba&quot; was published in Buenos Aires, rumours of its favourable reception reached him in Mount Holyoke. He was gratified to learn that he was starting to find an audience and that his name was getting mentioned when Spanish poetry was discussed.

==Translations==

During the writing of &quot;Invocaciones&quot;, he met the German philosopher and linguist Hans Gebser, who was living and working in Madrid in the Ministry of Education. This was at a time when Cernuda was beginning to become enthused by the poetry of Hölderlin and, with Gebser&#x27;s help he began to translate selected poems. These appeared in &quot;Cruz y Raya&quot; in early 1936. Because his knowledge of German was rudimentary, he made an error in translating the final line of one of the poems. A second edition was published in Mexico in 1942 but, since Bergamín did not advise him of this and Cernuda himself was living in Scotland at the time, he was unable to correct this and other infelicities. Gebser himself, together with Roy Hewin Winstone, was compiling an anthology of contemporary Spanish poetry translated into German and Cernuda tried to get him to exclude any poems by Guillén, Salinas or Dámaso Alonso, on the basis that they were teachers rather than poets. He only succeeded in getting Alonso excluded and the anthology was published in Berlin in 1936.

In addition, he translated a set of 6 poems by Eluard, published in &quot;Litoral&quot; in 1929. In 1938, with the collaboration of Stanley Richardson, he translated 2 sonnets by Wordsworth which were published in &quot;Hora de España&quot;. He also translated poems by Blake, Yeats and Keats, which were published in &quot;Romance&quot; in 1940. Three poems by Yeats, Browning and Marvell were included in the first volume of &quot;Poesía y literatura&quot;.

==Works in prose==
===Prose poems===
====Ocnos (1940–1956)====
Cernuda did not enjoy his life in Glasgow. He felt exiled both from happiness and love and began to feel a yearning for his childhood days. He remembered the South as a lost paradise. It was in 1940 that the contrasts between the sordid and ugly city of Glasgow where he was living and his childhood memories of Seville inspired him to start to write brief prose poems to try to exorcise the tensions building up inside him. As the collection built up, he cast about for a title, finally finding one that pleased him in a work by Goethe. Ocnos was a mythical Roman figure who twisted reeds into ropes only to discover that his donkey methodically ate them. Yet he persisted in his efforts in order to give himself something to do and perhaps learn something. It struck Cernuda that there was a fitting irony - the creator continually trying to create and the donkey symbolising time the destroyer, standing in the place of the reading public, an unwittingly destructive consumer. The first edition was published in London in 1942 and consisted of 31 pieces. Cernuda continued mining the seam of work that writing prose poetry opened up for him and brought out a second edition in Madrid in 1949, with 48 pieces. The first edition had focused solely on Cernuda&#x27;s childhood and adolescence in Seville. In the second edition, he gave the pieces a biographical sequence and moved beyond his life in Seville. The final edition had 63 pieces and was published in Mexico in 1963.

The first group of poems overlapped with the writing of &quot;Como quien espera el alba&quot; and this was obviously one of those periods of inspired creativity, such as when he was writing &quot;Un río, un amor&quot; and &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot;. Exploration of his formative years was becoming a major preoccupation and there are overlaps between his poems and prose poems. The clearest example is &quot;Jardín antiguo&quot;, which is both the title of a poem in &quot;Las nubes&quot; and a prose poem in &quot;Ocnos&quot;. Both are inspired by the gardens of the Alcázar of Seville. In the poem, an ageing man dreams of returning to the walled garden, with its fountain, lemon trees, magnolias and birdsong. He dreams of the return of youth with its pangs of desire, knowing full well that they will not come back. In &quot;Ocnos&quot; we get a more expansive description of the garden and at the same time a deeper reflection on his connection to that place, the sense of rapture that he felt as a boy there. It concludes with a statement of the gap between reality and desire: Más tarde habías de comprender que ni la acción ni el goce podrías vivirlos con la perfección que tenían en tus sueños al borde de la fuente. Y el día que comprendiste esa triste verdad, aunque estabas lejos y en tierra extraña, deseaste volver a aquel jardín y sentarte de nuevo al borde de la fuente, para soñar otra vez la juventud pasada.

(Later you had to understand that neither action nor enjoyment could be lived with the perfection they had in your dreams at the edge of the fountain. And the day you understood that sad truth, even though you were far away and in a strange land, you wished to return to that garden and sit again on the edge of the fountain, to dream again of past youth.)
John Taylor writes,&quot;As [Cernuda] recalls loci of ephemeral harmony, increases his knowledge and self-knowledge, and crafts his ruminations, he hints that these introspective and poetic labours are all in vain. The donkey is already chewing the beautiful reed-woven rope.&quot;

While the predominant mood of the collection is sad, imbued with a sense of loss and nostalgia, there is also room for the occasional celebration as in &quot;El estío&quot; and &quot;El amante&quot;, where he recalls the sensual delights of a holiday in Málaga in 1933, frolicking on the beach and in the sea, walking naked under his white robe with his friends and, in particular, his lover Gerardo Carmona. Apart from the short-lived affairs with Serafín Fernández Ferro and Stanley Richardson, Carmona is the only other person we know about with whom Cernuda had a lasting affair in the 1930s. Again, these prose poems share an affinity of mood and subject-matter with a poem written around the same time, &quot;Elegía anticipada&quot;, included in &quot;Como quien espera el alba&quot;, in which he declares that their love has broken out of the prisons of time.

When his thoughts turn to Glasgow, in &quot;Ciudad caledonia&quot;, he describes his hatred of the place, its monotony, vulgarity and ugliness and his dislike of the utilitarian, puritanical people. It was like a prison, useless in his life apart from work, parching and consuming what youthfulness he had left. One prose poem, &quot;Escrito en el agua&quot; (Written in the water), was excluded from the second edition of &quot;Ocnos&quot; by the censors in Franco&#x27;s Spain - presumably because it contains blasphemous ideas - &quot;God does not exist.&quot; He had the reputation of holding Communist views, of being anti-Franco, of living a lifestyle and holding views repugnant to the regime - a homosexual who was anti-religion and anti-family values, so his writings were always likely to come under close scrutiny from the censors. Cernuda himself decided not to include it in the third edition. Taylor points out that the title is a translation of Keats&#x27;s epitaph, &quot;Here Lies One Whose Name was Writ in Water&quot;. Cernuda had come to think it was too rhetorical in tone. It is another account of the destructiveness of time and how reality destroys all hopes and dreams. There is also an extended meditation in &quot;El acorde&quot; on his conception of cosmic harmony, a unity of feeling and consciousness that comes fleetingly, a moment of ecstasy. He calls it by the German word &quot;Gemüt&quot; and writes that the closest thing to it is &quot;entering another body in the act of love [and thereby obtaining] oneness with life by way of the lover&#x27;s body.&quot;

====Variaciones sobre tema mexicano (1950)====
The first piece in this book is called &quot;La lengua&quot;. Since his departure from Spain in February 1938, although he had been in contact with many Hispanic people, he had missed the sense of being surrounded by his native language. His visit to Mexico in the summer of 1949, the feeling of being in a Hispanic culture, the temperament of the people, the hot sun all seem to have kick-started his inspiration. These prose poems and his next collection of poetry, &quot;Con las horas contadas&quot;, are the result. He wrote these pieces in the course of 1950, once he was back at Mount Holyoke, and the collection was published in 1952. He sets the general theme in an introduction by discussing the lack of interest in Mexico shown by writers from peninsular Spain. As a child, he had no curiosity about the country. His curiosity was sparked by chance after his arrival in America. Curiosity turned into interest, which developed into love and this love is explored in these pieces. This is one of the sunniest, in all senses, of Cernuda&#x27;s collections. Gone is the sad introspection of &quot;Ocnos&quot;. In &quot;Miravalle&quot;, he is enchanted by the viceroy&#x27;s palace. If he were allowed to stay, he cannot imagine that he could tire of it or want to move elsewhere. In &quot;Lo nuestro&quot;, the sight of native children begging reminds him of his homeland. His initial impulse is to return to the USA but, on further reflection, he comes to realise that this country is alive, in spite of its poverty. He reflects that perhaps poverty is the price you pay for being so alive. The USA seems vacuous and trivial in comparison. In &quot;El mirador, he describes how the landscape, so similar to Spain, is taking control of him, exerting a spell over him, like it must have done over the conquistadors. &quot;Perdiendo el tiempo&quot; depicts a scene of indolent sensuality. &quot;Ocio&quot; is a reflection on the necessity of idleness. In &quot;El patio&quot;, he feels as if he is back in the Seville of his childhood. He has finally managed to recover it. In &quot;La posesión&quot;, he describes his urge to fuse with the land. In &quot;Centro del hombre&quot;, he observes that the feeling of being a stranger, which had been a constant in his years of exile, has gone. He had been living with his body in one place and his soul in another. Now they are reunited: con todo o con casi todo concordabas, y las cosas, aire, luz, paisaje, criaturas, te eran amigas.

(you agreed with everything or almost everything, and things, air, light, landscape, creatures, were friends with you.)

However, these moments of harmony and union can only be fleeting - perfect shimmering moments, each of which is like a pearl between its two valves. On the plane back to the USA, he had to hide his tears and keep his feelings private. He then comments that this would add to the legend that has been created of his being dry and cold-hearted.

===Short stories and drama===
He published a set of three short stories - &quot;Tres narraciones&quot; - in Buenos Aires, 1948. The stories are:

*&quot;El Viento en la Colina&quot;, originally written in 1938,
*&quot;El Indolente&quot;, originally written in 1929, 
*&quot;El Sarao&quot;, originally written in 1941-42.

Two more stories appeared in &quot;Hora de España&quot;, &quot;En la costa de Santiniebla&quot; (1937) and &quot;Sombras en el salón&quot; (1937). The latter depicts the atmosphere of Carlos Morla&#x27;s &quot;tertulias&quot; in which &quot;not only literary and aesthetic questions were debated but quarrels and affairs of the heart: love, disillusion, dislikes...&quot; It seems to be a fictionalised account of the breakdown of Cernuda&#x27;s affair with Serafín Ferro.

He completed one play - &quot;La familia interrumpida&quot; - in two acts in 1937-38. It was published posthumously in 1988. Before that, in 1931, he wrote 9 pages of an untitled play that he never completed.

During his time in London, probably 1946, he began to translate Shakespeare&#x27;s Troilus and Cressida into Spanish verse. This was a task that taught him a lot and which gave him a great deal of satisfaction.
He acknowledged the advice given by E.M.Wilson, especially his help in clarifying difficult passages. Wilson was an eminent British scholar of Spanish Golden Age theatre who was at that time Professor of Spanish Literature at King&#x27;s College, London. They had met in Madrid in 1930-31, when Wilson was on a scholarship at the &quot;Residencia de Estudiantes.&quot; Cernuda finished his translation in 1950 when he was at Mount Holyoke. With sponsorship from the British Council, it was published in &quot;Ínsula&quot; in 1953.

He also translated part of the first act of Romeo and Juliet.

===Criticism===

Cernuda wrote critical essays throughout his career, many of which were published in newspapers or magazines. Towards the end of his life, however, he brought out 4 collections of his most important pieces.

The first was &quot;Estudios sobre poesía española contemporánea&quot; (Madrid 1957). The conception of this work probably dates back to the 1940s but he only began work on the articles that comprise it in 1954. Cernuda gives a survey of what seem to him to be the most important currents in Spanish poetry from the 19th century onwards. He deliberately omits any neo-Classical or Romantic poets and starts with Ramón de Campoamor. He also covers Bécquer and Rosalía de Castro before moving on to a general essay on &quot;Modernismo and the Generation of 1898&quot;. This is followed by individual essays on Miguel de Unamuno, Machado and Juan Ramón Jiménez. He then moves on to León Felipe, José Moreno Villa and Gómez de la Serna before focusing on his contemporaries, Salinas, Guillėn, Lorca, Diego, Alberti, Aleixandre and Altolaguirre. He ends the collection with some thoughts on developments since 1936. These articles were first published in a magazine called &quot;México en la Cultura&quot; between 1954 and 1956. The subsequent publication of the collected articles was delayed by the uproar that some of them had provoked, especially the essays on Juan Ramón Jiménez, Salinas and Guillén. It was eventually published in 1957 in a heavily bowdlerised version that omitted chapters relating to Guillén, Aleixandre, Altolaguirre, Diego and Alberti.

His next collection was &quot;Pensamiento poético en la lírica inglesa&quot; (Mexico 1958). Luis Maristany suggests that it is more interesting as an indication of Cernuda&#x27;s interests than as a work of criticism in its own right, given that it was written up in Mexico from his notes at a time when he lacked access to a proper English language library and so could not properly develop his arguments. Yet, his audience was attracted by the novelty of a study of English poetry, written by a Spaniard. In a letter to Derek Harris, dated March 3, 1961, Cernuda states that &quot;English literature, from my arrival in England (1938) until now, has been part of my daily reading.&quot; In his essay on Aleixandre, collected in the &quot;Estudios sobre poesía española contemporánea&quot;, he writes of his fascination with the tradition of poet-critics in English literature, comparing unfavourably the writings of such people as Sainte-Beuve and Menéndez y Pelayo with Coleridge, Keats, Arnold and Eliot. He was particularly inspired by his reading of essays by Eliot such as &quot;The Frontiers of Criticism&quot; and &quot;Tradition and the Individual Talent&quot;. The collection shows just how extensive and deep his reading of English literature was, as it contains studies of Blake, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Keats, Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, Swinburne and Hopkins.

&quot;Poesía y literatura, I y II&quot; (Barcelona 1960, 1964) These collections gathered together his most important essays or articles on literary themes. They display the extraordinary range of his reading, covering authors as diverse as Galdós, Goethe, Hölderlin, Cervantes, Marvell, Browning, Yeats, Gide, Rilke, Ronald Firbank, Nerval, Dashiell Hammett, Reverdy, Valle-Inclán as well as figures more often found in his writings such as Eliot and Juan Ramón Jiménez. The dates of composition of the essays range from 1935 to 1963, so they cover the full range of his critical career. For students of Cernuda, the main interest lies in the first volume. Not only does it contain his heartfelt 1946 tribute to Andrė Gide but also &quot;Palabras antes de una Lectura&quot; and &quot;Historial de un Libro&quot;, two of the most revealing accounts of his poetics and starting-points for all Cernuda criticism. &quot;Palabras&quot; was the text of a lecture delivered at the Lyceum Club in Madrid in 1935 and edited for publication in 1941. He begins by discussing the purpose of poetry, which for him is a question of conveying his personal experience of the world. It is in this lecture that he reveals his primary theme: reality versus desire. His aim is to find &quot;a transcendental plane of existence where the division between the objective and the subjective dimensions of the world is eliminated&quot; and cosmic harmony can be attained. He makes a clear distinction between the world&#x27;s deceptive appearance and the hidden &quot;imagen completa del mundo&quot;, which is the true reality. He also develops the idea of a &quot;daimonic power&quot; that pervades the universe and is able to achieve this synthesis of the invisible underlying reality and its deceiving appearance. But a force powerful enough to do this is also capable of destroying the poet, as in the case of Hölderlin. The &quot;Historial&quot; was first published in instalments in &quot;México en la Cultura&quot; in 1958. It is a detailed account of Cernuda&#x27;s intellectual development and gives great insight into the process of how he became a poet and how his poetry evolved over time. In a review in the Bulletin of Hispanic Studies, Arthur Terry described it as &quot;the most remarkable piece of self-analysis by any Spanish poet, living or dead&quot;. It is, however, very reticent about his emotional development. For example, he only alludes very obliquely to the love affairs that inspired &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot;, &quot;Donde habite el olvido&quot; and &quot;Poemas para un cuerpo&quot;.

==Cernuda and his contemporaries==

===Salinas and Guillén===

He came to the attention of Pedro Salinas in his first year at Seville University - 1920-21 - and recorded, as late as 1958, that he would probably never have found his vocation as a poet had it not been for the older man&#x27;s encouragement. However, his attitude towards Salinas seems to have been quite complex, as far as can be judged from his writings. In 1929 and 1930, his growing political militancy, inspired by his attraction to surrealism, made it difficult for him to tolerate friends whom he had come to consider bourgeois - such as Guillén, Salinas and even Aleixandre. Even though he might have reverted to friendly terms with Salinas and Guillén (and this was right at the start of his relationship with Aleixandre, when he viewed him as a comfortable bourgeois), in a collection of essays published in 1957, &quot;Estudios sobre Poesía española contemporánea&quot;, it is possible to see that he continues to view them as adhering to a different conception of poetry. For Cernuda, a true poet has to break away from society in some way, even if he might live a lifestyle that looks totally conventional from the outside, and these two poets never managed to do that. He does not approve of the playful qualities in Salinas&#x27;s poetry and his seeming refusal to deal with profound subjects. When he considers the change that came over Salinas&#x27;s poetry with &quot;La voz a ti debida&quot;, he dismisses it as

just another game, a desire to show that he was as human as the next man.

In truth, the poetry of Salinas was alien to Cernuda - so alien as to be antipathetic to him. His personal relationship with Salinas had probably never fully recovered from the blow of his apparent rejection of &quot;Perfil del aire&quot; in 1927. Not even his favourable review of the first edition of &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot; seems to have appeased Cernuda for long. Salinas wrote an introduction to an anthology of Spanish poetry that was published in the 1940s and referred to Cernuda as &quot;el más Licenciado Vidriera de los poetas&quot;, an allusion to the Cervantes short story &quot;El licenciado Vidriera&quot;, in which the hero retreats timorously from life under the delusion that he is made of glass. In a poem called &quot;Malentendu&quot;, included in &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, Cernuda launches a bitter attack on a man who, he claims, consistently misunderstood and ill-treated him, alluding specifically to that description.

His contacts with Guillén seem to have been more sporadic. Cernuda clearly valued his supportive words when &quot;Perfil del aire&quot; first appeared and he does not seem to have done anything to vex Cernuda. However the latter&#x27;s assessment is based solely on the evidence of &quot;Cántico&quot; - the later collections had not begun to appear when Cernuda wrote about him. Clearly, the poet who wrote in &quot;Beato sillón&quot; that

&lt;poem&gt;
El mundo está bien
Hecho
&lt;/poem&gt;

has a different view of reality than Cernuda. Nevertheless, Cernuda respects his dedication to his poetry and his commitment to revising it and making it better. However, he does regret that Guillén should have expended so much care and energy on expounding such a limited view of life. He notes what he views as Guillén&#x27;s tendency to draw everything he sees into a contained, bourgeois viewpoint. He also notes the way that when Guillén writes about Lorca, the latter&#x27;s life and works become a personal affair of the Guillén family. His assessment ends in a contradictory way. He views Guiillén as a poet in the manner of Coventry Patmore - a now forgotten 19thc. British poet - and yet also one of the 3 or 4 finest poets of his generation.

===Aleixandre===

One of the first things that Cernuda did on arriving in Madrid in 1928 was to pay a visit to Vicente Aleixandre. This was their first meeting. However, they did not immediately become friends and Cernuda blames it on his own timidity and distrust. He was struck by Aleixandre&#x27;s warmth and friendliness, not realising until a later date that his visit had been during the hours when Aleixandre, for the sake of his health, would normally have been resting. Unfortunately he was also struck by Aleixandre&#x27;s calmness and the sense of ease that he exuded at being in familiar surroundings. For Cernuda, who was always uneasy about feeling at home anywhere, this was a reason for deciding that he did not want to see Aleixandre again.

After his return to Madrid from Toulouse in June 1929, he met Aleixandre again: he recounts that it was Aleixandre who re-introduced himself to Cernuda as he himself did not recognise him. Gradually, over the course of many meetings, Cernuda&#x27;s habitual reserve and distrust faded. His friendship with Vicente Aleixandre developed into the closest he had ever had. They often met in Aleixandre&#x27;s house, sometimes with Lorca and Altolaguirre there as well. Aleixandre seems to have had a special gift for friendship, because he also became one of Lorca&#x27;s closest friends (according to Ian Gibson). and Cernuda notes specifically his skill as an attentive and sympathetic listener. The implication is that he was trusted with the intimate confessions of many of his friends. Cernuda also gives a very favourable account of Aleixandre&#x27;s poetry in &quot;Estudios sobre poesía española contemporánea&quot;, seeing in his work the struggle of a man of intense feeling trapped inside a sick body, an analogous situation to his own struggle for fulfilment.

However, not even Aleixandre was able to escape from Cernuda&#x27;s sensitivity about his future reputation. In the 1950s, he wrote a few essays on his memories of Cernuda, which of course were fixed in the late 1920s and early 1930s. He describes his friend&#x27;s apparent detachment from the world and unwillingness to engage. No attempt was made to see whether that old image still fitted the man who had gone through all the upheaval that Cernuda had experienced while going into exile. Perhaps more importantly, there was no attempt made to dissociate the poetry written by Cernuda, from Cernuda the man as Aleixandre had known him 20 years earlier.

===Lorca===

Cernuda&#x27;s relationship with Lorca was one of the most important in his life, notwithstanding the fact of its brevity. He first met Lorca in Seville in December 1927, during the celebrations in honour of Góngora. He recalled this meeting in an article he wrote in 1938. They met on the patio of a hotel in the evening. Cernuda was struck by the contrast between Lorca&#x27;s large, eloquent, melancholy eyes and his thickset peasant&#x27;s body. He was not favourably impressed by his theatrical manner and by the way he was surrounded by hangers-on - reminiscent of a matador. However, something drew them together: &quot;Something that I hardly understood or did not wish to acknowledge began to unite us...he took me by the arm and we left the others.&quot;

He next met Lorca three years later in Aleixandre&#x27;s apartment in Madrid after Lorca&#x27;s return from New York and Cuba. He noticed that something in Lorca had changed; he was less precious, less melancholy and more sensual.

Considering the friendship between them and his admiration for Lorca, Cernuda is dispassionate in his assessments of Lorca&#x27;s poetry. He is not a whole-hearted admirer of the &quot;Romancero gitano&quot;, for example, unimpressed by the obscurity of the narratives in many of the individual poems and by the theatricality and outmoded costumbrismo of the collection as a whole. When he discusses &quot;Canciones&quot;, he deplores the jokiness of some of the poems -

an attitude unworthy of a poet, but more appropriate to the son of a wealthy family who, comfortable in his very bourgeois status, is able to mock it, because he knows that it will not cost him anything and that it will earn him the reputation of being a smart, witty chap.

He notes that this is a fleeting characteristic in Lorca but more persistent in someone such as Alberti. For Cernuda, poetry is a serious business and he tends not to approve of people who take it lightly. It also tends to show how his criticism is guided by his own principles. He tends to be more lenient in his judgments of poets who are like him. He seems to approve of the fact that after the success of the &quot;Romancero gitano&quot;, Lorca continued along his own track, not seduced into writing more gypsy ballads. In &quot;Poeta en Nueva York&quot;, a collection not published in Spain in Lorca&#x27;s lifetime, Cernuda identifies the heart of the collection as the &quot;Oda a Walt Whitman&quot;. This is interesting as it is a poem in which Lorca clearly shows his identification with homosexuals but Cernuda&#x27;s reference is rather obscure -

in it the poet gives voice to a feeling that was the very reason of his existence and work. Because of that it is a pity that this poem is so confused, in spite of its expressive force.
On March 8, 1933, he was present at the premiere in Madrid of García Lorca&#x27;s play &quot;Bodas de sangre&quot;. but he makes no reference to it, or indeed to any of Lorca&#x27;s plays in his writings. He notes at the end of the chapter on Lorca in &quot;Estudios sobre Poesía española contemporánea&quot; that Lorca&#x27;s later poems give clear signs to suggest that he had a lot more to say at the time of his death and that his style was developing in emotional force.

Cernuda wrote an elegy for Lorca which he included in &quot;Las nubes&quot; and to the end of his life took pains to try to ensure that the image of Lorca was not academicised, that he remained a figure of vitality, rebellion and nonconformism.

===Dámaso Alonso===

In 1948, Cernuda published an open letter to the famous critic Dámaso Alonso in reaction to an article by the latter titled &quot;Una generación poética (1920-36)&quot;. He takes exception to two passages:
#Cernuda, at that time very young
#Cernuda was still a boy, almost isolated in Seville, in the year of our excursion to Seville, the same year in which &quot;Perfil del aire&quot; appeared in Málaga, which neither represents his mature work...

He points out that he was 25 at this time, so can scarcely be considered &quot;very young&quot; or a &quot;boy&quot;. As for his isolation in Seville, Alonso should recall that he had already had poems published in the &quot;Revista de Occidente&quot; and elsewhere. However, it is noteworthy that in his later essay, &quot;Historial de un libro&quot;, he used the same expression to depict his sense of confusion at the hostile reviews to his first collection. He also criticises Alonso&#x27;s use of the word &quot;mature&quot;. He points out the essential inconsistency in saying that the poet was young and then expecting maturity in his early work. He then states that for him the key factor is not whether a poem is mature or not but whether it has artistic merit. He goes on to say that, even after the passage of time, he still prefers some of his earlier poems to certain poems written later.

The major complaint he raises is that this critique is just a lazy repetition of the initial critical reaction in 1927. One of his key beliefs is that there are poets who find their audience at once and poets who have to wait for an audience to come to them - he reiterates this in &quot;Historial de un libro&quot;. He is one of the latter. So when people like Alonso, who rejected his early work and still persist in calling it immature, now say he is a fine poet, he takes that to mean that they are merely picking up on the favourable reactions of people 20 years younger to his recent works - in other words, the audience that has found him - and that they are unable to see the continuities between the earlier and the later work.
This develops into a key theme of Cernuda&#x27;s final collection. In &quot;Malentendu&quot;, he shows his unease that his own reputation could be shaped beyond the grave by the perceptions of someone such as Pedro Salinas and his reference to &quot;El Licenciado Vidriera&quot;. In &quot;Otra vez, con sentimiento&quot;, he shows the same unease on behalf of Lorca. Alonso had written in the same article (&quot;Una generación poética (1920-36)&quot;) a tribute to Lorca, calling him &quot;my prince&quot;. Cernuda is keen to save his old friend from appropriation by reactionary forces, defending his unconventional lifestyle (homosexuality) and everything else about him that would prevent him from being free to live in Franco&#x27;s Spain.

===Alberti and political commitment===

Alberti was another of the people whom he met for the first time in the Góngora celebrations in Seville in 1927. Alberti describes him as &quot;dark, thin, extremely refined and meticulous&quot;. However, it is not likely that Alberti ever became close to Cernuda although the latter contributed to many of the former&#x27;s journals during the early 1930s. Alberti invited him to contribute to the celebratory album that he was editing but Cernuda did not follow it up. His relationship with Alberti is suggestive of the pathways along which his mind was moving after his initial contact with surrealism. In 1933, for example, he wrote for Alberti&#x27;s magazine &quot;Octubre&quot; a piece called &quot;Los que se incorporan (Those who join up)&quot;. In it he calls for the destruction of bourgeois society: &quot;I trust in a revolution inspired by communism to achieve this&quot;.

In an article written for &quot;Hora de España&quot; in 1937, he wrote that: &quot;the poet is inevitably a revolutionary... a revolutionary with full awareness of his responsibility&quot;. However, by that time, it seems clear that he did not expect poets to get directly involved in revolutionary actions. In an essay devoted to Aleixandre in 1950 he goes so far as to say that, for a poet to take the course of direct action &quot;is absurd and tends to ruin the poet as a poet&quot;.

This attitude seems to colour his response to Alberti&#x27;s poetic output. A key point in Cernuda&#x27;s view of Alberti&#x27;s poetry is that Alberti seemed to lack any sense of self and his poetry lacks interiority. He also highlights the fact that Alberti was a virtuoso versifier, able to counterfeit the manner of Gil Vicente or any other folk poet. Cernuda does not approve of the playfulness that Alberti shows in his first three collections. He does not believe that Alberti rises above the level of his models, such as Góngora and Guillén in &quot;Cal y canto&quot; - in other words he sees Alberti as a parodist rather than as an original poet. The reader gets the impression that he envies the fact that Alberti became so successful so rapidly, using him as an example of a poet who found his public immediately. These thoughts were written in his essay in &quot;Estudios sobre poesía espaňola contemporánea&quot; on Alberti and seem to derive from Eliot&#x27;s essay &quot;Tradition and the Individual Talent&quot;, because he goes on to draw a contrast between writers who are readily accepted by the public with writers who are more original, who modify the tradition with their own experiences of life and who have to wait for the public to accept them. 
Cernuda ends up by praising his poetic fluency and virtuosity while stating that he had nothing to say and that his work is basically deprived of passion and emotion. Cernuda even wonders whether Alberti&#x27;s recognition of the social injustice of Spain was the inspiration for him to write political poetry because it is difficult to see any fundamental change in his ideas and feelings. The political poems are not very different from his previous phase and he remains just as committed to traditional poetic forms as ever. Cernuda closes his essay by noting that Alberti&#x27;s commitment to Communism does not stop him from turning to apolitical subject-matter in which the reader can divine nostalgia for his former success. In an attempt to revive this, he churns out variations of his old themes.

===Altolaguirre and his family===

That there was a close bond between Altolaguirre, his wife Concha Méndez, and Cernuda seems clear. Cernuda devoted separate chapters in both &quot;Estudios sobre poesía española contemporánea&quot; and &quot;Poesía y literatura&quot; to the poetry of Altolaguirre, consistently asserting that he was not a minor poet, despite the critical consensus to that effect. In &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, he defends his dead friend from superficial, mistaken memories of &quot;Manolito&quot; the endearing man, held by people who have forgotten or never knew his rare gifts as a poet, in &quot;Supervivencias tribales en el medio literario&quot;. It is like an echo of his fears for what will happen to his own reputation after death - will people remember him or turn to the legends promulgated by people like Salinas.

When Altolaguirre and Concha married in June 1932, Cernuda was one of the witnesses at their wedding, along with Lorca, Juan Ramón Jiménez, and Guillén. When in March 1933 their first child died in childbirth, Cernuda dedicated a poem to him - &quot;XIV&quot; in &quot;Donde habite el olvido&quot;. They lived in the same building in Madrid from 1935 to 1936 and, in Mexico, he lived in Concha&#x27;s house. At times, it seems that this was his real family. In &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, there are two poems that suggest this. &quot;Animula, vagula, blandula&quot; is a tender poem about watching Altolaguirre&#x27;s five-year-old grandson, whom he nicknamed Entelechy, playing in the garden and wondering how his fate will differ from his own. &quot;Hablando a Manona&quot; is like a nursery rhyme addressed to their granddaughter.

===Generation of 1898===

Cernuda&#x27;s best critical writing tends to be about writers who interested and inspired him. His writing about the Generation of 1898 is objective but nevertheless lacking in sympathy for the most part. For one thing, he seems to have found it difficult to forge personal relations with them. Regarding Juan Ramón Jiménez and Valle-Inclán, he recalled that they were so intent on their own speech that they neglected to listen to other people. And even in respect of Antonio Machado, so revered by for example Alberti, he recalled that he spoke little and listened to even less. In contrast to most Spanish thinkers, he respected Unamuno more as a poet than as a philosopher. For Ortega y Gasset, he had little positive to say: scattered all through Cernuda&#x27;s critical writings are remarks such as &quot;[he] always understood very little when it came to poetry&quot; and &quot;with his strange ignorance of poetic matters&quot;.

Regarding Valle-Inclán, he makes it clear in his 1963 essay how much he admires his integrity as an artist and human being. He does not rate his poetry very highly, does not comment often on his novels and reserves his admiration for 4 plays, the 3 &quot;Comedias bárbaras&quot; and &quot;Divinas palabras&quot;.

In his study &quot;Estudios sobre poesía española contemporánea&quot;, Cernuda is clearly drawn to those aspects of Antonio Machado where he finds similarities with his own poetic practice. So, for him, the best of Machado is in the early poems of &quot;Soledades&quot;, where he finds echoes of Bécquer. He writes of them these poems are sudden glimpses of the world, bringing together the real and the suprasensible, with a rarely achieved identification.
He is also drawn to the commentaries of Abel Martín and the notes of Juan de Mairena which began to appear in 1925. In these, he finds the &quot;sharpest commentary on the epoch&quot;. On the other hand, he is definitely not attracted by the nationalistic themes that appear in &quot;Campos de Castilla&quot;, especially the poet&#x27;s focus on Castile, which Cernuda sees as negating the essence of Machado&#x27;s best poetry, which stems from his Andalusian nature. However, this is difficult to reconcile with a strand of Cernuda&#x27;s own poetry, as exemplified by the first poem of the &quot;Díptico español&quot; from &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;, which is a tirade of invective against Spain that would not seem out of place in Machado. Indeed, one of Cernuda&#x27;s major themes is the contrast between modern Spain after the Civil War and the glorious past, which is also an important current in Machado&#x27;s poetry. One aspect of Machado that he focuses on is his use of language and how he fails when he tries to emulate the type of popular language described by German Romantics. He shows particular scorn for Machado&#x27;s attempt to write a popular ballad, &quot;La tierra de Alvargonzález&quot;. As Octavio Paz says: &quot;Jiménez and Antonio Machado always confused &quot;popular language&quot; with spoken language, and that is why they identify the latter with traditional song. Jiménez thought that &quot;popular art&quot; was simply the traditional imitation of aristocratic art; Machado believed that the true aristocracy resided in the people and that folklore was the most refined art...Influenced by Jiménez, the poets of Cernuda&#x27;s generation made of ballad and of song their favourite genre. Cernuda never succumbed to the affectation of the popular...and tried to write as one speaks; or rather: he set himself as the raw material of poetic transmututation not the language of books but of conversation

The member of that generation who had most impact on him is Jiménez, although when he went to Britain one of the very few books that he took with him was Gerardo Diego&#x27;s anthology &quot;Poesía española&quot; and he found solace for his nostalgia for Spain in reading the selection of poems by Unamuno and Machado contained within. It is also true that in his study of Unamuno, he makes a comment that seems to relate directly to his own practice as a writer, his preoccupation with creating and perpetuating himself in his poetry, transforming the circumstances of his life into myth:

Alive and striving beyond what were only current circumstances, moments that pass and do not remain, Unamuno was hoping to create himself, or at least create his personal myth, and to be forever what was passing.

He first met Jiménez in late September-early October 1925 in Seville. The meeting had been arranged by Pedro Salinas and he suggested to Cernuda that he should ask one of his friends, whose father was a warden of the Alcázar, for permission to visit the gardens, out of hours. Cernuda&#x27;s account is interesting. He was overawed by being in the presence of such an important figure. In addition, there was the presence of Jiménez&#x27;s wife - Zenobia Camprubí - which also put him at a disadvantage, both because of his shyness and a lack of interest in women, although he had not yet realised why women did not interest him. He placed himself in the role of a disciple, just listening to the Master. He records how gracious Jiménez was to him that evening and on subsequent meetings. At that time, he was something of a hero to Cernuda and he notes how much effort it cost him to free himself from Jiménez&#x27;s type of egoistic, subjective poetry with no connection to the world and life, which was so influential in Spanish cultural circles at that time.

In the essay in which he describes this meeting, &quot;Los Dos Juan Ramón Jiménez&quot;, included in &quot;Poesía y literatura vol 2&quot;, he analyses the Jekyll and Hyde personality of Jiménez. On the one hand he was a famous poet, worthy of admiration and respect. On the other hand, he was the man who launched abusive attacks on numerous literary figures. This latter side gradually became more and more dominant. In particular he took against the poets of Cernuda&#x27;s own generation, at first confining his attacks to verbal ones but then turning to print. He continued to print vilifications right to the end of his life, which had the effect of turning Cernuda&#x27;s former admiration into indifference or even worse.

Cernuda wrote many pieces about Jiménez, including a satirical poem included in &quot;Desolación de la Quimera&quot;. The early influence was decisively rejected and his essays identify all the stylistic elements that he cast off, such as the impressionistic symbolism, hermeticism, the fragmentation of his poems, his inability to sustain a thought, the lack of desire to go beyond the surface of things. His final thoughts about Jiménez came in an essay titled &quot;Jiménez y Yeats&quot; dated 1962 and included in &quot;Poesía y literatura vol 2&quot;. E.M. Wilson included a look at this in his survey of Cernuda&#x27;s literary borrowings because it contains a translation of Yeats&#x27;s poem &quot;A Coat&quot; and compares it to Jiménez&#x27;s &quot;Vino, primera, pura&quot;. Of the translation, Wilson writes One can point out minor infidelities...but the translation has life of its own and fulfils its purpose in Cernuda&#x27;s essay: a rod for the back of Juan Ramón Jiménez. Cernuda concludes that Jiménez is a more limited poet than Yeats because the latter put his poetry to one side in order to campaign for Irish Home Rule and to work as director of the Abbey Theatre in Dublin whereas Jiménez&#x27;s whole life was totally dedicated to poetry. He devoted himself to aesthetics and did not involve himself with ethical considerations at all.

==Gide, the dandy and homosexuality==

His sexual awakening seems to have coincided with the birth of his desire to write poetry, around the age of 14, but it was many years later before he really came to terms with this side of himself. A very important influence on his emotional development were the writings of André Gide. In &quot;Historial de un libro&quot;, Cernuda wrote that his introduction to the works of Gide was when Pedro Salinas gave him either &quot;Prétextes&quot; or &quot;Nouveaux Prétextes&quot; to read, followed by &quot;Morceaux Choisis&quot;, which is a selection by Gide himself of passages from his works. These books opened the way for him to resolve or at least reconcile himself with &quot;a vital, decisive problem within me&quot;. These works deal openly with the topic of homosexuality amongst many other things. For example, Gide included in the &quot;Morceaux Choisis&quot; the section of &quot;Les Caves du Vatican&quot; where Lafcadio Wluiki pushes Amédée Fleurissoire out of a moving train just from curiosity as to whether he can actually bring himself to do it - the original &quot;acte gratuit&quot;. Cernuda comments,&quot;I fell in love with his youth, his grace, his freedom, his audacity.&quot; This is redolent of the homoeroticism of a poem such as &quot;Los marineros son las alas del amor&quot; in &quot;Los placeres prohibidos.&quot; He went so far as to write a fan letter, perhaps even a love letter, to Lafcadio, which was printed in &quot;El Heraldo de Madrid&quot; in 1931. It includes these words: &quot;the only real thing in the end is the free man, who does not feel part of anything, but lives wholly perfect and unique in the midst of nature, free from imposed and polluting customs.&quot; This is reiterated in his essay of 1946, where he writes: &quot;the transcendent figure for Gide is not that of a man who by means of abstention and denial searches for the divine, but that of a man who seeks out the fullness of humanity by means of effort and individual exaltation.&quot; In other words, he was affected by the idea of total hedonism without any sense of guilt.

Another idea that he takes from Gide is expressed in Book 1 of &quot;Les Nourritures Terrestres&quot;:There is profit in desires, and profit in the satisfaction of desires - for so they are increased. And indeed, Nathaniel, each one of my desires has enriched me more than the always deceitful possession of the object of my desire. 

So hedonism and the exaltation of desire are not enough in themselves; what matters is the dignity and integrity of the desire. That is what gives it virtue, not the object of the desire. As Cernuda expressed it, &quot;what he holds in his arms is life itself, rather than a desired body.&quot; In &quot;Unos cuerpos son como flores&quot;, another poem from &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot;, the transience of love is accepted as a perfectly normal phenomenon because it is the transcendent nature of that love that overrides everything. Following Gide&#x27;s example, Cernuda becomes concerned with maintaining his personal integrity. Free from guilt, he will live true to his own values, which include rejection of conventional sexual mores and acceptance of his homosexuality. In &quot;La palabra edificante&quot;, Octavio Paz wrote &quot;Gide gave him the courage to give things their proper names; the second book of his surrealist period is called &quot;Los placeres prohibidos&quot; (Forbidden Pleasures). He does not call them, as one might have expected &quot;Los placeres pervertidos&quot; (Perverse Pleasures)&quot;.

Cernuda&#x27;s reading of Gide was thorough. As well as the works mentioned above, his essay includes discussions of the &quot;Journals&quot;, &quot;Les cahiers d&#x27;André Walter, Le Traité du Narcisse, Paludes, Le Prométhée Mal Enchaîné, Les Nourritures Terrestres, Amyntas, L&#x27;Immoraliste, La Porte Etroite, Le Retour de l&#x27;Enfant Prodigue, Corydon, Les Caves du Vatican, Les Faux Monnayeurs, Si le grain ne meurt,&quot; and &quot;Thésée.&quot; One of the most interesting passages concerns Gide&#x27;s memoirs, &quot;Si le grain ne meurt.&quot; Many of the episodes recounted in this book had formed the basis for his previous works; however, this new account is not so much a repetition as a complement to the previous versions. The reader gets a broader vision of what was happening. Gide&#x27;s works are clarified and are heightened when they can be interpreted in the light of the extra information in the memoirs. It was clearly with a similar aim in mind that Cernuda set out writing &quot;Historial de un libro&quot;, to recount &quot;the story of the personal events that lie behind the verses of &quot;La realidad y el deseo.&quot;&quot; Narcissism is another trait that Gide and Cernuda shared: &quot;After all, we cannot know anybody better than our self.&quot;

At times, it seems that the two writers share the same sensibility. For example, Gide had visited Seville in 1892, in company with his mother, and was struck by the gardens of the Alcázar. This made its way into &quot;Les nourritures terrestres&quot;: &quot;What of the Alcazar? Marvellous as a Persian garden! Now I come to speak of it, I believe I prefer it to all the others. When I read Hafiz, I think of it.&quot; Cernuda describes a similar sense of transcendence in &quot;Jardín antiguo&quot; in &quot;Ocnos&quot;. Gide was in Seville during &quot;Semana Santa&quot; and revelled in the sensuality of the celebrations. In his journals, he describes how there was a feeling of loosening the corsets and throwing off prudish morality, which is quite similar to the atmosphere of Cernuda&#x27;s poem &quot;Luna llena en Semana Santa&quot; from &quot;Desolación de la Quimera.&quot;

As seen in his accounts of his first meetings with Jiménez in 1925 and Lorca in 1927, he took a few years to come to terms fully with his sexuality. This only seems to happen once he finally left Seville in 1928, after his mother&#x27;s death. However, during that period he seems to have cultivated his sense of difference by becoming a dandy. During his time at the University of Seville, Salinas had already noted his dapper appearance, commenting on his &quot;well-cut suit, a perfectly-knotted tie&quot;. This tendency seems to have intensified during his brief stay in Madrid before going to Toulouse, where he assumed the pose of a man who frequents bars, drinks cocktails, affects English shirts, discussed in an article by Villena (&quot;La rebeldía del dandy en Luis Cernuda&quot;). Villena diagnoses it as the sign of a refined hermit trying to hide his hyper-sensitivity and repressed desire for love. In Toulouse, he wrote to a friend that he was starting to think that he was too well-dressed. Two months later, he wrote to the same friend complaining that he had only managed to make female friends - the young men being too coarse for him - and boasting about some purchases: an American hat exactly like the one worn by Gilbert Roland in the film Camille, a wristwatch that cost 1000 francs and some other things &quot;simply so that during these courses they might call me a snob and accuse me of being frivolous and lightweight.&quot; He also says that he sometimes wears his moustache in the manner of Don Alvarado or Nils Asther. In his short story &quot;El indolente&quot; Cernuda reflects on dandyism:a certain friend once claimed to convince the writer of this that he dressed and adorned himself not to attract but rather to rebuff people from his side. He had noticed, or thought he had noticed, that if an elegant women attracts, the elegant man repels. According to this theory, dandyism would be just one of the ways of aspiring to the ascetic solitude of the wasteland.

In some way, however, the combination of his contact with the world, especially the atmosphere of Paris which he visited in the university vacations, the rebellious attitudes and thinking of the surrealists, the influence of Gide, and his pent-up fight against bourgeois tendencies coincided in the belated acceptance of his sexuality, as expressed finally in &quot;Un río, un amor&quot;. His dandified style of dressing seems to have continued for the rest of his life. For example in 1950, he stayed overnight with Jorge Guillén and the latter wrote to Pedro Salinas,&quot;What a blue robe with white spots...what a smell of perfume in the passageway on rising the following morning!&quot;

==Critical reception and legacy==

For a long time, the reactions of critics to Cernuda&#x27;s poetry were based on a caricature of his personality - the shy, introverted but prickly person so quick to take offence. Concha de Albornoz, one of his closest friends, wrote of him &quot;his is a climate that changes: now serene, now tormented. Sometimes I feel so close to him and at other times so distant ... His spirit is like a fly&#x27;s eye: made of a thousand facets.&quot; He found it difficult to make friends. Many of the people who knew him allude to his aloofness and this is a trait borne out by the critical comments he makes in his writings about his contemporaries, which are sometimes so harsh that it is hard to believe they were ever friends or colleagues. Cernuda was well aware that his reputation was of a complicated, tortured individual and this became a matter of concern for him in his later years. In the final poem in his final collection, &quot;A sus paisanos&quot;, he criticises his countrymen for the way they have accepted this perception of him, without making any effort to see if it is justified. He makes it clear that this &quot;legend&quot; is a gross distortion of reality:&lt;poem&gt;
¿Mi leyenda dije? Tristes cuentos
Inventados de mí por cuatro amigos
(¿Amigos?), que jamás quisisteis
Ni ocasión buscasteis de ver si acomodaban
A la persona misma así traspuesta.
Mas vuestra mala fe los ha aceptado &lt;/poem&gt;

(Did I say my legend? Sad tales made up about me by four friends, (Friends?), that you never wanted nor sought any occasion to check to see whether they fitted that person thus superimposed. But your bad faith has accepted them) It seems likely that the four &quot;friends&quot; were Juan Ramón Jiménez, Pedro Salinas, Vicente Aleixandre and José Moreno Villa. Jiménez shows him as aloof and effete to the point of sickliness. Aleixandre emphasises Cernuda&#x27;s solitariness and detachment from the world. Salinas shows him as dedicated, timid, solitary and fragile. Moreno Villa, in his autobiography, concentrates on the tortured side of his character and effeminacy: &quot;He was then a fine and shy young man, very dapper and very sad. He suffered with material things and with human relationships. They say he cried in front of the windows of clothes&#x27;s shops because he could not buy some silk shirts; but I, of course, have seen him almost in tears for not having friends or anyone to love him.&quot;

It is striking that all these accounts refer to the young man they knew in the 1920s and 1930s but Moreno Villas wrote his autobiography in 1944; Salinas wrote his description in 1945 and Aleixandre in 1955. The only contemporary account was Jiménez&#x27;s from 1934. Cernuda&#x27;s character seems to have left a lasting impression on them which they do not seem to have thought of revising. The fundamental problem is the unquestioning, if not naive, belief that the poetry is the man, that there is no distinction between them. They project the brittle, languid, effete personality of the man they knew onto his poetry even though it reveals a very partial, incomplete and misleading reading. It might apply to some of the earlier work but it bears no relation to the passion of the surrealist poems, or the later poems of reflection and self-examination, or the use of the &quot;Doppelgänger&quot; device. Even as late as 1962, it was possible for a critic to write &quot;he is so accustomed by now to live surrounded only by the creations of his own mind - who obey him always and are much more easily controlled than people - that real company bothers him.&quot; The projection of these unbalanced ideas of the man onto the poetry - a man seeking to escape from the real world - was the dominant theme of Cernuda criticism, even among people who never met him.

It was not until 1965 that a different viewpoint began to emerge. The key was the publication in that year of Octavio Paz&#x27;s essay &quot;La palabra edificante&quot;: &quot;Cernuda&#x27;s work is an exploration of himself...He said it himself:&#x27;I have only tried, like every man, to find my truth, my own, which will not be better or worse than that of others, only different.&#x27;...The work of Cernuda is a road toward our own selves. That is what gives it its moral value.&quot; Cernuda is a moralist, a seeker after truth rather than an effete man of glass. Of course, this is implied by the title he chose for his oeuvre, &quot;La realidad y el deseo&quot;. His work is grounded in reality and he criticises poets, such as Juan Ramón Jiménez, who try to escape from or ignore reality. In the words of Villena, &quot;Cernuda defends liberty, anti-conventionalism, joy, faithfulness to your own destiny, the individual leading the way for other people, a blend of stoicism and epicureanism.&quot; He goes on to compare the satirical poems in Cernuda&#x27;s final collection to those of Persius, Juvenal and Quevedo as they are not merely personal attacks but also defences of a moral code that is different from that held by the person being attacked, a different set of ethics.

Towards the end of his life, Cernuda was gratified to learn that a younger generation of Spanish writers were taking an interest in his work. Given the censorship that was operating in Spain at the time, it must have been difficult to get hold of unexpurgated copies of Cernuda&#x27;s poetry. The first tangible sign was an edition of the magazine &quot;Cántico&quot; dedicated to his work in 1955. In a letter to the scholar José Luis Cano, he gives praise to an essay by Vicente Núñez, accuses Adriano del Valle of inventing anecdotes about him, such as wearing patent leather shoes or yellow gloves, and claims not to believe a word of the praise that they give him. It is interesting that Cernuda does not mention the fact that Aleixandre also made a contribution to that issue, one of the essays that stoked the legend of Luis Cernuda. However, he was sufficiently impressed to commend the homage to a young British scholar, Derek Harris, who was starting his researches into Cernuda&#x27;s works.

This was followed in 1962 by a special edition of &quot;La caña gris&quot;. This homage seems to have pleased him even more than the earlier one, with the exception of another contribution by Aleixandre and one by Juan Gil-Albert. Two of the contributors were poets who showed signs of Cernuda&#x27;s influence -Jaime Gil de Biedma and José Valente. Biedma wrote an elegy for him called &quot;Después de la noticia de su muerte&quot;. Another poet of that generation who was influenced by him was Francisco Brines.

== Popular culture ==

* A sculptural monument to Cernuda stands in Sevilla, Spain.
* Spanish painter Gregorio Prieto drew portraits of Luis Cernuda and Vicente Aleixandre.
* The Spanish government has issued several postage stamps featuring portraits of Cernuda, including a stamp issued on the one hundredth anniversary of the poet&#x27;s birth.

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*(Library of Congress Catalog Card Number)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*J. A. Coleman, &quot;Other voices. A study of the late poetry of Luis Cernuda&quot; (North Carolina University Press, 1969)
* Ph. Silver, &quot;Luis Cernuda: el poeta en su leyenda&quot; (Madrid, 1972)
* D. Harris (ed.), &quot;Luis Cernuda&quot; (Madrid, 1977)
* R. Martínez Nadal, &quot;Españoles en la Gran Bretaña: Luis Cernuda. El hombre y sus temas&quot; (Madrid, 1983)
* M. Petrelli, &quot;L&#x27;arte pura in tutte le lingue del mondo: Luis Cernuda&quot; in &quot;Confluenze. Rivista di Studi Iberoamericani&quot;, vol. 1, n. 2, 2009.
* M. Ulacia, &quot;L. Cernuda: escritura, cuerpo y deseo&quot; (Barcelona, 1986).

==External links==

* Biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q439578" start="0" end="18" title="Luis Cernuda" label="Luis Cernuda Bidón"/>
<link wikidata="Q575691" start="95" end="117" title="Generation of &amp;#x27;27" label="Generation of &amp;#x27;27"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="480" end="495" title="literary criticism" label="critical essays"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689" start="506" end="512" title="French literature" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="514" end="521" title="English literature" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q181287" start="526" end="532" title="German literature" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q238499" start="544" end="562" title="Spanish literature" label="Spanish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="587" end="600" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q203715" start="1419" end="1426" title="Bécquer" label="Bécquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229996" start="2011" end="2032" title="University of Seville" label="University of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q379789" start="2128" end="2141" title="Pedro Salinas" label="Pedro Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q921933" start="2533" end="2552" title="Manuel Altolaguirre" label="Manuel Altolaguirre"/>
<link wikidata="Q530267" start="2557" end="2570" title="Emilio Prados" label="Emilio Prados"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="2636" end="2643" title="Litoral" label="Litoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q131318" start="3435" end="3453" title="Juan Ramón Jiménez" label="Juan Ramón Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q498261" start="3476" end="3494" title="Alcázar of Seville" label="Alcázar of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q153020" start="3624" end="3639" title="Ortega y Gasset" label="Ortega y Gasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q9015413" start="3737" end="3748" title="Juan Chabás" label="Juan Chabás"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854180" start="3750" end="3775" title="Melchor Fernández Almagro" label="Melchor Fernández Almagro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343995" start="3781" end="3800" title="Enrique Díez-Canedo" label="Enrique Díez-Canedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4183" end="4216" title="Luis de Góngora#Góngora and the Generation of &amp;#x27;27" label="Góngora tercentenary celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813091" start="4287" end="4307" title="Ateneo de Sevilla" label="Arts Club of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="4326" end="4338" title="García Lorca" label="García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q312945" start="4340" end="4353" title="Dámaso Alonso" label="Dámaso Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q118936" start="4355" end="4369" title="Rafael Alberti" label="Rafael Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q59837" start="4371" end="4384" title="Jorge Guillén" label="Jorge Guillén"/>
<link wikidata="Q332850" start="4386" end="4399" title="José Bergamín" label="José Bergamín"/>
<link wikidata="Q379789" start="4962" end="4975" title="Pedro Salinas" label="Pedro Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134644" start="4984" end="5002" title="Vicente Aleixandre" label="Vicente Aleixandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q578023" start="5077" end="5099" title="University of Toulouse" label="University of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="6174" end="6190" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20087385" start="6255" end="6262" title="Octubre (magazine)" label="Octubre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759438" start="6301" end="6318" title="María Teresa León" label="María Teresa León"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890334" start="6554" end="6567" title="Concha Méndez" label="Concha Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q311001" start="6663" end="6675" title="Valle-Inclán" label="Valle-Inclán"/>
<link wikidata="Q332850" start="7081" end="7094" title="José Bergamín" label="José Bergamín"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="7310" end="7322" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="7415" end="7432" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176543" start="7461" end="7479" title="Concha de Albornoz" label="Concha de Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q251413" start="7562" end="7580" title="Alvaro de Albornoz" label="Alvaro de Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53711" start="8213" end="8233" title="Sierra de Guadarrama" label="Sierra de Guadarrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5901757" start="8482" end="8496" title="Hora de España (magazine)" label="Hora de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q210189" start="9594" end="9606" title="Anti-fascism" label="Anti-Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8818" start="9624" end="9632" title="Valencia (city in Spain)" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="9663" end="9674" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5822523" start="9782" end="9794" title="El Mono Azul" label="El Mono Azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293365" start="10626" end="10631" title="Spanish Republican exiles" label="exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376234" start="10807" end="10828" title="Katharine Stewart-Murray, Duchess of Atholl" label="the Duchess of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528174" start="10830" end="10866" title="Gavin Henderson, 2nd Baron Faringdon" label="Gavin Henderson, 2nd Baron Faringdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q236669" start="10892" end="10904" title="Rebecca West" label="Rebecca West"/>
<link wikidata="Q528576" start="10909" end="10922" title="Rose Macaulay" label="Rose Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183364" start="11104" end="11118" title="Eaton Hastings" label="Eaton Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182204" start="11626" end="11642" title="Cranleigh School" label="Cranleigh School"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="11700" end="11721" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481002" start="11793" end="11801" title="the Ritz London" label="the Ritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q797892" start="12440" end="12467" title="Emmanuel College, Cambridge" label="Emmanuel College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="12682" end="12688" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176543" start="13711" end="13729" title="Concha de Albornoz" label="Concha de Albornoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140542" start="13755" end="13776" title="Mount Holyoke College" label="Mount Holyoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="13778" end="13791" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q222738" start="16567" end="16607" title="National Autonomous University of Mexico" label="National Autonomous University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="17042" end="17046" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256981" start="17506" end="17533" title="San Francisco State College" label="San Francisco State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="17784" end="17817" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23924614" start="18013" end="18027" title="Panteón Jardín" label="Panteón Jardín"/>
<link wikidata="Q332850" start="23296" end="23309" title="José Bergamín" label="José Bergamín"/>
<link wikidata="Q311405" start="25310" end="25319" title="Garcilaso de la Vega (poet)" label="Garcilaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q702468" start="25435" end="25456" title="Salvador de Madariaga" label="Salvador de Madariaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076958" start="25963" end="25984" title="objective correlative" label="objective correlative"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="26064" end="26072" title="TS Eliot" label="TS Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q535195" start="28666" end="28697" title="White Shadows in the South Seas" label="White Shadows in the South Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="32007" end="32016" title="La Coruña" label="La Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="32219" end="32226" title="Malraux" label="Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q203715" start="33567" end="33589" title="Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer" label="Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q243771" start="35413" end="35428" title="Antonio Machado" label="Antonio Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q530936" start="38675" end="38693" title="Spanish Golden Age" label="Spanish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126248" start="38702" end="38720" title="Generation of &amp;#x27;98" label="Generation of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="39264" end="39275" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="39280" end="39286" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280027" start="40135" end="40154" title="Radcliffe Infirmary" label="Radcliffe Infirmary"/>
<link wikidata="Q298773" start="40586" end="40607" title="Mariano José de Larra" label="Mariano José de Larra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="41875" end="41884" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="41888" end="41897" title="the Blitz" label="the Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203402" start="45126" end="45137" title="enjambement" label="enjambement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="50050" end="50061" title="El Escorial" label="El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="52164" end="52170" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189869" start="53483" end="53502" title="Benito Pérez Galdós" label="Benito Pérez Galdós"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="53507" end="53526" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311405" start="54645" end="54654" title="Garcilaso de la Vega (poet)" label="Garcilaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q450246" start="54656" end="54668" title="Luis de León" label="Luis de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q219744" start="54670" end="54677" title="Luis de Góngora" label="Góngora"/>
<link wikidata="Q165257" start="54679" end="54691" title="Lope de Vega" label="Lope de Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q201315" start="54693" end="54700" title="Francisco de Quevedo" label="Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170800" start="54705" end="54725" title="Pedro Calderón de la Barca" label="Calderón de la Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484" start="54813" end="54823" title="André Gide" label="André Gide"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="54842" end="54852" title="Baudelaire" label="Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="54854" end="54862" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="54867" end="54874" title="Rimbaud" label="Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q379931" start="54926" end="54940" title="Pierre Reverdy" label="Pierre Reverdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q294181" start="55313" end="55324" title="Comte de Lautréamont" label="Lautréamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="55838" end="55848" title="Surrealist" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161955" start="55860" end="55872" title="André Breton" label="André Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q152176" start="55874" end="55885" title="Paul Eluard" label="Paul Eluard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128" start="55887" end="55899" title="Louis Aragon" label="Louis Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q713288" start="55904" end="55915" title="René Crevel" label="René Crevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="56165" end="56174" title="Hölderlin" label="Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8934183" start="58530" end="58545" title="Greek Anthology" label="Greek Anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157281" start="59280" end="59296" title="pathetic fallacy" label="pathetic fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="59581" end="59589" title="Robert Browning" label="Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="60002" end="60012" title="T.S. Eliot" label="T.S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="60695" end="60705" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q61889" start="60826" end="60839" title="Hermann Diels" label="Hermann Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q725050" start="60900" end="60911" title="John Burnet (classicist)" label="John Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080252" start="62776" end="62791" title="Fra Lippo Lippi (poem)" label="Fra Lippo Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846429" start="62795" end="62811" title="Andrea del Sarto (poem)" label="Andrea del Sarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q87292" start="64188" end="64199" title="Jean Gebser" label="Hans Gebser"/>
<link wikidata="Q75889" start="64350" end="64359" title="Hölderlin" label="Hölderlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q183304" start="75812" end="75832" title="Troilus and Cressida" label="Troilus and Cressida"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="76166" end="76193" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="76516" end="76532" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q64578" start="77172" end="77190" title="Ramón de Campoamor y Campoosorio" label="Ramón de Campoamor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464264" start="77219" end="77236" title="Rosalía de Castro" label="Rosalía de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600643" start="77282" end="77292" title="Modernismo" label="Modernismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126248" start="77301" end="77319" title="Generation of 1898" label="Generation of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q185085" start="77368" end="77385" title="Miguel de Unamuno" label="Miguel de Unamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076131" start="77439" end="77450" title="León Felipe" label="León Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q981658" start="77452" end="77469" title="José Moreno Villa" label="José Moreno Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063392" start="79052" end="79064" title="Sainte-Beuve" label="Sainte-Beuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q716799" start="79069" end="79086" title="Menéndez y Pelayo" label="Menéndez y Pelayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="79092" end="79101" title="Coleridge" label="Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="79103" end="79108" title="Keats" label="Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="79110" end="79116" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706580" start="79821" end="79835" title="Ronald Firbank" label="Ronald Firbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="79845" end="79861" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q576188" start="84279" end="84301" title="El licenciado Vidriera" label="El licenciado Vidriera"/>
<link wikidata="Q716197" start="85771" end="85787" title="Coventry Patmore" label="Coventry Patmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136545" start="89727" end="89739" title="costumbrismo" label="costumbrismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068193" start="99784" end="99793" title="Entelechy" label="Entelechy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185085" start="100618" end="100625" title="Unamuno" label="Unamuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q382815" start="103798" end="103811" title="Gerardo Diego" label="Gerardo Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346493" start="104896" end="104912" title="Zenobia Camprubí" label="Zenobia Camprubí"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="109700" end="109708" title="hedonism" label="hedonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q919206" start="114617" end="114631" title="Gilbert Roland" label="Gilbert Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276755" start="114644" end="114651" title="Camille (1926 feature film)" label="Camille"/>
<link wikidata="Q930822" start="114902" end="114914" title="Don Alvarado" label="Don Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q722861" start="114918" end="114929" title="Nils Asther" label="Nils Asther"/>
<link wikidata="Q332785" start="121008" end="121015" title="Persius" label="Persius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="121017" end="121024" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201315" start="121029" end="121036" title="Francisco de Quevedo" label="Quevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q978013" start="122518" end="122537" title="Jaime Gil de Biedma" label="Jaime Gil de Biedma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821666" start="122703" end="122719" title="Francisco Brines" label="Francisco Brines"/>
<link wikidata="Q134644" start="122875" end="122893" title="Vicente Aleixandre" label="Vicente Aleixandre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686729" start="123631" end="123674" title="Confluenze" label="Confluenze. Rivista di Studi Iberoamericani"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89618" wikidata="Q354364" url="?curid=89618" title="Blue Angel">
<text>Blue Angel may refer to:

==Music==
*Blue Angel (band), which featured Cyndi Lauper as their lead vocalist, prior to her solo career
*&quot;Blue Angel&quot; (Blue Angel album), 1980
*&quot;Blue Angel&quot; (Patricia Conroy album), 1990
*&quot;Blue Angel&quot; (Park Ji-yoon album), 1998
*&quot;Blue Angel&quot; (Strawbs album), 2003
===Songs===
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot; (song), Roy Orbison, 1960
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot;, a single by Gene Pitney written by Roger Cook, 1974 No.2 in Australia
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot;, a song by Squirrel Nut Zippers from their 1996 album &quot;Hot&quot;
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot;, a song by Dave Cousins from his 1972 album &quot;Two Weeks Last Summer&quot;
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot;, a song by The Love Language from their 2010 album &quot;Libraries&quot;

==Films and television==
* &quot;The Blue Angel&quot;, a 1930 movie starring Marlene Dietrich and Emil Jannings
* &quot;The Blue Angel&quot; (1959 film), a remake, starring May Britt and Curt Jurgens
* &quot;The Blue Angel&quot;, a 1954 American TV series

==Literature==
* &quot;The Blue Angel&quot; (novel), a 1999 novel based on the science fiction TV series &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* &quot;Blue Angel&quot; (novel), a 2000 novel by American author Francine Prose
*&quot;The Blue Angel&quot;, the English title of the novel &quot;Professor Unrat&quot;
*&quot;Blue Is the Warmest Color&quot; (comics), a 2010 graphic novel by French author Julie Maroh originally titled &quot;Blue Angel&quot;

==Other==
*Blue Angel (train), a diesel railcar formerly used by the Netherlands Railways
* Blue Angel (certification), a German certification for environmentally friendly products and services
*Blue Angel (nightclub), a nightclub in Liverpool, England
*The Blue Angel (New York nightclub), a defunct nightclub in New York City
*Blue Angel, the act of fart lighting
*HTC Blue Angel, a mobile phone made by High Tech Computer Corporation
*The blue angel, &quot;Glaucus atlanticus&quot;, a species of sea slugs

==See also==
* Blue Angels (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354364" start="0" end="10" title="Blue Angel" label="Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497276" start="37" end="54" title="Blue Angel (band)" label="Blue Angel (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919571" start="134" end="175" title="Blue Angel (Blue Angel album)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (Blue Angel album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928829" start="183" end="229" title="Blue Angel (Patricia Conroy album)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (Patricia Conroy album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121308058" start="237" end="280" title="Blue Angel (Park Ji-yoon album)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (Park Ji-yoon album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247453" start="288" end="326" title="Blue Angel (Strawbs album)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (Strawbs album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q116245364" start="347" end="376" title="Blue Angel (song)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="434" end="445" title="Gene Pitney#Singles" label="Gene Pitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909687" start="577" end="580" title="Hot (Squirrel Nut Zippers album)" label="Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132278" start="662" end="683" title="Two Weeks Last Summer" label="Two Weeks Last Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021201" start="772" end="781" title="Libraries (album)" label="Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q158047" start="822" end="836" title="The Blue Angel" label="The Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571122" start="903" end="941" title="The Blue Angel (1959 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Blue Angel&amp;quot; (1959 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131759063" start="997" end="1011" title="The Blue Angel (TV series)" label="The Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428687" start="1063" end="1097" title="The Blue Angel (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Blue Angel&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555594" start="1176" end="1206" title="Blue Angel (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Angel&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q457481" start="1321" end="1336" title="Professor Unrat" label="Professor Unrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228373" start="1344" end="1390" title="Blue Is the Warmest Color (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Blue Is the Warmest Color&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985732" start="1495" end="1513" title="Blue Angel (train)" label="Blue Angel (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q882616" start="1576" end="1602" title="Blue Angel (certification)" label="Blue Angel (certification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928830" start="1679" end="1701" title="Blue Angel (nightclub)" label="Blue Angel (nightclub)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857837" start="1738" end="1773" title="The Blue Angel (New York nightclub)" label="The Blue Angel (New York nightclub)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436457" start="1836" end="1849" title="fart lighting" label="fart lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q712188" start="1851" end="1865" title="HTC Blue Angel" label="HTC Blue Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131757" start="1944" end="1962" title="Glaucus atlanticus" label="Glaucus atlanticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15873378" start="2009" end="2037" title="Blue Angels (disambiguation)" label="Blue Angels (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89620" wikidata="Q5196669" url="?curid=89620" title="Meteņi">
<text>Meteņi () or Metenis is an ancient Latvian spring waiting holiday, that ends on Ash Wednesday, which is followed by Lent. Meteņi is celebrated in February or early March, seven weeks before Lieldienas.

== Origins ==

The Meteņi celebration preserved the ancient traditions of New Year&#x27;s Eve, because ancient Indo-European people celebrated New Year&#x27;s Eve in mid-February. This came from the early Latvian word &quot;meti&quot;, which meant turn of time, gauge. The original meaning is preserved in the word &quot;laikmets&quot; (era). Lithuanian word &quot;metai&quot; even now means &quot;year&quot;.

== Name in other languages ==

In Livonian populated regions and Riga, this celebration is known as Fastelavn (possibly originating from German &quot;Fastnacht&quot; - hunger night). Elsewhere, it is also called Lastavāgs, Aizgavēnis, Miesmetis, Buduļi Eve, and Pie Day. Lithuanians call it &quot;užgavėnės&quot;, while Estonians call it &quot;vastlapäev&quot;. To Russians and other Orthodox Christian peoples this festival is known as Maslenitsa (Russian: Масленица, Belarusian: масьленіца, Ukrainian: масниця).

Elsewhere in Europe and America, this festival coincides with the carnival time and referred to as Shrove Tuesday (French: &quot;Mardi Gras&quot;, German: &quot;Fastnachtsdienstag&quot;, Italian: &quot;Martedì grasso&quot;, English: &quot;Shrove Tuesday&quot; ) or &quot;Pancake Day&quot;. In Latin countries, it is called &quot;carnival&quot;, &quot;carnaval&quot; or &quot;meat balls&quot;, and it is the holiday of overeating, after which comes Lent. It is also has a connection with Roman Empire&#x27;s time to celebrate traditions of &quot;April Fools&#x27; Day&quot; on April 1. During it happens a mask parade (&quot;masquerade&quot;), all sorts of performances, and immoderate blowout and drinking. To bid a farewell to Winter, they burned a year-old allegorical serpent or dragon, straw dolls, and logs, whose ashes are spread across the land so that the New Year would be fruitful.

== Holiday traditions ==
Meteņi is about people eating and drinking as much as they wanted. During this time pigs were slaughtered, so the traditional holiday dishes were pig&#x27;s head and fritters. Parents threw gifts to their children from above the room, as if Laima threw her gifts from above the heaven. As with every winter holiday, ķekatas were traveling the country and paid visits to people. There is a belief that the longer Meteņi is celebrated, the better the harvest is expected following summer. The Solstice bonfire is burned while performing rituals of tying a witch&#x27;s tongue and donations. The campfire is used to burn last summer&#x27;s Jāņi festive wreaths. The straw is often burned and in some places, the straws are handmade into characters, which is primarily removed from hills and then burned to drive winter away.

== See also ==
* Užgavėnės
* Maslenitsa

== References ==
== External links ==
* Latvian dainas about Meteņi
* Latvian traditional seasonal rhythms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5196669" start="0" end="6" title="Meteņi" label="Meteņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196669" start="13" end="20" title="Meteņi" label="Metenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="35" end="42" title="Latvia" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="43" end="49" title="spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="80" end="93" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="116" end="120" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544141" start="190" end="200" title="Lieldienas" label="Lieldienas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="277" end="296" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q690126" start="648" end="656" title="Livonians" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975890" start="714" end="723" title="Fastelavn" label="Fastelavn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="885" end="896" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864742" start="911" end="920" title="užgavėnės" label="užgavėnės"/>
<link wikidata="Q173302" start="934" end="943" title="Estonians" label="Estonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="979" end="987" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="998" end="1016" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q913575" start="1051" end="1061" title="Maslenitsa" label="Maslenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1063" end="1070" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="1083" end="1093" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="1107" end="1116" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1244" end="1250" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1276" end="1282" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1316" end="1323" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1353" end="1360" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1616" end="1628" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80949" start="1674" end="1695" title="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day" label="April Fools&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="2131" end="2135" title="domestic pig" label="pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543737" start="2288" end="2293" title="Laima" label="Laima"/>
<link wikidata="Q117801803" start="2363" end="2370" title="ķekatas" label="ķekatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672817" start="2684" end="2688" title="Jāņi" label="Jāņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864742" start="2887" end="2896" title="Užgavėnės" label="Užgavėnės"/>
<link wikidata="Q913575" start="2899" end="2909" title="Maslenitsa" label="Maslenitsa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89622" wikidata="Q1581438" url="?curid=89622" title="She Bop">
<text>&quot;She Bop&quot; is a song by American singer-songwriter Cyndi Lauper, written by Lauper, Stephen Broughton Lunt, Gary Corbett, and Rick Chertoff, and produced by the lattermost. It was released on July 2, 1984, via Portrait Records as the third single from her debut studio album &quot;She&#x27;s So Unusual&quot; (1983). Lyrically, the song talks about the subject of female masturbation, which caused controversy upon its release at the time.

One of Lauper&#x27;s most successful singles, &quot;She Bop&quot; peaked within the top ten of the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, reaching number three in September 1984. The track peaked within the top ten of Australia and New Zealand, reached the top twenty of the European Hot 100 Singles chart, and topped the Israeli Singles Chart. Due to a lack of promotion, the track stalled at number 46 in the United Kingdom. The music video for the track, which utilized animated segments and multiple visual effects, would receive a nomination at the 1985 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Female Video. Lauper would re-record a quieter version of the song for her 2005 studio album &quot;The Body Acoustic&quot;.

== Recording and composition ==
&quot;She Bop&quot; moves at a tempo of 137 beats per minute. The song was recorded at Record Plant Studios in New York City and was produced by Rick Chertoff. Lauper said she recorded the song naked in an interview with &quot;The Howard Stern Show&quot;.

=== Lyrical content ===
The track is an ode to masturbation. It was included on the Parents Music Resource Center&#x27;s &quot;Filthy Fifteen&quot; list in 1984 due to it being considered &quot;profane or sexually explicit&quot;; this led to the creation of the Parental Advisory sticker. Lauper has stated that finding a copy of gay men&#x27;s magazine &quot;Blueboy&quot; lying around in the recording studio provided the impetus for writing &quot;She Bop&quot;. The magazine is mentioned in the first verse.

==Reception==
&quot;Cash Box&quot; said that &quot;with characteristic zaniness, Lauper takes a be-bop back beat and sparks it with an inspired vocal that pops and chirps with rhythmic intensity.&quot;

==Chart performance==
&quot;She Bop&quot; was released on July 2, 1984. It debuted on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 at No. 52 in the issue dated July 21, 1984, and spent a total of 18 weeks on the chart, reaching a peak position of No. 3 in the issue dated September 8, 1984. It was the third single from Lauper&#x27;s debut album to make the top 10 of the Hot 100. The single also reached number 10 on the Hot Dance/Club Play Songs chart the week of September 15, 1984, and placed at 34 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; year-end chart of 1984. On April 17, 1989, the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for the shipment of half a million copies across the United States.

==Music video==
The accompanying music video for &quot;She Bop&quot; was directed by Edd Griles. Mark Marek designed the characters in the animated sections of this music video, which were produced and directed by Jerry Lieberman, of NYC&#x27;s Jerry Lieberman Productions, and the cover of the US 12&quot; version. Wendi Richter and Lou Albano appear in the video, with Richter lip-synching the first line of the song.

The video expands upon the references to masturbation in the song&#x27;s lyrics, although not overtly. Among the images presented are an upright bottle shooting mayonnaise into the air, a sign at a gas station that displays &#x27;GIT OFF HERE&#x27;, gas pumps (labelled &#x27;good x&#x27;, &#x27;better xx&#x27;, &#x27;nirvana xxx&#x27;, &#x27;single&#x27;, and &#x27;multiple&#x27;), a large sign that reads &quot;Self Service&quot;, a dance sequence where Lauper portrays a blind person with a cane, and that same person winning a game of &quot;Masterbingo&quot;– both a reference to the myth that masturbation causes blindness. Most of the more blatant references appear during the animated instrumental sequence, although subtle images are seen throughout the live action scenes.

At the 1985 MTV Video Music Awards, the video was nominated for &quot;Best Female Video&quot;, but lost to Tina Turner&#x27;s &quot;What&#x27;s Love Got to Do with It&quot;.

British music magazine &quot;Melody Maker&quot; complimented the video, noting that it worked well because &quot;Lauper has a certain Boop-cheeked charm&quot; and also because of the &quot;superb bits of animation&quot; used in it.

==Formats and track listings==
* US/UK 7&quot; single
# &quot;She Bop&quot; – 3:47
# &quot;Witness&quot; – 3:40
* US 12&quot; single
# &quot;She Bop&quot; (Special Dance Mix) – 6:16
# &quot;She Bop&quot; (Instrumental) – 6:30
* UK 12&quot; single
# &quot;She Bop&quot; (Special Dance Mix) – 6:16
# &quot;She Bop&quot; (Instrumental) – 5:20 (stated)
# &quot;Witness&quot; – 3:40

==Official versions==
# Album version – 3:42
# Single version – 3:47 
# Special dance mix – 6:27 
# Instrumental – 5:21 
# Video mix – 4:35 
# Live at Le Zenith – 5:12 
# Live at Irvine Meadows – 5:20 
# The Body Acoustic Version – 4:16 
# Live – 3:46 
# Live at the Warehouse, Memphis – 4:04 
# Live – 3:59 

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==

==Awards and nominations==
Won
* 1985 – BMI Awards for Pop Award

Nominations
* 1985 – MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video

== Release history ==
==Cover versions==
* Howie Beno and Cruella DeVille recorded a version of the song for the 1999 movie Jawbreaker
* Hong Kong singer Aaron Kwok recorded a Cantonese and a Mandarin version of the song, both called &quot;絕對美麗&quot;.
* Greek band Matisse covered the song for their 2007 album, &quot;Toys Up&quot;.
* Chilean hard rock band Betty Black Boots covers this song in their presentations in the Chilean rock scene.
* In July 2008, J-pop singer Nana Kitade covered &quot;She Bop&quot; for the album &quot;We Love Cyndi – Tribute to Cyndi Lauper&quot;; another version of the cover was featured on her 2009 album &quot;Bondage&quot;.
* South Korean pop singer Wax covered the song. Her version of it is called &quot;Oppa&quot;, which means &quot;Brother&quot;.
* American heavy metal band GWAR performed a version of the song in October 2015 for &quot;The A.V. Club&quot; A.V. Undercover series, in a medley with The Ramones&#x27; &quot;Blitzkrieg Bop&quot;.
* Ex-Reuben frontman Jamie Lenman, covered the song for his 2019 album &quot;Shuffle&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Cyndi Lauper – She Bop – YouTube – Uploaded by CyndiLauperVEVO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1581438" start="6" end="13" title="She Bop" label="She Bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="60" end="72" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q442052" start="93" end="115" title="City Boy (band)" label="Stephen Broughton Lunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524898" start="117" end="129" title="Gary Corbett" label="Gary Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331292" start="135" end="148" title="Rick Chertoff" label="Rick Chertoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110777" start="219" end="235" title="Portrait Records" label="Portrait Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q263323" start="290" end="311" title="She&amp;#x27;s So Unusual" label="She&amp;#x27;s So Unusual"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="373" end="392" title="female masturbation" label="female masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="552" end="581" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q266102" start="720" end="744" title="European Hot 100 Singles" label="European Hot 100 Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q580720" start="767" end="788" title="Israel Broadcasting Authority" label="Israeli Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q532052" start="999" end="1026" title="1985 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1985 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091031" start="1031" end="1048" title="Best Female Video" label="Best Female Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q743732" start="1135" end="1152" title="The Body Acoustic" label="The Body Acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="1224" end="1229" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095593" start="1280" end="1300" title="Record Plant" label="Record Plant Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1304" end="1317" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331292" start="1338" end="1351" title="Rick Chertoff" label="Rick Chertoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="1420" end="1441" title="The Howard Stern Show" label="The Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="1497" end="1509" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591480" start="1534" end="1563" title="Parents Music Resource Center" label="Parents Music Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455930" start="1712" end="1729" title="Parental Advisory" label="Parental Advisory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930277" start="1810" end="1817" title="Blueboy (magazine)" label="Blueboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="1982" end="1990" title="Cash Box" label="Cash Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q105513" start="2058" end="2064" title="be-bop" label="be-bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q654693" start="2065" end="2074" title="back beat" label="back beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2255" end="2284" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="2576" end="2601" title="Hot Dance Club Songs" label="Hot Dance/Club Play Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="2752" end="2756" title="RIAA certification" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="2764" end="2805" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="2915" end="2926" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076153" start="3198" end="3211" title="Wendi Richter" label="Wendi Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q556873" start="3216" end="3226" title="Lou Albano" label="Lou Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q532052" start="4095" end="4122" title="1985 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1985 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q131814" start="4195" end="4206" title="Tina Turner" label="Tina Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300404" start="4220" end="4254" title="What&amp;#x27;s Love Got to Do with It (song)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Love Got to Do with It"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="4292" end="4304" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q583810" start="4397" end="4401" title="Betty Boop" label="Boop"/>
<link wikidata="Q891885" start="5301" end="5325" title="Broadcast Music, Incorporated" label="BMI Awards for Pop Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q532052" start="5341" end="5345" title="1985 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091031" start="5348" end="5391" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video" label="MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199877" start="5517" end="5527" title="Jawbreaker (film)" label="Jawbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16872" start="5547" end="5557" title="Aaron Kwok" label="Aaron Kwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787601" start="5658" end="5665" title="Matisse (Greek band)" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957853" start="5711" end="5718" title="Toys Up" label="Toys Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q131578" start="5852" end="5857" title="J-pop" label="J-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q182576" start="5865" end="5876" title="Nana Kitade" label="Nana Kitade"/>
<link wikidata="Q770559" start="6038" end="6045" title="Bondage (album)" label="Bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q624269" start="6079" end="6082" title="Wax (singer)" label="Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="6191" end="6202" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q507863" start="6208" end="6212" title="GWAR" label="GWAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="6271" end="6284" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="6332" end="6343" title="The Ramones" label="The Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332140" start="6356" end="6370" title="Blitzkrieg Bop" label="Blitzkrieg Bop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317400" start="6383" end="6389" title="Reuben (band)" label="Reuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147110" start="6399" end="6411" title="Jamie Lenman" label="Jamie Lenman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89626" wikidata="Q155417" url="?curid=89626" title="Astoria">
<text>Astoria may refer to:

== Arts, entertainment and media ==
=== Fictional entities ===
* Astoria, ex-wife of Muppet character Waldorf
* Astoria Greengrass, a &quot;Harry Potter&quot; character
* Astoria Rapunzel, in Italian animated series &quot;Regal Academy&quot;
* Astoria, in comic book &quot;Cerebus the Aardvark&quot;
* Astoria, a song by 40 Watt Sun

=== Music ===
* &quot;Astoria&quot; (Marianas Trench album) 2015
* &quot;Astoria&quot;, a 2006 album by The Shys
* &quot;&quot;, a 1990 album by Tony Bennett

===Other uses in arts, entertainment and media===
* &quot;Astoria&quot; (book), by Washington Irving, an 1836 account of the founding of Astoria, Oregon 
* &quot;Astoria&quot; (film), a 2000 American drama film
* &quot;Astoria&quot;, a play by Jura Soyfer (1912–1939)

== Buildings ==
* Astoria–Megler Bridge, a bridge that connects Megler, Washington to Astoria, Oregon
* Astoria (Amsterdam), a Jugendstil Office building in the Netherlands
* Astoria, Stockholm, a cinema in Sweden
* Astoria Theatre, Brighton, in England
* Hotel Astoria, the name of several hotels
* London Astoria, a former music venue in England
* Kaufman Astoria Studios, in New York City, United States

== Places ==
=== United States ===
* Astoria, Illinois
** Astoria Township, Fulton County, Illinois
* Astoria, Missouri
* Astoria, Queens, New York
** Astoria Boulevard
** Astoria Boulevard station
** Astoria Park
* Astoria, Oregon
** Fort Astoria, fur trading post of the Pacific Fur Company 
** Astoria Regional Airport
* Astoria, South Dakota
* Astoria Canyon, a submarine abyss near the mouth of the Columbia River

=== Other places ===
* Astoria, Budapest, Hungary
** Astoria metro station
* Astoria River, in Jasper National Park, Alberta, Canada

== Ships ==
* &quot;Astoria&quot;, later &quot;Saga Pearl II&quot;, a cruise ship 2002–2010
* MV &quot;Astoria&quot;, a passenger liner
* , the name of several U.S. Navy vessels

== Sports ==
* Astoria Bydgoszcz, or simply Astoria, a Polish multi-sports club
* FC Astoria Walldorf, a German football club 

==Other uses==
* Astoria (recording studio), a houseboat and recording studio
* Astoria Bank, a former New York bank
* Astoria Cinemas, a former Swedish cinema chain
* Cafe Astoria, a Western-style bakery in Taiwan
* WCF Data Services, formerly ADO.NET Data Services, codename &quot;Astoria&quot;

==See also==
* Astoria High School (disambiguation)
* Astoria Line (disambiguation)
* Astoria station (disambiguation)
* Waldorf-Astoria (disambiguation)
* &quot;Astoria Grande&quot;, a cruise ship from 2021
* Astor family
** John Jacob Astor (1763–1848), after whom many things called &quot;Astoria&quot; are named</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155417" start="0" end="7" title="Astoria" label="Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q714997" start="125" end="132" title="Statler and Waldorf" label="Waldorf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="191" title="List of Harry Potter characters#G" label="&amp;quot;Harry Potter&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="Q24941197" start="245" end="258" title="Regal Academy" label="Regal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162238" start="296" end="316" title="Cerebus the Aardvark" label="Cerebus the Aardvark"/>
<link wikidata="Q31839854" start="344" end="355" title="40 Watt Sun" label="40 Watt Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065427" start="373" end="416" title="Astoria (Marianas Trench album)" label="&amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot; (Marianas Trench album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764080" start="461" end="469" title="The Shys" label="The Shys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811094" start="568" end="594" title="Astoria (book)" label="&amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot; (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517208" start="672" end="698" title="Astoria (film)" label="&amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45267" start="760" end="771" title="Jura Soyfer" label="Jura Soyfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043471" start="803" end="824" title="Astoria–Megler Bridge" label="Astoria–Megler Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809125" start="849" end="867" title="Megler, Washington" label="Megler, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="871" end="886" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505167" start="889" end="908" title="Astoria (Amsterdam)" label="Astoria (Amsterdam)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811099" start="960" end="978" title="Astoria, Stockholm" label="Astoria, Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15192767" start="1001" end="1026" title="Astoria Theatre, Brighton" label="Astoria Theatre, Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123272" start="1041" end="1054" title="Hotel Astoria (disambiguation)" label="Hotel Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258938" start="1085" end="1099" title="London Astoria" label="London Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194285" start="1135" end="1158" title="Kaufman Astoria Studios" label="Kaufman Astoria Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073812" start="1230" end="1247" title="Astoria, Illinois" label="Astoria, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811125" start="1251" end="1292" title="Astoria Township, Fulton County, Illinois" label="Astoria Township, Fulton County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q28120819" start="1295" end="1312" title="Astoria, Missouri" label="Astoria, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q121765" start="1315" end="1330" title="Astoria, Queens" label="Astoria, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811095" start="1344" end="1361" title="Astoria Boulevard" label="Astoria Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339636" start="1365" end="1390" title="Astoria Boulevard station" label="Astoria Boulevard station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811114" start="1394" end="1406" title="Astoria Park" label="Astoria Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="1409" end="1424" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499810" start="1428" end="1440" title="Fort Astoria" label="Fort Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876108" start="1490" end="1514" title="Astoria Regional Airport" label="Astoria Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136609" start="1517" end="1538" title="Astoria, South Dakota" label="Astoria, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811098" start="1541" end="1555" title="Astoria Canyon" label="Astoria Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949709" start="1636" end="1653" title="Astoria, Budapest" label="Astoria, Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q779210" start="1666" end="1687" title="Astoria metro station" label="Astoria metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070660" start="1690" end="1703" title="Astoria River" label="Astoria River"/>
<link wikidata="Q896683" start="1794" end="1807" title="Saga Pearl II" label="Saga Pearl II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934435" start="1841" end="1863" title="MV Astoria" label="MV &amp;quot;Astoria&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q340038" start="1941" end="1958" title="Astoria Bydgoszcz" label="Astoria Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q325270" start="2008" end="2027" title="FC Astoria Walldorf" label="FC Astoria Walldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q750189" start="2071" end="2097" title="Astoria (recording studio)" label="Astoria (recording studio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811104" start="2134" end="2146" title="Astoria Bank" label="Astoria Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q10420899" start="2173" end="2188" title="Astoria Cinemas" label="Astoria Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017087" start="2222" end="2234" title="Cafe Astoria" label="Cafe Astoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q581651" start="2271" end="2288" title="WCF Data Services" label="WCF Data Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811107" start="2367" end="2403" title="Astoria High School (disambiguation)" label="Astoria High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811110" start="2406" end="2435" title="Astoria Line (disambiguation)" label="Astoria Line (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64624454" start="2438" end="2470" title="Astoria station (disambiguation)" label="Astoria station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961602" start="2473" end="2505" title="Waldorf-Astoria (disambiguation)" label="Waldorf-Astoria (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q548292" start="2514" end="2528" title="Astoria Grande" label="Astoria Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q661575" start="2562" end="2574" title="Astor family" label="Astor family"/>
<link wikidata="Q57423" start="2578" end="2594" title="John Jacob Astor" label="John Jacob Astor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89627" wikidata="Q391705" url="?curid=89627" title="Usini">
<text>Usini is a town and &quot;comune&quot; in the province of Sassari, Sardinia, Italy.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391705" start="0" end="5" title="Usini" label="Usini"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="26" end="32" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16272" start="46" end="65" title="province of Sassari" label="province of Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="67" end="75" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="77" end="82" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89628" wikidata="Q16851156" url="?curid=89628" title="Jurģi">
<text>Jurģi () or [[Ūsiņš]] Day is an ancient Latvian spring festival which coincides with the Christian Church&#x27;s day of feast in honor of Saint George on April 23. After the holidays, it signified the beginning of pieguļa and shepherding. According to a solar calendar, Jurģi day marks the midpoint between the spring solstice (Lieldienas) and summer solstice (Jāņi) and, according to a Julian calendar, it is celebrated on 6 May.

After the abolition of serfdom in 19th century, Jurģi was developed in the Latvian culture on the day of termination of the contract.

==Origin of the Christian holiday==

The Christian Church celebrates this day in honor of Saint George, one of the first martyrs of Emperor Diocletian. After the Crusades, a legend describing St. George battling on horseback with a dragon, a symbol of paganism and evil, was spreading in Europe. According to this legend, he was a rider, a soldier, a weapons blacksmith, and even a patron of robbers. In Estonia, St. George is a horse god, but in Russia, St. George is not only the patron of horses, but also the shepherd deity.

==Relationship with Ūsiņš==

In Latvian folk traditions, St. George or Jurģi is usually described as the patron of horses. It is believed that the Christian faith influenced Latvian folk traditions by placing St. George in Ūsiņš place. In one of Valmiera&#x27;s surveys on traditions, a remark was preserved. In the past, Jurģi Day was known as Ūsiņš Day.

==Jurģi Day&#x27;s traditions and beliefs==

When leaving the old place of residence, people did not say goodbyes, so they would not become unhappy in new place of residence. When moving to the new house on Jurģi day, the straw from the old site is taken along and scattered them in the barn, so that the leaving person would not get cursed with any kind of spell. Others also took along stones from the old house and threw them into a new home&#x27;s barn, to prevent themselves from any strange magic.

Since summer is approaching, Jurģi is also about preserving beauty and health, although it&#x27;s mostly focuses on how not to get burned. If it snows on Jurģi&#x27;s morning, people washed their mouth; otherwise - you do not need to wash it, it is in order to not get burned. Before Jurģi, you need to wash with frog tadpoles. Likewise was done with birch juice, before drinking it, use it to wash your mouth. People spitted on anthill, so that ants could shoot acid onto their face; believing it was a remedy from burn down and freckles. People also believed if before Jurģi you walk barefoot and whistle, it would protect you from the fever. When people heard roaring thunder for the first time before Jurģi, they took a stone from the ground, dragged it over the forehead 3 times and put it back. It was done so that the head wouldn&#x27;t hurt. Jurģi is considered to be one of the warmest days, and it was believed that God threw 3 cold stones on Jacob, Miķeļi and Mārtiņi days, but took them away once they got warm on Jurģi, Pentecost and Jāņi. Time fore-tellers watched, how many days had dew before Jurģi: that way they counted how many days is going to be spent on harvesting rye before Jacob&#x27;s day. Wind is checked on Jurģi morning; if it&#x27;s windy on Jurģi, then it meant that it will be windy all year. If it rains on Jurģi, it meant a wet summer, and believed that forest meadows will not have medical herbs because of that. If Jurģi falls on Friday, it meant a miserable year, if on Monday - it meant an unhappy summer. People did not weave on Jurģi day, believing there will be a lot of thunder if they did. They also believed that you should not make wishes or mad dogs will come to their homes. If the fields were light on fire, it meant their home will burn. On Jurģi morning, in front of the sun, people crossed over the field on foot to furrow, so that not a single burdock would grow up. On early Jurģi morning, an oven was built and light, for a smoke to dash out up the chimney. Whoever makes it first, that person will be happy.

==Jurģis Day&#x27;s meal==

Loaves of bread on Jurģi Day&#x27;s meal had to be circular, believing it would help to grow horses and cows. Eggs were eaten or rolled across the back of cows, believing that it would make cows grow plump.

Sauerkraut is often made, which plays an important role in both promoting harmony, and to make strangers stay as long as possible.

When entering the home of new residents on Jurģi, the housekeeper cooked cabbage and gave it to the guest to eat, so that visitors could stay longer at home. On the other hand, if fish was given to eat, it was followed by visitors rapidly leaving their house. On Jurģi day, when the old remnants were moving away, they cooked the cabbage, but when they arrived into a new home, they fried eggs, so that everyone could live in peace like chicks.

When it came to shepherd the cows for the first time, the hostess gave to the shepherd a lot of eggs. The amount of them depended on how many cows they were shepherding. Eggs were boiled, marked with a horse&#x27;s name, and were given to the person who owned a horse. They removed the eggshell from their eggs; if it sheds good, it meant the horse is fine, if not, then it meant it was better to give it away. During pieguļa pantāga is cooked - the traditional Jurģi food. It is poured into a stake or ax&#x27;s shaft hole and then blaming this hole with a large stone on top, or first bite it to make a small hole and back-filled it with soil, then pantāga is offered to Ūsiņš. Only after that you could eat it. It only takes boiled and raw eggs to cook pantāga. Pantāga were baked by men over a campfire.

==References==

==External links==
* Ancient Latvian solar calendar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16851156" start="0" end="5" title="Jurģi" label="Jurģi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851156" start="12" end="25" title="Jurģi" label="[[Ūsiņš]] Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540" start="40" end="47" title="Latvians" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="138" end="150" title="Saint George" label="Saint George"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995259" start="214" end="221" title="pieguļa" label="pieguļa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544141" start="328" end="338" title="Lieldienas" label="Lieldienas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6672817" start="361" end="365" title="Jāņi" label="Jāņi"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="455" end="462" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="707" end="717" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="729" end="737" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448660" start="5263" end="5270" title="pantāga" label="pantāga"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89629" wikidata="Q608079" url="?curid=89629" title="The Castle of Cagliostro">
<text>is a 1979 Japanese animated action adventure comedy film co-written and directed by Hayao Miyazaki. It is the second animated feature film based on the 1967–69 manga series &quot;Lupin III&quot; by Monkey Punch. The film was Miyazaki&#x27;s feature directorial debut after having previously worked as an animator for Toei Animation and Telecom Animation Film, and directing several animated television series, including &quot;Lupin III Part I&quot;.

&quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; follows gentleman thief Lupin III, who successfully robs a casino—only to find the money to be counterfeit. He heads to the tiny country of Cagliostro, the rumoured source of the bills, and attempts to save the runaway Princess Clarisse from Count Cagliostro&#x27;s men; the Count plans to marry Clarisse in order to cement his power and recover the fabled ancient treasure of Cagliostro, requiring Clarisse&#x27;s ancestral ring. Lupin enlists his associates, Jigen and Goemon, and sends his calling card to the Count to get Inspector Zenigata, his longtime nemesis, to the castle. After becoming trapped in the dungeon under the castle, Lupin and Zenigata form a pact to escape and foil the Count&#x27;s counterfeit operation and save Clarisse from her forced marriage to the Count.

The original theatrical release in Japan occurred on 15 December 1979, distributed by Toho. In North America, it was screened at various festivals in the early 1980s, while a heavily edited and shortened version became available in the form of an arcade LaserDisc video game, &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot; (1983), combined with footage from the previous &quot;Lupin III&quot; film, &quot;The Mystery of Mamo&quot; (1978). &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; eventually made its American theatrical debut on 3 April 1991, with the home release following in October 1992. This first theatrical dub was produced by Streamline Pictures and released on home video the following year. A new dubbed version was produced by Manga Entertainment in 2000 and has had several releases.

Despite initially underperforming at the box office, &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; has garnered high praise, with critics and historians noting the film&#x27;s influence on Miyazaki&#x27;s later works, becoming the most popular and well-regarded entry in the entire &quot;Lupin III&quot; franchise, and has since been recognised as a cult film. However, some have disapproved of its depiction of Lupin as a gallant hero instead of his original persona as a ruthless criminal. The film has served as a major influence on animators and directors worldwide, such as Pixar director John Lasseter and several Disney films, including titles of the Disney Renaissance. The Japanese computer animated film &quot;Lupin III: The First&quot; (2019) also has a plot structure loosely modelled after &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot;.

== Plot ==
In 1968, master thief Lupin III and his colleague, Daisuke Jigen, flee the Monte Carlo Casino with huge quantities of stolen money, but as they celebrate their latest heist, Lupin recognizes the bills as distinctively high-quality counterfeits. Deciding to seek out the source, they head to the Grand Duchy of Cagliostro, the alleged wellspring of the counterfeits.

Shortly after arriving, the two are passed by a young woman in a wedding gown driving a red car being chased by a group of armed thugs. They rescue the young woman, but in the ensuing mayhem Lupin is knocked unconscious and the woman gets captured, but she leaves him a signet ring. After seeing the ring, Lupin recognizes the woman as Clarisse, the princess of Cagliostro, who will soon be married to Count Cagliostro, the country&#x27;s regent against her will. The Count&#x27;s arranged marriage will cement his power and recover the fabled ancient treasure of Cagliostro, for which he needs both his and Clarisse&#x27;s ancestral rings.

The next night, a squad of assassins attack Lupin and Jigen at their inn, but they escape. Lupin leaves his calling card on the back of Jodot, the Count&#x27;s butler and chief assassin, announcing he is going to steal Clarisse. Lupin summons Goemon Ishikawa XIII and tips off his longtime pursuer, Inspector Koichi Zenigata, to his whereabouts to provide a distraction. Lupin disguises himself as Zenigata and makes his way into the castle, while the real Zenigata ends up trapped in the castle&#x27;s catacombs. After meeting his on-off lover Fujiko Mine posing as Clarisse&#x27;s lady-in-waiting, Lupin makes his way to Clarisse and returns her ring, vowing to help her to escape. Before he can act, the Count drops Lupin down a trapdoor into the catacombs. Lupin mocks the Count through the ring he gave to Clarisse—a fake containing a transmitter—and the Count sends three assassins to retrieve the real ring.

Lupin encounters Zenigata, and they form a pact to help each other escape. After overpowering the assassins, they escape into a room full of printing presses, the source of the counterfeits which Cagliostro has used throughout history to form a global shadow empire. Zenigata wants to collect evidence, but Lupin points out they must escape the castle first. They start a fire as a distraction and steal the Count&#x27;s autogyro, but as they attempt to rescue Clarisse, Lupin is seriously wounded. Clarisse offers the ring to the Count in exchange for Lupin&#x27;s life, but after securing the ring, the Count&#x27;s attempt at betrayal is foiled when Fujiko&#x27;s actions allow her, Lupin, and Zenigata to flee. As Lupin recovers from his injuries, Zenigata tries convincing his superiors at Interpol to prosecute the Count for counterfeiting, but fearing political repercussions, they halt the investigation and remove him from the case. Lupin intends to stop the wedding and rescue the princess, revealing to his companions that ten years earlier she had saved his life during his unsuccessful first attempt to find the treasure of Cagliostro. Fujiko tips off Lupin regarding how to sneak into the castle, and forms a plan with Zenigata to publicly reveal the counterfeiting operation under the cover of pursuing Lupin.

The wedding with a drugged Clarisse appears to go as planned, until Lupin disrupts the ceremony and, despite the Count&#x27;s precautions, makes off with Clarisse and the Count&#x27;s rings. To expose the Count&#x27;s operations, Zenigata leads Fujiko, posing as a television reporter, to the Count&#x27;s counterfeiting facility. After the Count corners Lupin and Clarisse on the clock tower&#x27;s face, Lupin attempts to trade the rings for Clarisse&#x27;s life, but the Count betrays him, and Lupin and Clarisse fall into the castle&#x27;s lake. After using the rings on a secret mechanism built into the tower, the Count is crushed to death by the converging clock arms. Lupin and Clarisse watch as the mechanism drains the lake to reveal exquisite ancient Roman ruins—the true treasure of Cagliostro. Clarisse explains that she doesn&#x27;t want Lupin to go, even expressing her readiness to become a thief like him, but Lupin gently rejects her, and he and his friends bid farewell to Clarisse, now the rightful ruler of Cagliostro. With Zenigata pursuing them again (for the crime of &quot;stealing Clarisse&#x27;s heart&quot;) and Fujiko fleeing with the plates from the printing presses, Lupin and the gang leave Cagliostro.

== Voice cast ==

== Production ==

&quot;Lupin III&quot; began as a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Monkey Punch. The title character, Lupin III, was inspired by (and is claimed in the series to be the grandson of) Maurice Leblanc&#x27;s fictional character Arsène Lupin, a gallant and famous outlaw able to outsmart even Sherlock Holmes. Lupin III is a gentleman thief and announces his intentions to steal valuable objects by sending a calling card to the owners of the desired items. The manga&#x27;s popularity led to two anime series, titled &quot;Lupin III&quot; and &quot;Lupin III Part II&quot;. The first film, &quot;The Mystery of Mamo&quot;, was released on 16 December 1978. &quot;Cagliostro&quot; released a year later following the financial success of that film. This is marked as the first feature-length film to be directed by Miyazaki, who had previously co-directed episodes of the first Lupin anime series with Isao Takahata. The two directors along with Toshio Suzuki would give birth to Studio Ghibli in 1985. He was also a writer and director of two episodes in the second series under the pseudonym &quot;Telecom&quot;, both produced a year after &quot;Cagliostro&quot;. In works other than &quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot; and the series episodes directed by Miyazaki and Takahata, Lupin III is portrayed as a scheming and lecherous thief, sometimes supported by his former enemies Jigen and Goemon. Miyazaki&#x27;s film conflicts with the typical behaviour and personality of the characters, a change that has been described as Lupin &quot;growing up&quot;.

&quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot; marked Miyazaki&#x27;s debut as a theatrical movie director, but he also was a writer, a designer, and a storyboardist on the movie.
The production for the film began in May 1979 with the writing of the story and storyboarding for the film. Miyazaki began by drawing a bird&#x27;s eye view of the setting before creating the story to completion. After the first draft scenario was returned to Miyazaki without change, he began the storyboards. The story was divided into four parts, but after reaching the third part changes had to be made at the storyboard phase in order to not exceed the decided running time. Animation work began in July while the storyboards were only a quarter complete; Miyazaki had to complete them during the animation production. Production wrapped up at the end of November and the film&#x27;s premiere on 15 December 1979 was a short seven and a half months from the project&#x27;s undertaking, with only five months of production time.

The film draws upon many sources of inspiration that were important in the production of the film. McCarthy writes that a research trip was not specifically undertaken for the film, but says Miyazaki&#x27;s &quot;Heidi, Girl of the Alps&quot; sketchbooks were useful for the scenery. Miyazaki would cite &quot;Italian Mountain Cities and the Tiber Estuary&quot; from Kagoshima Publishing as influencing the production of the film. The film included elements that were seen in other Arsène Lupin works, including &quot;La Justice d&#x27;Arsène Lupin&quot; by Boileau-Narcejac, involving the discovery of a tremendous stash of forged franc notes with which World War I–era Germany had planned to destabilize the French economy. Maurice Leblanc&#x27;s &quot;The Green-eyed Lady&quot; also featured a secret treasure hidden at the bottom of a lake. The design of mechanisms with secret tunnels in the clock tower, and the adventure plotted around beauty is inspired from &quot;Ghost Tower&quot; by Edogawa Ranpo. The castle is visually influenced by that of the original 1952 unfinished release of &quot;The King and the Mockingbird&quot;. Greenberg writes, &quot;&quot;Cagliostro&quot; also borrowed many narrative and visual elements from Grimault&#x27;s film: the basic plotline of disrupting the wedding of an evil tyrant and a beautiful innocent girl, the tyrant&#x27;s luxuriously-decorated palace that is also full of traps, and a gang of henchmen serving the tyrant – both oversized goons and ninja-like assassins...&quot; The staff added personal touches to the film, the most iconic being Lupin&#x27;s car, the Fiat 500, was the car of head animator Yasuo Ōtsuka. Clarisse&#x27;s car in the chase scene is a Citroën 2CV, which was Miyazaki&#x27;s first car.

McCarthy describes the summery color palette of the film as matching the scenery and the characters, but notes the use of dark and light colours to emphasize the subplot of the dark and light sides of the Cagliostros. The film&#x27;s score was composed by series regular Yuji Ohno, and varies between jazz, romance and orchestral music. Notably, it includes a variation of Lupin III&#x27;s iconic TV theme. The music was performed by You &amp; The Explosion Band, who had previously worked on the second television series. The main vocal song &quot;Fire Treasure&quot; was performed by Bobby (aka Toshie Kihara) and saw release as an LP single. The first release of the soundtrack was &quot;Lupin the 3rd The Castle of Cagliostro Original Soundtrack BGM Collection&quot;, an album containing extended versions of select cues from the film. It was originally sold on vinyl and cassette tape in 1983, but later saw release on CD in 1985 with several additional prints runs. In 2003, the entire score was finally released on a newly commissioned album entitled &quot;Lupin the 3rd: The Castle of Cagliostro – Music File&quot; and also contained 13 unused cues.

&quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot;″s portrayal of the characters was changed to better identify with Miyazaki&#x27;s concept of a &quot;hero&quot; and to remove a sense of apathy in the story. This resulted in Lupin being a happy-go-lucky and upbeat thief who drives and lives out of a Fiat 500; a sharp contrast to the scheming and lecherous Lupin who drives expensive cars like the Mercedes-Benz SSK because it was &quot;Hitler&#x27;s favorite&quot;. The changes would also impact secondary characters like Jigen and Goemon, changing their serious and cold personalities into friendly and humorous; even the erotic elements involving the femme-fatale Fujiko were dropped.

Fred Patten, who worked at Streamline Pictures was involved in the English adaptation of the film and was involved in the choice of title for the English release,

The film had a production budget of or at the time, surpassing &quot;Space Battleship Yamato&quot; (1977) to become the most expensive anime film up until then. Its production budget record was later matched by Miyazaki&#x27;s &quot;&quot; (1986) and then surpassed by &quot;Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise&quot; (1987).

== Release ==
The film&#x27;s Japanese theatrical release was on 15 December 1979.

=== Box office ===
In Japan, the film grossed , equivalent to , in 1979. The MX4D release in 2017 grossed a further () in Japan. The film&#x27;s overseas screenings in 2007 and 2017 grossed $152,775 in Italy and South Korea, and $142,425 in the United States, adding up to at least grossed in Asia, Italy and the United States.

In terms of box office admissions, the film sold 900,000 tickets in Japan , 109,072 tickets in France and Italy, 58,000 tickets in the United States, and 1,729 tickets in South Korea, adding up to at least tickets sold worldwide.

=== English releases ===
In 1980, Tokyo Movie Shinsha began screen testing the film in North America and it was notably shown at the World Science Fiction Convention in Boston for a marketing survey. It was later screened at other festivals during the 1980s, including FILMEX 82 in Los Angeles. Despite resounding acclaim from the screenings, many of them were unsuccessful. According to Fred Patten, the primary reason was that, &quot;most people did not bother to come to it since it was &#x27;only&#x27; an animated-cartoon feature, not a &#x27;serious&#x27; live-action movie.&quot; A heavily edited and shortened version of the film eventually became available in North America in the form of an arcade laserdisc video game, &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot; (1983), which combined an English-dubbed version of the film&#x27;s footage with that of the previous Lupin film &quot;Mystery of Mamo&quot;.

The American theatrical debut was on 3 April 1991 in New York City by Carl Macek&#x27;s Streamline Pictures, with the home release following in October 1992. Due to copyright issues with the estate of Maurice Leblanc, the creator of the original Arsène Lupin, Lupin is referred to as &quot;Wolf&quot;. Inspector Koichi Zenigata is erroneously named &quot;Keibu Zenigata,&quot; likely due to a translation error (&quot;keibu&quot; being the Japanese title for a police inspector). The UK release followed on 10 June 1996 by Manga Video. Optimum Releasing re-released &quot;Cagliostro&quot; in the UK after Manga Entertainment lost its licence in the UK. The new DVD features an anamorphic widescreen print with the original Japanese audio track as well as the Streamline dub, both in stereo.

On 25 April 2000, Manga released the film on home video in the United States with a newly commissioned dub that adhered closer to the original script with the correct names restored. The DVD preserves the film in its original aspect ratio of 1.85:1 widescreen and is non-anamorphic. It additionally features remastered audio and picture, but contains no extras. The same company later released a new special edition DVD of &quot;Cagliostro&quot; on 29 August 2006. The disc is double-sided with the film on side A and the extras on side B. It includes a new digital transfer; Manga&#x27;s English dub in 2.0 and 5.1 surround plus Japanese, Spanish, and French language tracks in mono; the complete film in storyboard format, accompanied by Japanese audio with English subtitles; an original Japanese trailer; a sketch and still gallery; a 26-minute interview with animation director Yasuo Ōtsuka, and animated menus. The film is presented in 16:9 anamorphic widescreen; however, the opening credits have been heavily re-edited to remove the Japanese credits, instead using selected still-frames of scenes that appear without Japanese writing. The English-translated names are superimposed over these stills. This change was negatively received by fans of the film. Both DVD releases are out-of-print, with Manga no longer owning the U.S. film rights.

In December 2008, the film was released on Blu-ray in Japan. Its video format is MPEG-4 AVC and its digitally-remastered audio is improved over that of the DVD, but contains no English audio or subtitle options despite being in Region A format. Years later, a new HD digital remaster was produced and &quot;Cagliostro&quot; was given a limited theatrical re-release in Japan on 9 May 2014. The remaster was released both individually and as part of &quot;The Collected Works of Hayao Miyazaki&quot;, a box set containing all of Miyazaki&#x27;s movies. Both these newer releases were released by Studio Ghibli in conjunction with Disney. StudioCanal released a Blu-ray and DVD bundle of the film on 12 November 2012 in the UK. The StudioCanal release is of superior quality with its new high definition transfer, but the credits for the film are absent.

North American anime distributor Discotek Media announced on 26 March 2014 that they had licensed the film and planned to release it on DVD in 2014, with a Blu-ray release to follow at a then-unspecified future date. The DVD version was eventually delayed to 6 January 2015 and included the Streamline and Animaze/Manga dubs, a &quot;Family Friendly&quot; alternate version of the Animaze/Manga dub with reduced profanity, the original Japanese audio with newly translated English subtitles, an alternate subtitle option based on the subtitles used by TMS in their 1980 screenings of the film, a collection of alternate opening and closing sequences to the film from previous releases, translation notes, two trailers and a fan-made audio commentary by Reed Nelson. The Blu-ray was released on 23 June 2015 and featured the same extras in addition to another alternate subtitle option using a literal translation of the film&#x27;s screenplay, new interviews with Lupin&#x27;s English actors Bob Bergen and David Hayter, an introduction to the film by Hayter, translated past interviews from the French Blu-ray (featuring Yasuo Ōtsuka, Kazuhide Tomonaga and Monkey Punch), an optional storyboard viewing mode, a slideshow gallery of production and promotional art, and a text-based overview of the film&#x27;s production history. Plans to include an emulated port of &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot; as an extra feature for the Blu-ray were dropped when the original contracts for the game could not be found.

Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment would later release &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; in &quot;The Collected Works of Hayao Miyazaki&quot; blu-ray set which included a total of eleven films produced by Studio Ghibli, including &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot;, which released on November 17th, 2015. This release only features the Streamline dub and the Japanese audio with English subtitles; none of the extras from Discotek&#x27;s releases are included.

A 4K UHD remaster of the film by VAP was released in Japan on 24 July 2019. Alongside that release in the United States, Discotek Media released a 4K UHD version on 26 January 2021 with a new Japanese audio track in 7.1 surround sound and an improved mix of the Animaze/Manga dub.

== Reception ==
While the film was not initially a box-office success, it developed a cult following through numerous re-releases and was even voted as &quot;the best anime in history&quot; by the readers of &quot;Animage&quot; in November 2001. Following a July 1992 release by Streamline Pictures, Janet Maslin said she thought the film &quot;should fare nearly as well [as &quot;Akira&quot;] with animation fans of any age, provided they are unwavering in their devotion to the form and do not think 100 minutes is an awfully long time.&quot; According to Maslin, the film is an &quot;interestingly wild hybrid of visual styles and cultural references&quot; whose &quot;animation is weak when it comes to fluid body movements, but outstanding in its attention to detail.&quot; According to Marc Savlov of &quot;The Austin Chronicle&quot;, &quot;&quot;C of C&quot; refrains from the Technicolor ultra-violence that helped make films like &quot;Golgo 13&quot;, &quot;Akira&quot;, and &quot;Vampire Hunter D&quot; such audience favorites, and instead focuses on broad, almost slapstick humor and chaos to keep viewers riveted. Sometimes it works, and unfortunately, sometimes it doesn&#x27;t.&quot;

 According to Metacritic, which compiled 7 reviews and calculated an average rating of 72 out of 100, the film received &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;. Some fans maintain that it is not a &quot;true&quot; Lupin title, due to Miyazaki&#x27;s altering of the titular character into a bumbling hero, rather than his original ruthless criminal self. Monkey Punch, creator of &quot;Lupin III&quot;, called &quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot; an &quot;excellent&quot; film, but agreed Miyazaki&#x27;s vision of Lupin differs from his own.

The film received the Ōfuji Noburō Award from the 1979 Mainichi Film Concours. Cagliostro, the country and setting, is depicted in meticulous detail and unconstrained by limitations of architecture, geography and culture, which can be described as &quot;akogare no Paris&quot; (Paris of our dreams), which is a fantastical view of Europe through Eastern eyes. The use of unexpected and unique camera angles and attention to individual movement of the characters are distinctive signatures of Miyazaki&#x27;s style, including the opening heist scene which provides characterization and spirit to understanding the character of Lupin. The changes made to the portrayal of the cast, depicting a heroic and selfless Lupin, a friendly Jigen, funny Goemon, and un-sexualized Fujiko, were initially not well received by fans. Otaku USA&#x27;s Surat compared this shift to &quot;a James Bond movie where [James Bond] stayed at Motel 6 and his &#x27;Bond mobile&#x27; was a Toyota Camry!&quot;

The film was the best selling anime DVD in May 2001, and the third best selling in June. Both of Manga Entertainment&#x27;s releases of &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; received &quot;DVD Talk Collector Series&quot; recommendation status, the highest status given by the review website DVDtalk.com. In January 2001, the Japanese magazine &quot;Animage&quot; elected &quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot; the 9th best anime production of all time. Chris Beveridge of AnimeOnDVD.com gave the film a grade of &quot;A+&quot;, although he disliked Manga Entertainment&#x27;s use of PG-13 level language in the English dub. &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; placed in 5th place on Japan&#x27;s Agency for Cultural Affairs&#x27;s list of best anime. The film was named &quot;The Best Japanese Animated Film of All Time&quot; by Japanese film magazine Kinema Junpo in 2009. In 2020, CBR.com ranked &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; as the best Lupin movie.

=== Legacy ===

&quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; has been watched and appreciated by various people in the film industry, including Steven Spielberg. Several critics have noted similarities between &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; and the &quot;Indiana Jones&quot; films by Spielberg and George Lucas, particularly the first &quot;Indiana Jones&quot; film &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; (1981). These similarities include a rollicking adventure, humorous tone, similar overall action style, treasure hunting plot, a clever protagonist (Lupin and Indiana Jones) thrown into very difficult situations, overcoming obstacles with his wits, the use of gadgets, the help of several competent sidekicks, and a high-speed car chase down winding mountain roads. This has led to rumours, though unconfirmed, that the film may have influenced the &quot;Indiana Jones&quot; series of films due to these similarities. However, both the script and most of the filming for &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; was completed by early 1981, years before &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; first became available in English.

In 1983, TMS Entertainment and Stern Electronics wanted to capitalize on the success of animated laserdisc video games at the time. They released the arcade game, &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot;, which used footage from this film, along with the previous Lupin film &quot;Mystery of Mamo&quot;. Even though the films themselves weren&#x27;t available in North America at the time, the &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot; game was featured in an episode of the 1980s game show &quot;Starcade&quot;. The arcade game also made an appearance in &quot;The Goonies&quot; (1985).

The character of Clarisse has been cited as a potential ancestral example of moe character design.

&quot;Cagliostro&quot; deeply influenced Pixar co-founder John Lasseter, along with Miyazaki&#x27;s later films; in October 2014, Lasseter delivered a keynote address to the Tokyo International Film Festival describing how Miyazaki&#x27;s influence upon his own life and work began when he first saw a clip from &quot;Cagliostro&quot;.

Walt Disney Animation Studios&#x27; 1986 film &quot;The Great Mouse Detective&quot;, co-directed by John Musker and Ron Clements, paid homage to &quot;Cagliostro&quot; with the film&#x27;s climactic Big Ben sequence. The two-minute climax scene used computer-generated imagery (CGI), making it the first Disney film to extensively use computer animation, a fact that Disney used to promote the film during marketing. In turn, &quot;The Great Mouse Detective&quot; paved the way for the Disney Renaissance.

Another reference to the clock-tower fight is in &quot;The Clock King&quot; episode of &quot;&quot;. In the original video animation (OVA) &quot;Here Is Greenwood&quot;, students set a play where the scene of Lupin saving Clarisse on the clock tower is re-enacted.

Gary Trousdale, co-director of Disney&#x27;s &quot;&quot;, said that a scene at the end of &quot;Atlantis&quot;, where the waters recede from the sunken city, was directly inspired from the ending in &quot;Cagliostro&quot;. One of the sequence directors of &quot;The Simpsons Movie&quot; also mentioned &quot;Cagliostro&quot; as an influence; a brief shot where Bart Simpson rolls down the roof of the family house was inspired by Lupin running down the castle roof during his rescue attempt.

The 2019 film &quot;Lupin III: The First&quot; was inspired by &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot;. The director Takashi Yamazaki found the tone in &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; as the best portrayal for the 3D film. Yamazaki was profoundly moved by &quot;The Castle of Cagliostro&quot; ever since he saw the film on TV in the 1980s. The experience entrenched in himself the idea that Japan can make high-quality films. The moment influenced the direction for the current film. Therefore, the movie is constructed around the model of &quot;Cagliostro&quot; with many homages added. The ending&#x27;s emotional climax is similar to the climax in &quot;Cagliostro&quot;.

== See also ==
* Alessandro Cagliostro

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* 
* The Castle Of Cagliostro at the Lupin the Third Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="19" end="27" title="Anime" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="28" end="44" title="action adventure film" label="action adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="45" end="56" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="84" end="98" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210849" start="179" end="188" title="Lupin III (manga)" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370780" start="198" end="210" title="Monkey Punch" label="Monkey Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616757" start="241" end="266" title="List of directorial debuts" label="feature directorial debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q730179" start="317" end="331" title="Toei Animation" label="Toei Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11319473" start="336" end="358" title="Telecom Animation Film" label="Telecom Animation Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389984" start="426" end="442" title="Lupin the Third Part I" label="Lupin III Part I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358328" start="496" end="511" title="gentleman thief" label="gentleman thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294962" start="512" end="521" title="Lupin III (character)" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="583" end="594" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q771880" start="949" end="954" title="Daisuke Jigen" label="Jigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772786" start="959" end="965" title="Goemon Ishikawa XIII" label="Goemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454316" start="1014" end="1032" title="Inspector Zenigata" label="Inspector Zenigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="1360" end="1364" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="1528" end="1548" title="LaserDisc video game" label="LaserDisc video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680674" start="1556" end="1568" title="Cliff Hanger (video game)" label="Cliff Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756220" start="1657" end="1676" title="The Mystery of Mamo" label="The Mystery of Mamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="1882" end="1901" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902765" start="1986" end="2005" title="Manga Entertainment" label="Manga Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24988397" start="2225" end="2252" title="List of works by Hayao Miyazaki" label="Miyazaki&amp;#x27;s later works"/>
<link wikidata="Q876182" start="2324" end="2333" title="Lupin the Third" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="2386" end="2395" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="2615" end="2620" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q269214" start="2630" end="2643" title="John Lasseter" label="John Lasseter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="2656" end="2662" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q906232" start="2694" end="2712" title="Disney Renaissance" label="Disney Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="2727" end="2744" title="computer animated" label="computer animated"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2756" end="2776" title="Lupin III: The First" label="Lupin III: The First"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294962" start="2911" end="2920" title="Lupin III (character)" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q771880" start="2940" end="2953" title="Daisuke Jigen" label="Daisuke Jigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779905" start="2964" end="2982" title="Monte Carlo Casino" label="Monte Carlo Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q165116" start="3184" end="3195" title="Grand Duchy" label="Grand Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3526" end="3537" title="Seal (emblem)#Signet rings" label="signet ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q231632" start="3702" end="3718" title="Forced marriage" label="against her will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="3737" end="3754" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772786" start="4141" end="4161" title="Goemon Ishikawa XIII" label="Goemon Ishikawa XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454316" start="4207" end="4222" title="Koichi Zenigata" label="Koichi Zenigata"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="4401" end="4410" title="catacombs" label="catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754109" start="4443" end="4454" title="Fujiko Mine" label="Fujiko Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715222" start="4481" end="4496" title="lady-in-waiting" label="lady-in-waiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="5066" end="5079" title="Soft power" label="shadow empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208708" start="5235" end="5243" title="autogyro" label="autogyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="5609" end="5617" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6159" end="6166" title="Sedative#Disinhibition and crime" label="drugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6894" end="6907" title="ancient Roman" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="7304" end="7310" title="printing plate" label="plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q876182" start="7418" end="7427" title="Lupin III" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370780" start="7494" end="7506" title="Monkey Punch" label="Monkey Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294962" start="7529" end="7538" title="Lupin III (character)" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q314993" start="7609" end="7624" title="Maurice Leblanc" label="Maurice Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q461606" start="7652" end="7664" title="Arsène Lupin" label="Arsène Lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="7716" end="7731" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358328" start="7748" end="7763" title="gentleman thief" label="gentleman thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="7920" end="7925" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389984" start="7947" end="7956" title="Lupin The Third Part I" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158788" start="7973" end="7990" title="Lupin III Part II" label="Lupin III Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756220" start="8020" end="8039" title="The Mystery of Mamo" label="The Mystery of Mamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="8325" end="8338" title="Isao Takahata" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q713511" start="8369" end="8382" title="Toshio Suzuki (producer)" label="Toshio Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="8403" end="8416" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q715718" start="10192" end="10215" title="Heidi, Girl of the Alps" label="Heidi, Girl of the Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662892" start="10537" end="10553" title="Boileau-Narcejac" label="Boileau-Narcejac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667316" start="10634" end="10657" title="History of Germany during World War I" label="World War I–era Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q314993" start="10705" end="10720" title="Maurice Leblanc" label="Maurice Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q347412" start="10973" end="10986" title="Edogawa Ranpo" label="Edogawa Ranpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q934970" start="11079" end="11107" title="The King and the Mockingbird" label="The King and the Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q467767" start="11596" end="11604" title="Fiat 500" label="Fiat 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320151" start="11635" end="11647" title="Yasuo Ōtsuka" label="Yasuo Ōtsuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q326015" start="11693" end="11704" title="Citroën 2CV" label="Citroën 2CV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442609" start="12015" end="12024" title="Yuji Ohno" label="Yuji Ohno"/>
<link wikidata="Q56315914" start="13285" end="13302" title="Mercedes-Benz SSK" label="Mercedes-Benz SSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="13324" end="13330" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q222573" start="13541" end="13553" title="femme-fatale" label="femme-fatale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496045" start="13576" end="13587" title="Fred Patten" label="Fred Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="13603" end="13622" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693349" start="13809" end="13832" title="Space Battleship Yamato (1977 film)" label="Space Battleship Yamato"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13860" end="13885" title="List of most expensive animated films#Anime" label="most expensive anime film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14015" end="14057" title="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise" label="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146262" start="14234" end="14238" title="MX4D" label="MX4D"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="14850" end="14882" title="Worldcon" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496045" start="15105" end="15116" title="Fred Patten" label="Fred Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="15425" end="15445" title="laserdisc video game" label="laserdisc video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680674" start="15453" end="15465" title="Cliff Hanger (video game)" label="Cliff Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756220" start="15591" end="15606" title="The Mystery of Mamo" label="Mystery of Mamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q305362" start="15685" end="15695" title="Carl Macek" label="Carl Macek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="15703" end="15722" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q314993" start="15816" end="15831" title="Maurice Leblanc" label="Maurice Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q461606" start="15861" end="15873" title="Arsène Lupin" label="Arsène Lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902765" start="16138" end="16149" title="Manga Entertainment" label="Manga Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628112" start="16151" end="16168" title="StudioCanal UK" label="Optimum Releasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320151" start="17290" end="17302" title="Yasuo Ōtsuka" label="Yasuo Ōtsuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="17802" end="17809" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="18354" end="18367" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628112" start="18396" end="18407" title="StudioCanal UK" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281717" start="18646" end="18660" title="Discotek Media" label="Discotek Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q773512" start="19605" end="19615" title="Bob Bergen" label="Bob Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q711792" start="19620" end="19632" title="David Hayter" label="David Hayter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320151" start="19735" end="19747" title="Yasuo Ōtsuka" label="Yasuo Ōtsuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804150" start="19749" end="19766" title="Kazuhide Tomonaga" label="Kazuhide Tomonaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370780" start="19771" end="19783" title="Monkey Punch" label="Monkey Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="19963" end="19971" title="Video game console emulator" label="emulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="19972" end="19976" title="Video game porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680674" start="19986" end="19998" title="Cliff Hanger (video game)" label="Cliff Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="20116" end="20154" title="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment" label="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="20328" end="20341" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="20589" end="20595" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K UHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723301" start="20620" end="20623" title="VAP (company)" label="VAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818198" start="20803" end="20821" title="7.1 surround sound" label="7.1 surround sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="20955" end="20969" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="21083" end="21090" title="Animage" label="Animage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="21148" end="21167" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="21169" end="21181" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="21251" end="21256" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="21683" end="21703" title="The Austin Chronicle" label="The Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21815" end="21823" title="Golgo 13: The Professional" label="Golgo 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416674" start="21860" end="21876" title="Vampire Hunter D (1985 film)" label="Vampire Hunter D"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="21945" end="21954" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="22083" end="22093" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370780" start="22424" end="22436" title="Monkey Punch" label="Monkey Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q384857" start="22631" end="22649" title="Ōfuji Noburō Award" label="Ōfuji Noburō Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340271" start="22664" end="22686" title="Mainichi Film Concours" label="Mainichi Film Concours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108407" start="23428" end="23437" title="Otaku USA" label="Otaku USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="23482" end="23492" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188884" start="23528" end="23535" title="Motel 6" label="Motel 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q500035" start="23574" end="23586" title="Toyota Camry" label="Toyota Camry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902765" start="23692" end="23711" title="Manga Entertainment" label="Manga Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670005" start="23885" end="23896" title="DVD Talk" label="DVDtalk.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="23943" end="23950" title="Animage" label="Animage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902765" start="24137" end="24156" title="Manga Entertainment" label="Manga Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052227" start="24441" end="24453" title="Kinema Junpo" label="Kinema Junpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="24472" end="24479" title="CBR.com" label="CBR.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="24686" end="24702" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="24803" end="24816" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="24846" end="24858" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="24920" end="24943" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12281707" start="25054" end="25070" title="treasure hunting" label="treasure hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q148659" start="25109" end="25122" title="Indiana Jones (character)" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054807" start="25681" end="25698" title="TMS Entertainment" label="TMS Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498776" start="25703" end="25720" title="Stern (game company)" label="Stern Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="25769" end="25790" title="laserdisc video games" label="laserdisc video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="25822" end="25833" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680674" start="25841" end="25853" title="Cliff Hanger (video game)" label="Cliff Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756220" start="25937" end="25952" title="Mystery of Mamo" label="Mystery of Mamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312015" start="26136" end="26144" title="Starcade" label="Starcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="26201" end="26212" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q497942" start="26305" end="26308" title="Moe (slang)" label="moe"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="26369" end="26374" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q269214" start="26386" end="26399" title="John Lasseter" label="John Lasseter"/>
<link wikidata="Q960189" start="26479" end="26486" title="keynote" label="keynote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043431" start="26502" end="26535" title="Tokyo International Film Festival" label="Tokyo International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="26665" end="26694" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney Animation Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q334132" start="26717" end="26742" title="The Great Mouse Detective" label="The Great Mouse Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q735440" start="26765" end="26776" title="John Musker" label="John Musker"/>
<link wikidata="Q930209" start="26781" end="26793" title="Ron Clements" label="Ron Clements"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="26864" end="26871" title="Big Ben" label="Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="26915" end="26941" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="27000" end="27018" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q906232" start="27151" end="27169" title="Disney Renaissance" label="Disney Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="27280" end="27304" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388243" start="27317" end="27334" title="Here Is Greenwood" label="Here Is Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152051" start="27438" end="27452" title="Gary Trousdale" label="Gary Trousdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q182254" start="27701" end="27719" title="The Simpsons Movie" label="The Simpsons Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="27800" end="27812" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27952" end="27972" title="Lupin III: The First" label="Lupin III: The First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052320" start="28046" end="28062" title="Takashi Yamazaki" label="Takashi Yamazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q312332" start="28627" end="28648" title="Alessandro Cagliostro" label="Alessandro Cagliostro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89631" wikidata="Q636043" url="?curid=89631" title="The Goonies">
<text>The Goonies is a 1985 American adventure comedy film directed and co-produced by Richard Donner from a screenplay by Chris Columbus based on a story by Steven Spielberg and starring Sean Astin, Josh Brolin, Jeff Cohen, Corey Feldman, Kerri Green, Martha Plimpton and Ke Huy Quan with supporting roles done by John Matuszak, Robert Davi, Joe Pantoliano, and Anne Ramsey. In the film, a group of kids who live in the &quot;Goon Docks&quot; neighborhood of Astoria, Oregon, attempt to save their homes from foreclosure and in doing so they discover an old treasure map that takes them on an adventure to unearth the long-lost fortune of One-Eyed Willy, a legendary 17th-century pirate, while being pursued by a family of criminals who are after the treasure as well.

The film was produced by Spielberg&#x27;s Amblin Entertainment and released by Warner Bros. theatrically on June 7, 1985, in the United States. The film grossed $125 million worldwide on a budget of $19 million. Critics reviewed the film positively and it has since become a cult film. In 2017, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.

On February 14, 2025, a sequel was confirmed to be in the works with Potsy Ponciroli writing the script along with Steven Spielberg producing.

==Plot==

Facing foreclosure of their homes in the &quot;Goon Docks&quot; area of Astoria, Oregon to an expanding country club, a group of kids who call themselves &quot;the Goonies&quot;—Mike &quot;Mikey&quot; Walsh, Richard &quot;Data&quot; Wang, Clark &quot;Mouth&quot; Devereaux, and Lawrence &quot;Chunk&quot; Cohen—gather for a final weekend together. Rummaging through Mikey&#x27;s attic, they come across a 1632 doubloon and an old treasure map purporting to lead to the treasure of legendary pirate &quot;One-Eyed Willy&quot;, believed to be located somewhere nearby and considered by Mikey to be the original Goonie.

Seeing the treasure as their last chance to save their homes, the kids overpower and bind Mikey&#x27;s older brother, Brandon &quot;Brand&quot; Walsh, to get past him and make their way to an abandoned restaurant on the coast that coincides with the map. Brand soon follows alongside Andrea &quot;Andy&quot; Carmichael, a cheerleader with a crush on him; and her best friend Stephanie &quot;Stef&quot; Steinbrenner, a tomboy.

The group soon discover that the derelict restaurant is a hideout of the Fratelli crime family: Francis, Jake, and their mother. The Goonies find a tunnel in the basement and follow it, but Chunk leaves to alert the police after being locked in the freezer. Chunk flags down a nearby car to go to the sheriff&#x27;s station and it turns out to be the Fratellis, who imprison him alongside their hulking and deformed younger brother Sloth. The Fratellis interrogate Chunk until he reveals where the Goonies have gone and begin pursuit. Chunk is left behind with Sloth, whom he befriends. After Sloth frees them both, Chunk calls the sheriff, who thinks it is another one of his tall tales. Chunk and Sloth follow the trail of the Fratellis.

The Goonies evade several deadly booby traps along the tunnels, while barely staying ahead of the Fratellis. They finally reach the grotto where Willy&#x27;s pirate ship, the &quot;Inferno&quot;, is anchored. The group uncover the ship filled with treasure, and they start filling their pockets, but Mikey warns them not to take any on a set of scales in front of Willy&#x27;s skeleton, considering that to be their tribute to him. As the Goonies are plotting their escape, the Fratellis appear and strip them of their haul. The Fratellis start to bind the Goonies&#x27; hands and make them walk the plank until Chunk and Sloth arrive and distract the Fratellis long enough for the Goonies to jump overboard and swim to safety. Brand saves Andy from drowning and they kiss. The Fratellis proceed to grab all the treasure they can, including those on Willy&#x27;s scales, which triggers one last booby trap, causing the grotto to cave in. With Sloth&#x27;s help, the Goonies and Fratellis barely escape.

The groups emerge on Astoria&#x27;s beach, where the Goonies reunite with their families and the Fratellis are arrested by the police. The Goonies prevent Sloth&#x27;s arrest, and Chunk invites Sloth to live with him, which he accepts. Just as Mikey&#x27;s father is about to sign the foreclosure papers, the Walshes&#x27; housekeeper, Rosalita, discovers that Mikey&#x27;s marble bag is filled with some of the ship&#x27;s jewels that had not been seized by the Fratellis. Mikey&#x27;s father triumphantly rips up the papers, declaring that they have enough money to negate the foreclosure. As the Goonies are recounting their adventure to the dumbfounded police and press, everyone&#x27;s attention is drawn to the &quot;Inferno&quot;, having broken free of the grotto, sailing off majestically on its own in the distance.

==Cast==

* Sean Astin as Michael &quot;Mikey&quot; Walsh, the asthmatic leader of the Goonies
* Josh Brolin as Brandon &quot;Brand&quot; Walsh, a high-school athlete and Mikey&#x27;s older brother 
* Jeff Cohen as Lawrence &quot;Chunk&quot; Cohen, a clumsy and gluttonous member of the Goonies and habitual fabulist
* Corey Feldman as Clark &quot;Mouth&quot; Devereaux, a member of the Goonies nicknamed for his cheeky tongue and Mikey&#x27;s best friend
* Ke Huy Quan as Richard &quot;Data&quot; Wang, a member of the Goonies who is a James Bond fanatic and amateur gadgeteer
* Kerri Green as Andrea Theresa &quot;Andy&quot; Carmichael, a high-school cheerleader and Brand&#x27;s love interest
* Martha Plimpton as Stephanie &quot;Stef&quot; Steinbrenner, a snarky tomboy and Andy&#x27;s best friend
* John Matuszak as Lotney &quot;Sloth&quot; Fratelli, the deformed and much-abused, but child-hearted son of Mama Fratelli whom Chunk befriends
* Robert Davi as Jake Fratelli, Mama Fratelli&#x27;s counterfeiter son
* Joe Pantoliano as Francis Fratelli, Mama Fratelli&#x27;s favorite son
* Anne Ramsey as Mama Fratelli, the Fratellis&#x27; matriarch
* Mary Ellen Trainor as Irene Walsh, Mikey and Brand&#x27;s mother
* Keith Walker as Irving Walsh, Mikey and Brand&#x27;s father and a curator at the local history museum
* Lupe Ontiveros as Rosalita, the Walsh family&#x27;s Mexican housekeeper who can only speak Spanish
* Curt Hanson as Elgin Perkins, Troy&#x27;s millionaire father and proprietor of Astoria Country Club who is behind the foreclosures at the &quot;Goon Docks&quot;
* Steve Antin as Troy Perkins, the spoiled son of Elgin Perkins who is Brand&#x27;s rival for Andy&#x27;s attention
* Paul Tuerpe as the Sheriff
* George Robotham as a prison guard who gets fooled by Jake&#x27;s feigned suicide
* Michael Paul Chan as Data&#x27;s approving father

Director Richard Donner makes an uncredited cameo appearance as a sheriff&#x27;s deputy. The film&#x27;s cinematographer Nick McLean also has a cameo as Mouth&#x27;s father. The part of the dead FBI agent was performed by stuntman Ted Grossman.

== Production ==


Principal photography on &quot;The Goonies&quot; began on October 22, 1984, and lasted five months. An additional six weeks of audio dubbing and recording were used. The shooting script was lengthy, at more than 120 pages, to which several sequences were eventually cut from the final theatrical version. During the film&#x27;s &quot;dénouement&quot;, mention is made of an octopus, which refers to a scene that was excised from the final cut.

In the documentary &quot;The Making of The Goonies&quot;, Richard Donner noted both the difficulties and pleasures of working with so many child actors. He praised them for their energy and excitement, but said that they were also unruly when brought together. As a result, the documentary frequently showed him coaching the actors and revealing some techniques he used to create realistic performances. One of these tricks involved One-Eyed Willy&#x27;s pirate ship, which was actually a full-sized replica of a pirate ship created under the direction of production designer J. Michael Riva. Donner restricted the actors from seeing the ship until they filmed the scene wherein it is revealed to their characters; the characters&#x27; first glimpse of the ship was also the actors&#x27; first view of it, bringing about a more realistic performance. However, that particular scene in the final cut was actually the second take, due to the cast feeling so overwhelmed at first sight that the scene had to be reshot. The entire set was scrapped after shooting because they could not find anyone who wanted it.

In his book &quot;There and Back Again&quot;, Sean Astin claimed that Donner and Spielberg were &quot;like co-directors&quot; on the film as he compared and contrasted their styles when directing scenes.

Some of the on-location filming was done in Astoria. The interior and exterior of the old Clatsop County Jail features as the holding place of Jake Fratelli at the start of the film. (The building was later converted into the Oregon Film Museum, which opened on the 25th anniversary of &quot;The Goonies&quot; with memorabilia from this and other local films.) The museum where Mikey&#x27;s father works is, in reality, the Captain George Flavel House Museum. The Walsh family home is a real home on the eastern end of the town, at 368 38th Street. The road leading to the home was closed to tours in 2015. The scenes along the coast were filmed in Oregon, but they were a considerable distance from Astoria. The Goonies bicycle to Ecola State Park (in reality, in Cannon Beach, over south of Astoria) and then find the starting location of the map using Haystack Rock as a guide. Underground scenes were filmed at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank, California, including the cavernous set where the Goonies find One-Eyed Willy&#x27;s ship, which was in Stage 16, one of the largest sound stages in the United States. The final scene was shot at Goat Rock State Beach in Sonoma County, California.

The film also marked Wes Takahashi&#x27;s first major motion picture as an animation supervisor for Industrial Light &amp; Magic.

== Music and soundtrack ==

&quot;The Goonies: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack&quot; features music by Cyndi Lauper, REO Speedwagon, The Bangles, and others. The cast members (except Kerri Green) appeared alongside professional wrestlers &quot;Rowdy&quot; Roddy Piper, The Iron Sheik, Nikolai Volkoff, The Fabulous Moolah, and &quot;Captain&quot; Lou Albano (who previously appeared in Lauper&#x27;s &quot;Girls Just Wanna Have Fun&quot; video) in the 12-minute &quot;The Goonies &#x27;R&#x27; Good Enough&quot; music video. Steven Spielberg makes a cameo appearance. Lauper also has a cameo in the film, performing the song on TV, although the song was not completed until after filming.

Dave Grusin&#x27;s score was unavailable for 25 years. The main theme, &quot;Fratelli Chase&quot;, has been used in numerous trailers, such as &quot;Innerspace&quot;, &quot;Scrooged&quot;, and &quot;Guarding Tess&quot;, and was re-recorded by Grusin and the London Symphony Orchestra for the album &quot;Cinemagic&quot;. The score makes liberal use of the Max Steiner-composed theme from &quot;Adventures of Don Juan&quot;. Soundtrack label Varèse Sarabande released the score on CD in March 2010 in a limited edition of 5,000 copies. The company reissued the score on CD as a wide release in June 2019, but with the previous CD&#x27;s four bonus tracks omitted.

== Release ==
Warner Bros. released the film in 1,705 cinemas across the United States on June 7, 1985.

=== Home media ===
&quot;The Goonies&quot; was first released on VHS and Betamax video in the United States in March 1986 and the LaserDisc and CED versions also debuted that year. Warner Home Video released a theatrical widescreen laserdisc on January 29, 1992. Warner Home Video released &quot;The Goonies&quot; in widescreen on Region 1 DVD on August 21, 2001. Warner Home Video released &quot;The Goonies&quot; on Blu-ray Disc in October 2008 in Europe and November 2010 in North America. The video is in 1080p high-definition VC-1 and accompanied by a Dolby TrueHD soundtrack. Warner released the film on Ultra HD Blu-ray in September 2020 in North America.

== Reception ==
=== Critical response ===
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 77% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 64 reviews, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The critical consensus: &quot;&quot;The Goonies&quot; is an energetic, sometimes noisy mix of Spielbergian sentiment and fun-house tricks that will appeal to kids and nostalgic adults alike.&quot; At Metacritic it has a rating score of 62 based on 13 reviews, indicating &quot;generally favorable reviews&quot;.

Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four and called the film &quot;a smooth mixture of the usual ingredients from Steven Spielberg action movies, made special because of the high-energy performances of the kids who have the adventures.&quot; Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; also awarded three stars out of four and wrote that after a dull start &quot;some kind of minor movie miracle takes place, and &quot;The Goonies&quot; gets its act together as the kids stop trading wisecracks and get closer to finding their long-lost pirate treasure, thereby to help save their parents&#x27; homes. Only then do we accept &quot;The Goonies&quot; for what it is—a &quot;funny&quot; juvenile windup toy about kids in perilous, comic-book situations.&quot; Janet Maslin of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that the film &quot;has a kind of breakneck pacing that keeps it fast, funny, ingenious, entertaining, and — only a small point while the movie is in progress — almost entirely without staying power.&quot; &quot;Variety&quot; called it &quot;a dangerous Disneyland sort of a film stamped with the Steven Spielberg style of high fun. Like other Spielberg summer extravaganzas, pic is a roller coaster ride best enjoyed as it&#x27;s speeding along. Once it stops to consider the sacred state of adolescence, it becomes painfully syrupy.&quot; Michael Wilmington of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote that the film &quot;resembles nothing so much as a wildly exaggerated fun-fair ride, one that keeps comically exposing you to dangers, comically pulling you away, then, finally, with a shivering plop, deposits you on dry land, in the bosom of your family.&quot; Paul Attanasio of &quot;The Washington Post&quot; called it &quot;an artfully crafted movie, thrumming with energy and sometimes wit, and utterly uninvolving for anyone over the age of 12.&quot; Colin Greenland reviewed &quot;The Goonies&quot; for &quot;White Dwarf&quot; and stated, &quot;&quot;The Goonies&quot; I was unable to enjoy because of a bunch of kids yelling and screaming all the way through. Not the audience, the actors.&quot;

=== Box office ===
&quot;The Goonies&quot; grossed $9 million in its opening weekend in the U.S., second on the charts behind &quot;&quot;. It grossed $63.9 million in the United States and Canada, placing it among the top-10 highest-grossing films of 1985 and $60.6 million overseas for a worldwide gross of $125 million.

=== Awards ===
Ramsey won a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role as &quot;Mama&quot; Fratelli. At the 7th Youth in Film Awards (now known as Young Artist Awards), Astin&#x27;s portrayal of Mikey won the award for Best Starring Performance By a Young Actor in a Motion Picture. Cohen, Feldman, and Plimpton were also nominated for awards for their performances in &quot;The Goonies&quot;. The film itself was nominated for best adventure motion picture.

== Legacy ==
Special anniversary events for the film, hosted by the city of Astoria, have drawn about 10,000 to 15,000 visitors. The home used for the Walsh family has become a tourist attraction, receiving between 1,200 and 1,500 visitors a day during the summer of the 30th anniversary. As a result, in August 2015, the residents and owners of the home, their neighbors, and the city of Astoria took steps to limit public access to the home.

=== Video games ===
Datasoft produced a &quot;Goonies&quot; video game for Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit computers, and Apple II in 1985, which was later ported to the ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC by U.S. Gold. This game features eight screens in which a player had to use two members of the Goonies group to solve puzzles and reach an exit to advance to the next stage. The screens were largely inspired by actual sets and puzzles seen in the film. A reference to the aforementioned &quot;octopus scene&quot; is included, as the seventh level.

In 1986, Japanese game developer Konami created two versions of &quot;The Goonies&quot; for the MSX (&quot;The Goonies&quot;) in Japan and Europe, and Family Computer (&quot;The Goonies&quot;) in Japan.

&quot;The Goonies II&quot; was also released on the Famicom (and its international counterpart, the Nintendo Entertainment System). &quot;The Goonies II&quot; was released in North America, Europe, and Australia, although the original was one of the NES games released as part of the Nintendo VS. System arcade machine in the 1980s. &quot;The Goonies II&quot; has little to do with the film. In it, the Fratellis have kidnapped all the Goonies (except Mikey, whom the player guides) and have hidden them in cages across a terrain of caverns, mazes, and abandoned buildings. As Mikey, the player must rescue them all and ultimately free a mermaid named Annie.

Mikey was also a playable character in Konami&#x27;s 1988 Famicom title &quot;Wai Wai World&quot;, which included a Goonies-themed level.

In February 2007, Chrysler&#x27;s Jeep division sponsored &quot;The Goonies: Return to Astoria&quot;, a Flash-based online game developed by Fuel Industries. The player&#x27;s goal is to collect map pieces and doubloons, and then race the Fratellis to One-Eyed Willy&#x27;s treasure.

A &quot;Goonies&quot; level pack for &quot;Lego Dimensions&quot; was released on May 9, 2017. The pack includes a constructible pirate ship, a skeleton organ, and a Sloth minifigure who is able to change into the other Goonies and unlocks a bonus level that adapts the plot of the film from the perspective of him and Chunk.

=== Canceled sequels, adaptations and confirmed sequel ===
The possibility of a film sequel has been confirmed and denied many times over the years by the original cast and crew. Donner said that he had a story he liked and Spielberg behind him, but in 2004, several of the actors from the original revealed that Warner Bros., the film&#x27;s owner, had shown no interest in a sequel. Sean Astin told MTV in October 2007 that &quot;Goonies 2&quot; &quot;is an absolute certainty ... The writing&#x27;s on the wall when they&#x27;re releasing the DVD in such numbers.&quot; Donner has expressed doubt that a sequel will ever happen, as many of the actors had not shown interest in returning for one. Corey Feldman stated in his November 25, 2008 blog post, &quot;NO! There is no &quot;Goonies 2&quot;! I&#x27;m sorry but it&#x27;s just not gonna happen ... Course now that I&#x27;ve said that, they&#x27;ll do it.&quot; However, on the July 2010 release of &quot;The Making of a Cult Classic: The Unauthorized Story of The Goonies&quot; DVD, Richard Donner states a sequel to &quot;The Goonies&quot; is a &quot;definite thing&quot; and will involve as much of the old cast as possible. &quot;It will happen,&quot; says Donner. &quot;We&#x27;ve been trying for a number of years.&quot; On April 5, 2014, Richard Donner revealed a sequel is in the works, and he hopes to bring back the entire cast. In the 2020 reunion event, Spielberg stated &quot;Chris, Dick and I — and Lauren [Shuler Donner] — have had a lot of conversations about [a sequel]...Every couple of years we come up with an idea but then it doesn&#x27;t hold water.&quot; In May 2021, Feldman stated that despite Columbus saying that he is writing a sequel, the chances for a sequel are &quot;dead&quot; as Donner had chosen to direct &quot;Lethal Finale&quot; as his final film, and the cast did not want to return if Donner was not involved. Donner died almost two months later, making the chances of a sequel even less likely.

In September 2024, The Sun published a report claiming that the sequel was in development at Warner Bros. however Martha Plimpton and Corey Feldman shot down rumors of a sequel. &quot;People, there is no Goonies2 script, there is no one &#x27;attached,&#x27; Spielberg is not directing, it&#x27;s not real&quot; Plimpton said on social media. Feldman responded on social media saying &quot;2&#x27;SDAY, IS #GOONIES2 REAL?! EVERY1 IS ASKING... I CAN OFFICIALLY TELL U 100% NO! I HAV NO INFO THAT A SEQUEL IS IN THE WORKX&quot; In January 2025 it was reported by Deadline that Warner Bros. was developing a sequel to &quot;The Goonies&quot; and were waiting on a treatment from writer Chris Columbus who also was reported to have turned in a script for a third &quot;Gremlins&quot; movie as well. Nothing official has been confirmed by Warner Bros. about a sequel being planned. In February 2025, some of the cast reunited to celebrate Key Huy Quan&#x27;s star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Some were asked about a sequel happening with Quan saying “It’s one of the most asked questions in my life. I would love for it to happen”. Feldman replied to the question by saying “All I can say is, get us all together. Everybody is looking good. Sean’s looking good. Josh is looking good. We’re all looking good still, and we’re all alive. Goonies never say die…There’s hope.”

Rumors of adaptations and sequels in other media took off in 2007, including a comic-book miniseries, an animated television series and a musical adaptation of the film. Corey Feldman said he was asked to reprise the role of Mouth in an animated series that would feature the original Goonies characters as adults and focus on the adventures of a new set of kids. Apparently, this project was briefly in the works for Cartoon Network before being shelved. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; reported in March 2007 on a potential musical adaptation of the film. &quot;Steven and I have discussed it, and it&#x27;s something that I&#x27;m fairly passionate about right now,&quot; Donner says. &quot;Variety&quot; reported in October 2008 that Donner had met with Broadway entertainment attorney John Breglio, and is &quot;confident things are moving in the right direction.&quot; As of May 2011, the musical was still in the beginning stages, but Donner was hopeful that an &quot;irreverent&quot; script would be completed by October.

On February 12, 2020, Fox ordered a pilot for a drama series from Sarah Watson, creator of &quot;The Bold Type&quot;, about a woman helping film students create a shot-for-shot remake of &quot;The Goonies&quot;. Greg Mottola is attached as director, and as executive producer along with Richard Donner and his wife, Lauren Shuler Donner. On May 7, 2021, Fox announced that the pilot would not be moving forward. On December 15, 2021, Disney+ picked up the series for development now titled &quot;Our Time&quot;.

On February 14, 2025, it was announced that &quot;The Goonies 2&quot; was offically in the works. Potsy Ponciroli is set to write the script with Steven Spielberg, Kristie Macosko Krieger and Holly Bario producing for Amblin Entertainment alongside Chris Columbus. Lauren Shuler Donner will executive produce.

=== Influenced works ===
The 2024 &quot;Star Wars&quot; franchise television series &quot;Star Wars: Skeleton Crew&quot; was inspired by &quot;The Goonies&quot;.

=== Reunions ===
On April 27, 2020, through his YouTube channel, Josh Gad aired a virtual cast reunion via Zoom as the first episode of Gad&#x27;s &quot;Reunited Apart&quot;, a charity fundraising effort during the COVID-19 pandemic, with the &quot;Goonies&quot; reunion supporting the Center for Disaster Philanthropy. All the living primary cast participated, with the event dedicated to the cast members who have since died. In addition to the cast, director Richard Donner, producer Steven Spielberg, and writer Chris Columbus were also present, and even Cyndi Lauper made an appearance. On December 5, 2020, the cast had another virtual reunion, this time for a live reading of the full movie script that was broadcast on multiple social media outlets. The characters whose original actors had died were played by other actors, including Josh Gad as Sloth, Jean Smart as Mama Fratelli, and Kristen Bell as Irene Walsh. Cary Elwes served as the narrator. The event earned over $130,000 in donations for the charity No Kid Hungry.

On February 3, 2025, some of the cast reunited to celebrate Ke Huy Quan&#x27;s imprint ceremony at TCL Chinese Theatres. Josh Brolin, Corey Feldman, Jeff Cohen, Kerri Green and writer Chris Columbus were there to celebrate him receiving his star. Sean Astin didn&#x27;t appear in photos, but was said to have arrived later to the ceremony. Later that day, Feldman, Cohen and Green joined Quan and Astin on the red carpet for their movie premiere of &quot;Love Hurts&quot;. Martha Plimpton was absent for both events for unknown reasons. Quan discussed reuniting with Astin on their film by saying &quot;The day Sean arrived on set, I dropped everything and ran to give him a big hug. We’re brothers for life because of that movie. When we finally shot our first scene together, I was transported back to 1985. All the cameras and everyone around us disappeared — it was just me and him. I was that kid again, remembering that exchange: ‘Hey Data, where are you going?’ ‘I’m setting booty traps.’ ‘You mean booby traps.’ To share the screen with him again after all these years is an amazing gift.&quot;

==See also==
* &quot;Cliff Hanger&quot;, a 1983 arcade laserdisc video game featured in the film; the game itself is based on Hayao Miyazaki&#x27;s &quot;Lupin III&quot; anime film &quot;Castle of Cagliostro&quot; (1979).
* &quot;Finding ʻOhana&quot;, a 2021 Netflix film

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official Archive Site - The Goonies (AE)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1436734" start="31" end="40" title="adventure" label="adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="41" end="52" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="81" end="95" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="117" end="131" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="152" end="168" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q189351" start="182" end="192" title="Sean Astin" label="Sean Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="194" end="205" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137777" start="207" end="217" title="Jeff Cohen (actor)" label="Jeff Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q375419" start="219" end="232" title="Corey Feldman" label="Corey Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q440617" start="234" end="245" title="Kerri Green" label="Kerri Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="247" end="262" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q445017" start="267" end="278" title="Ke Huy Quan" label="Ke Huy Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718840" start="309" end="322" title="John Matuszak" label="John Matuszak"/>
<link wikidata="Q443317" start="324" end="335" title="Robert Davi" label="Robert Davi"/>
<link wikidata="Q296883" start="337" end="351" title="Joe Pantoliano" label="Joe Pantoliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q234083" start="357" end="368" title="Anne Ramsey" label="Anne Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="454" end="469" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q231710" start="504" end="515" title="foreclosure" label="foreclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261319" start="553" end="565" title="treasure map" label="treasure map"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="675" end="681" title="Piracy" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q457893" start="807" end="827" title="Amblin Entertainment" label="Amblin Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="844" end="856" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="1040" end="1049" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="1120" end="1142" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="1150" end="1169" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="1474" end="1489" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137210" start="1506" end="1518" title="country club" label="country club"/>
<link wikidata="Q389152" start="1812" end="1820" title="doubloon" label="doubloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61391" start="2342" end="2353" title="cheerleader" label="cheerleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="2438" end="2444" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612699" start="2529" end="2541" title="crime family" label="crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951220" start="3124" end="3133" title="tall tale" label="tall tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568202" start="3221" end="3232" title="booby traps" label="booby traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q331079" start="3779" end="3793" title="Walking the plank" label="walk the plank"/>
<link wikidata="Q189351" start="5030" end="5040" title="Sean Astin" label="Sean Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="5081" end="5087" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="5115" end="5126" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137777" start="5219" end="5229" title="Jeff Cohen (actor)" label="Jeff Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q375419" start="5337" end="5350" title="Corey Feldman" label="Corey Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q445017" start="5476" end="5487" title="Ke Huy Quan" label="Ke Huy Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="5555" end="5565" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q339084" start="5586" end="5592" title="gadget" label="gadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q440617" start="5598" end="5609" title="Kerri Green" label="Kerri Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="5716" end="5731" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q718840" start="5822" end="5835" title="John Matuszak" label="John Matuszak"/>
<link wikidata="Q443317" start="5966" end="5977" title="Robert Davi" label="Robert Davi"/>
<link wikidata="Q854851" start="6017" end="6030" title="Counterfeit money" label="counterfeiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q296883" start="6037" end="6051" title="Joe Pantoliano" label="Joe Pantoliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q234083" start="6109" end="6120" title="Anne Ramsey" label="Anne Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q442310" start="6171" end="6189" title="Mary Ellen Trainor" label="Mary Ellen Trainor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194791" start="6238" end="6250" title="Keith Walker (writer)" label="Keith Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q266804" start="6342" end="6356" title="Lupe Ontiveros" label="Lupe Ontiveros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623963" start="6606" end="6617" title="Steve Antin" label="Steve Antin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543968" start="6751" end="6766" title="George Robotham" label="George Robotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431499" start="6816" end="6831" title="Faked death" label="feigned suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387756" start="6834" end="6851" title="Michael Paul Chan" label="Michael Paul Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="6929" end="6945" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517414" start="7006" end="7017" title="Nick McLean" label="Nick McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="7150" end="7171" title="Principal photography" label="Principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="7277" end="7290" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="audio dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7478" end="7500" title="Dramatic structure#Dénouement" label="&amp;quot;dénouement&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40152" start="7524" end="7531" title="octopus" label="octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="7602" end="7613" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962070" start="8151" end="8170" title="production designer" label="production designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q543832" start="8171" end="8186" title="J. Michael Riva" label="J. Michael Riva"/>
<link wikidata="Q189351" start="8751" end="8761" title="Sean Astin" label="Sean Astin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036654" start="9334" end="9368" title="Captain George Flavel House Museum" label="Captain George Flavel House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37935480" start="9642" end="9658" title="Ecola State Park" label="Ecola State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q988747" start="9675" end="9687" title="Cannon Beach, Oregon" label="Cannon Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592015" start="9765" end="9778" title="Haystack Rock" label="Haystack Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9825" end="9837" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="9849" end="9868" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="9991" end="10002" title="sound stage" label="sound stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575330" start="10054" end="10075" title="Goat Rock Beach" label="Goat Rock State Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="10079" end="10104" title="Sonoma County, California" label="Sonoma County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896292" start="10128" end="10141" title="Wes Takahashi" label="Wes Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="10207" end="10235" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10272" end="10319" title="The Goonies: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" label="The Goonies: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="10344" end="10356" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="10358" end="10372" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214418" start="10374" end="10385" title="The Bangles" label="The Bangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q440617" start="10424" end="10435" title="Kerri Green" label="Kerri Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="10497" end="10508" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q289781" start="10510" end="10524" title="The Iron Sheik" label="The Iron Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q708073" start="10526" end="10541" title="Nikolai Volkoff" label="Nikolai Volkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q256279" start="10543" end="10562" title="The Fabulous Moolah" label="The Fabulous Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q556873" start="10588" end="10598" title="Lou Albano" label="Lou Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463661" start="10709" end="10746" title="The Goonies &amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27; Good Enough" label="The Goonies &amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27; Good Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="10753" end="10764" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q502923" start="10931" end="10942" title="Dave Grusin" label="Dave Grusin"/>
<link wikidata="Q506390" start="11080" end="11090" title="Innerspace" label="Innerspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q535395" start="11104" end="11112" title="Scrooged" label="Scrooged"/>
<link wikidata="Q651460" start="11130" end="11143" title="Guarding Tess" label="Guarding Tess"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="11189" end="11214" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="11287" end="11298" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214560" start="11325" end="11347" title="Adventures of Don Juan" label="Adventures of Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186369" start="11372" end="11388" title="Varèse Sarabande" label="Varèse Sarabande"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="11765" end="11768" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="11773" end="11780" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="11830" end="11839" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246349" start="11844" end="11847" title="Capacitance Electronic Disc" label="CED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="11881" end="11898" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12031" end="12039" title="DVD region code#1" label="Region 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="12040" end="12043" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="12118" end="12130" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="12209" end="12214" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q29435" start="12257" end="12269" title="Dolby TrueHD" label="Dolby TrueHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="12310" end="12326" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="Ultra HD Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="12424" end="12439" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="12761" end="12771" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="12874" end="12885" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="13125" end="13136" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="13150" end="13165" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="13643" end="13655" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="13665" end="13683" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="13908" end="13915" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="14269" end="14286" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q553234" start="14561" end="14575" title="Paul Attanasio" label="Paul Attanasio"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="14585" end="14604" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="14815" end="14826" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q249006" start="15230" end="15260" title="1985 in film" label="highest-grossing films of 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257399" start="15356" end="15396" title="Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644223" start="15447" end="15471" title="7th Youth in Film Awards" label="7th Youth in Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172285" start="16264" end="16272" title="Datasoft" label="Datasoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q30127133" start="16290" end="16297" title="The Goonies (1985 video game)" label="Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="16319" end="16331" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="16333" end="16354" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="16360" end="16368" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="16408" end="16419" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="16424" end="16435" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930918" start="16439" end="16448" title="U.S. Gold" label="U.S. Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q45700" start="16818" end="16824" title="Konami" label="Konami"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="16881" end="16884" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141429" start="16892" end="16903" title="The Goonies (MSX video game)" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="16936" end="16951" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Family Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521086" start="16959" end="16970" title="The Goonies (Famicom video game)" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383859" start="16995" end="17009" title="The Goonies II" label="The Goonies II"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="17041" end="17048" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="17089" end="17118" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323782" start="17273" end="17292" title="Nintendo VS. System" label="Nintendo VS. System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275676" start="17727" end="17740" title="Wai Wai World" label="Wai Wai World"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="17806" end="17814" title="DaimlerChrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q30113" start="17822" end="17826" title="Jeep" label="Jeep"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="17892" end="17897" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="17904" end="17915" title="online game" label="online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507127" start="17929" end="17944" title="Fuel Industries" label="Fuel Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19789277" start="18116" end="18131" title="Lego Dimensions" label="Lego Dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20203" end="20216" title="Lethal Weapon (franchise)#Lethal Finale (2023)" label="Lethal Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767321" start="20412" end="20419" title="The Sun (magazine)" label="The Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037100" start="20954" end="20962" title="Deadline Hollywood" label="Deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q241958" start="21158" end="21166" title="Gremlins" label="Gremlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="21359" end="21381" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="22182" end="22197" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="22226" end="22246" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="22818" end="22821" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q29515721" start="22893" end="22906" title="The Bold Type" label="The Bold Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356738" start="23008" end="23020" title="Greg Mottola" label="Greg Mottola"/>
<link wikidata="Q469795" start="23112" end="23132" title="Lauren Shuler Donner" label="Lauren Shuler Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958752" start="23230" end="23237" title="Disney+" label="Disney+"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="23660" end="23669" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23710" end="23734" title="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew" label="Star Wars: Skeleton Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="23831" end="23838" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190319" start="23848" end="23856" title="Josh Gad" label="Josh Gad"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979732" start="23890" end="23894" title="Zoom (software)" label="Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879606" start="23936" end="23950" title="Reunited Apart" label="Reunited Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="23998" end="24015" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190319" start="24626" end="24634" title="Josh Gad" label="Josh Gad"/>
<link wikidata="Q239069" start="24645" end="24655" title="Jean Smart" label="Jean Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q178882" start="24678" end="24690" title="Kristen Bell" label="Kristen Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311093" start="24707" end="24717" title="Cary Elwes" label="Cary Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125265183" start="25273" end="25283" title="Love Hurts (2025 film)" label="Love Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680674" start="25943" end="25955" title="Cliff Hanger (video game)" label="Cliff Hanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="25977" end="25997" title="laserdisc video game" label="laserdisc video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="26048" end="26062" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q876182" start="26076" end="26085" title="Lupin III" label="Lupin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="26092" end="26097" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q608079" start="26109" end="26129" title="Castle of Cagliostro" label="Castle of Cagliostro"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844235" start="26152" end="26166" title="Finding ʻOhana" label="Finding ʻOhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="26181" end="26188" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89633" wikidata="Q209026" url="?curid=89633" title="Warhammer 40,000">
<text>Warhammer 40,000 (sometimes colloquially called Warhammer 40K, WH40K or 40k) is a miniature wargame produced by Games Workshop. It is the most popular miniature wargame in the world, and is particularly popular in the United Kingdom. The first edition of the rulebook was published in September 1987, and the tenth and current edition was released in June 2023.

As in other miniature wargames, players enact battles using miniature models of warriors and fighting vehicles. The playing area is a tabletop model of a battlefield, comprising models of buildings, hills, trees, and other terrain features. Each player takes turns moving their model warriors around the battlefield and fighting their opponent&#x27;s warriors. These fights are resolved using dice and simple arithmetic.

&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; is set in the distant future, where a stagnant human civilisation is beset by hostile aliens and supernatural creatures. The models in the game are a mixture of humans, aliens, and supernatural monsters wielding futuristic weaponry and supernatural powers. The fictional setting of the game has been developed through a large body of novels published by Black Library (Games Workshop&#x27;s publishing division). &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was initially conceived as a scifi counterpart to &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot;, a medieval fantasy wargame also produced by Games Workshop. &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot; shares some themes and characters with &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; but the two settings are independent of each other. The game has received widespread praise for the tone and depth of its setting, and is considered the foundational work of the grimdark genre of speculative fiction, the word grimdark itself derived from the series&#x27; tagline: &quot;In the grim darkness of the far future, there is only war&quot;.

&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; has spawned many spin-off media. Games Workshop has produced a number of other tabletop or board games connected to the brand, including both extrapolations of the mechanics and scale of the base game to simulate unique situations, as with &quot;Space Hulk&quot; or &quot;Kill Team&quot;, and wargames simulating vastly different scales and aspects of warfare within the same fictional setting, as with &quot;Battlefleet Gothic&quot;, &quot;Adeptus Titanicus&quot; or &quot;Warhammer Epic&quot;. Video game spin-offs, such as &quot;Dawn of War&quot; and the &quot;Space Marine&quot; series, have also been released.

==Overview==
&quot;Note: The overview here refers to the 10th edition of the rules.&quot;

The rulebooks and miniature models required to play &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; are subject to copyright and sold exclusively by Games Workshop and its subsidiaries. These miniatures, in combination with other materials (dice, measuring tools, glue, paints, etc.), are generally more expensive than other tabletop games. A new player can expect to spend at least £200 to assemble enough materials for a regular game, and the armies that appear in tournaments can be many times more.

===Miniature models===

Games Workshop sells a large variety of gaming models for &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;, but no ready-to-play models. Rather, it sells boxes of model parts, which players are expected to assemble and paint themselves. Each miniature model represents an individual soldier, vehicle, or monster. Most &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; models are made of polystyrene but certain models, which are made and sold in small volumes, are made of lead-free pewter or epoxy resin. Games Workshop also sells glue, tools, and acrylic paints for finishing models. The assembly and painting of the models is a major aspect of the hobby, and many customers of Games Workshop buy models simply to paint and display them. A player might spend weeks assembling and painting models before they have a playable army.

===Playing field===
The current official rulebook recommends a table width of , and table length varies based on the size of the armies being used (discussed below). In contrast to board games, &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; does not have a fixed playing field. Players construct their own custom-made battlefield using modular terrain models. Games Workshop sells a variety of proprietary terrain models, but players often use generic or homemade ones. Unlike certain other miniature wargames such as &quot;BattleTech&quot;, &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; does not use a grid system, so players must use a measuring tape to measure distances, which are measured in inches.

===Assembling armies===
All the models that a player has selected to use in a match are collectively termed an &quot;army.&quot; In &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;, players are not restricted to playing with a fixed and symmetrical combination of game pieces, such as in chess. They get to choose which models they will fight with from a catalogue of &quot;datasheets&quot; presented in the rulebooks. Each datasheet corresponds to a particular model and contains any relevant gameplay statistics and permissible attachments. For instance, a model of a Tactical Space Marine has a &quot;Move&quot; range of 6 inches and a &quot;Toughness&quot; rating of 4 and is armed with a &quot;boltgun&quot; with a range of 24 inches. Both players must declare which models they will play with before the match starts, and once the match is underway, they cannot add any new models to their armies.

In official tournaments, it is mandatory for players to only use Games Workshop&#x27;s models, and those models must be properly assembled to match the player&#x27;s army roster; substitute models are forbidden. For example, if a player wants to use an Ork Weirdboy in their army, they must use an Ork Weirdboy model from Games Workshop. Games Workshop has also banned the use of 3D-printed miniatures in official tournaments. Public tournaments organised by independent groups might permit third-party models so long as the models are clearly identifiable as to which &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; model they are meant to represent. Tournaments might also have rules regarding whether armies are permitted to be unpainted or must be painted to a certain standard.

The composition of the players&#x27; armies must fit the rivalries and alliances depicted in the setting. All models listed in the rulebooks have keywords that divide them into factions. In a matched game, a player may only use models in their army that are all loyal to a common faction. Thus, a player cannot, for example, use a mixture of Aeldari and Necron models in their army, because in the game&#x27;s fictional setting, Aeldari and Necrons are mortal enemies and would never fight alongside each other.

The game uses a point system to ensure that the match will be &quot;balanced&quot;, i.e., the armies will be of comparable overall strength. The players must agree as to what &quot;points limit&quot; they will play at, which roughly determines how big and powerful their respective armies will be. Each model and weapon has a &quot;point value&quot; which roughly corresponds to how powerful the model is; for example, a Tactical Space Marine is valued at 13 points, whereas a Land Raider tank is valued at 240 points. The sum of the point values of a player&#x27;s models must not exceed the agreed limit. If the point values of the players&#x27; respective armies both add up to the limit, they are assumed to be balanced. 500 to 2,000 points are common point limits.

Although the rules place no limit on how big an army can be, players tend to use armies comprising between a few dozen to a hundred models, depending on its faction. A large army will slow down the pace of the match as the players must physically handle many more models and consider each strategically. Larger armies also cost more money and take more work to paint and assemble.

===Gameplay===

At the start of a game, each player places their models in the initial deployment zones at opposite ends of the playing field. The players roll dice to determine who takes the first turn.

At the start of their turn, a player moves each model in their army by hand across the field. A model can be moved no farther than its listed &quot;Move characteristic&quot;. For instance, a Space Marine model can be moved no farther than six inches per turn. If a model cannot fly, it must go around obstacles such as walls and trees.

Models are grouped into &quot;units&quot;. They move as a unit. All models in a unit must stay close to each other. Each model in a unit must finish a turn within two inches of another model from the unit. If there are more than five models in a unit, each model must be within two inches of two other models.

After moving, each model can attack any enemy unit within range and line-of-fire of whatever weapons and psychic powers its models have. For instance, a model of a Space Marine armed with a &quot;boltgun&quot; can shoot any enemy unit within 24 inches. Most of the races in the game have units with psychic powers. Prior to the release of the 10th edition of the game, Psyker units had the ability to cause unusual effects, such as rendering allied units invulnerable or teleporting units across the battlefield. The 10th Edition rules no longer use this feature. After ranged weapons are used, each unit can charge into melee range against enemy units. Units engaged in melee combat then take turns attacking each other until they all have fought.

When it is their turn to attack, the player declares to their opponent whichever of the models is attacking whichever enemy unit, and rolls dice to determine how much damage their models inflict upon their targets. The attacking player cannot target individual models within an enemy unit. If an enemy unit receives damage, the enemy player chooses which model in the unit suffers injury. Damage is measured in points, and if a model suffers more points of damage than its &quot;Wound characteristic&quot; permits, it dies. Dead models are removed from the playing field. Most models have only one Wound point, but certain models such as &quot;hero characters&quot;, vehicles and elite troops have multiple Wound points, so the damage they accumulate must be recorded.

At the end of each turn, dice are rolled to determine if units who have lost models &quot;lose morale&quot; and become Battleshocked. Then play passes to the opponent&#x27;s turn.

===Victory conditions===
A game of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; lasts until each player has taken five turns. A player wins the game when the turn limit ends and they have the most victory points. How players score victory points depends on what kind of &quot;mission&quot; was selected for the game. The most common way for players to score victory points is by controlling objective markers. Objective markers are 40mm markers placed on the playing field, positioned in accordance with the mission rules. Players score victory points on their turns when their allied models outnumber the enemy models positioned near the objective markers. Players might also have faction-specific ways to gain victory points, such as exterminating the enemy or retaining possession of a holy relic for a certain length of time.

==Setting==
Most &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; fiction is set around 40,000 AD. Though &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; is mostly a scifi setting, it adapts a number of tropes from fantasy fiction, such as magic, supernatural beings, daemonic possession, and fantasy races such as orcs and elves; &quot;psykers&quot; fill the role of wizards in the setting. The setting of this game inherits many fantasy tropes from &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot; (a similar wargame from Games Workshop), and by extension from &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. Games Workshop used to make miniature models for use in &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, and &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot; was originally meant to encourage customers to buy more miniature models. &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was originally conceived as a science-fiction spin-off of &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot;. Though the games share some characters and tropes, their settings are separate.

The setting of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; is violent and pessimistic: human scientific and social progress have ceased; humanity is in a state of total war with hostile alien races and occult forces; and the supernatural exists, is powerful and is usually untrustworthy if not outright malevolent. There are effectively no benevolent gods or spirits in the cosmos, only daemons and evil gods, and the cults dedicated to them are proliferating. In the long run, the Imperium of Man cannot hope to defeat its enemies, so the heroes of the Imperium are not fighting for a brighter future but &quot;raging against the dying of the light&quot;. Through constant sacrifice and toil, the Imperium delays its inevitable doom. The tone of the game&#x27;s setting, exemplified by its slogan &quot;In the grim darkness of the far future, there is only war&quot;, shaped the &quot;grimdark&quot; subgenre of scifi, which is particularly amoral, dystopian or violent.

As the setting is based on a wargame, the spin-off novels and comic books are often war dramas with protagonists being warriors of some sort, the most popular being the Space Marines. Otherwise, they tend to be aristocrats of some sort such as Inquisitors, Rogue Traders, or Eldar princes, because only such people have the resources and liberty to have a meaningful impact on a galaxy-spanning setting whose civilisations are mostly autocratic.

The source of magic is a parallel universe of supernatural energy, &quot;the Warp&quot;. All living things with souls are tied to the Warp, but certain individuals called &quot;psykers&quot; have an especially strong link and can manipulate the Warp&#x27;s energy to work magic. Psykers are generally feared and mistrusted by humans. Psykers may have many dangerous abilities such as mind control, clairvoyance, and pyrokinesis. Moreover, the Warp is full of predatory creatures that may use a psyker&#x27;s link to the Warp as a conduit by which to invade realspace. But for all the dangers that psykers pose, human civilisation cannot do without them: their telepathic powers provide faster-than-light communication and they are the best counter to supernatural foes on the battlefield. For this reason, the Imperium rounds up any psykers it finds and trains them to control their abilities and resist Warp predators. Those who fail or reject this training are executed for the safety of all. Those who pass their training are pressed into life-long servitude to the state and are closely monitored for misconduct and spiritual corruption.

===Influences===
Rick Priestley cites J. R. R. Tolkien, H. P. Lovecraft, &quot;Dune&quot;, &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;, and &quot;2000 AD&quot; as major influences on the setting.

The Chaos Gods were added to the setting by Bryan Ansell and developed further by Priestley. Priestley felt that &quot;Warhammer&quot;″s concept of Chaos, as detailed by Ansell in the supplement &quot;Realms of Chaos&quot;, was too simplistic and too similar to the works of Michael Moorcock, so he developed it further, taking inspiration from &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;. The story of the Emperor&#x27;s favoured sons succumbing to the temptations of Chaos deliberately parallels the fall of Satan in &quot;Paradise Lost&quot;. The religious themes are primarily inspired by the early history of Christianity. Daemons in WH40K are the embodiment of human nightmares and dark emotion, given physical form and sentience by the Warp—this idea comes from the 1956 movie &quot;Forbidden Planet&quot;. Chaos carries a lot of influences from H. P. Lovecraft, such as mystical artefacts that drive people insane and secretive cults dedicated to evil gods.

The Emperor of Man was inspired by various fictional god-kings, such as Leto Atreides II from the novel &quot;God Emperor of Dune&quot; by Frank Herbert, and King Huon from the &quot;Runestaff&quot; novels by Michael Moorcock.

Humans fear artificial intelligence and creating or protecting an artificial intelligence (or &#x27;abominable intelligence&#x27; ) is a capital offence (though most &#x27;crimes&#x27; such as petty theft or adjusting machinery are also capital offences in the Imperium). This comes from the &quot;Dune&quot; novels. As in the &quot;Dune&quot; setting, the prohibition on artificial intelligence was passed after an ancient war against malevolent androids.

==Factions==

Models available for play in &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; are divided into &quot;factions&quot;. Under normal circumstances, a player can only use units from the same faction in their army.

===The Imperium of Man===
The Imperium of Man is described as an authoritarian techno-feudal theocractic human empire that comprises approximately 1 million worlds and has existed for over 10,000 years. The faction abhors aliens to the point that associating with aliens is a capital offence. The state religion of the Imperium is centred around its founder, the Emperor of Mankind, who united humanity millennia earlier. Although the Emperor is its nominal ruler, he was mortally wounded in battle and is unable to actually rule, and is now sustained by a massive cybernetic life-support system dubbed the Golden Throne. Despite his condition, his mind still generates a &quot;psychic beacon&quot; called the Astronomican by which starships navigate through space which is vital to the Imperium&#x27;s infrastructure. Although the Imperium has highly advanced technology, most of its technologies have not improved for thousands of years due to a religious taboo on scientific inquiry and innovation.

Most &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; fiction is written from the perspective of the Imperium.

Of all the factions, the Imperium has the largest catalogue of models, which gives Imperium players the flexibility to design their army for any style of play. That said, players tend to build their armies around specific sub-factions which have more focused playstyles. For instance, an army of Space Marines will consist of a small number of powerful infantry, whereas an Imperial Guard army will have weak but plentiful infantry combined with strong artillery and vehicles.

===Chaos===
Chaos represents the myriad servants of the Chaos Gods, malevolent and depraved entities and daemons who formed from the base thoughts and emotions of all mortal sentients. Those exposed to the influence of Chaos are twisted in both mind and body and perform sordid acts of devotion to their dark gods, who in turn reward them with &quot;gifts&quot; such as physical mutations, psychic power, and mystical artefacts. Like their gods, the servants of Chaos are malevolent and insane, adopting the aesthetics of body horror and cosmic horror in the design of their models and story details. The struggle against Chaos is central to the setting of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;.

As with the Imperium, Chaos players have access to a large variety of models, allowing them to design their army for any style of play. That said, players may theme their army around a particular Chaos god, which focuses the style of play. For instance, an army themed around Nurgle will consist of slow-moving but tough troops. Likewise, a Chaos army themed around Khorne will lean towards melee combat and eschew psykers.

===Necrons===

The Necrons are an ancient race of skeleton-like androids. Millions of years ago, they were flesh-and-blood beings, but then they transferred their minds into android bodies, thereby achieving immortality. However, the transference process was flawed, as they all lost their souls and all but the highest-ranking ones became mindless as well. They are waking up from millions of years of hibernation in underground vaults on planets across the galaxy and seek to rebuild their old empire. Necron designs evoke ancient Egypt in their design, although they are not based on the Tomb Kings of &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot;.

Necron infantry have strong ranged firepower, tough armour, and slow movement. Necron units can rapidly regenerate wounds or &quot;reanimate&quot; killed models at the start of the player&#x27;s turn. All Necron models have a Leadership score of 10 (the maximum possible), so Necrons rarely suffer from morale failure. Necrons do not have any psykers, but they possess units called &quot;C&#x27;tan shards&quot; which are psyker-like.

===Aeldari===

The Aeldari (formerly called the Eldar) are based on Elves of fantasy fiction. Aeldari have very long lifespans and all of them have some psychic ability. The Aeldari travel the galaxy via a network of magical tunnels called &quot;the Webway&quot;, to which they have exclusive access. In the distant past, the Aeldari ruled an empire that dominated much of the galaxy, but it was destroyed in a magical cataclysm along with most of the population. The surviving Aeldari are divided into two major subfactions: the ascetic Asuryani, inhabitants of massive starships called Craftworlds; and the sadistic Drukhari (also known as &quot;Dark Eldar&quot;), who inhabit a city hidden within the Webway and must inflict pain on others to survive. There are a number of minor subfactions too: the Harlequins, followers of the Laughing God Cegorach; and the Ynnari, followers of the death god Ynnead. Although it has been 10,000 years since their empire&#x27;s fall, the Aeldari have never recovered, due to their low fertility and aggression by other races.

Craftworld Aeldari infantry tend to be highly specialised and relatively frail, often described as &quot;glass cannons&quot; because of their lack of staying power and flexibility, Aeldari armies can suffer severe losses after a bad tactical decision or even unlucky dice rolls, while successful gameplay can involve outnumbered Aeldari units that outmanoeuvre the opponent and kill entire units/squads before they have a chance to retaliate. Aeldari vehicles, unlike their infantry counterparts, are very tough and hard to kill because of many evasive and shielding benefits. With the exception of walkers, all Aeldari vehicles are skimmers which allow them to move freely across difficult terrain, and with upgrades, at speeds only matched by the Drukhari and the T&#x27;au armies. Drukhari are similar to Craftworld Aeldari, with the major differences being that they have no psykers and their vehicles tend to be open-topped, allowing infantry to shoot from them.

===Orks===

The Orks are green-skinned aliens based on the traditional orcs of high fantasy. Orks are a comical species, with crude personalities, ramshackle weaponry, and Cockney accents. Their culture revolves around war for the sake of it. Unlike other races who generally only go to war when it is in their interest, Orks recklessly start unnecessary conflicts for the pleasure of a good fight. Orks do not fear death, and combat is the only thing that gives them emotional fulfillment. Ork technology consists of dashed-together scrap that by all logic should be unreliable if even functional, but Orks generate a psychic field that makes their ramshackle technology work properly or more effectively (for example, vehicles painted red are faster, simply because the Orks believe it to be so). If a non-Ork tries to use an Ork gadget, it would likely malfunction.

Ork infantry models are slow-moving and tough. The Orks are oriented towards melee combat. Infantry models are cheap (by point cost), so a favourite strategy of Ork players is &quot;the Green tide&quot;: they field a large horde of Ork infantry and march them across the playing field to swarm the opponent. Orks do have a number of specialist units with abilities such as psychic powers or vehicle repair, but typically Ork warfare is about brute force and attrition. Ork gameplay is seen as fairly forgiving of tactical errors and bad die rolls.

===Tyranids===
The Tyranids are a mysterious alien race from another galaxy. They migrate from planet to planet, devouring all life in their path. Tyranids are linked by a psychic hive mind and individual Tyranids become feral when separated from it. Tyranid &quot;technology&quot; is entirely biological, all ships and weapons being purpose-bred living creatures.

Tyranids have a preference for melee combat. Their infantry models tend to be numerous and fast but frail. They have low point costs, meaning Tyranid armies in the game are relatively large (many cheap weak models, as opposed to armies with few expensive powerful models such as the Space Marines). Tyranids also have the most powerful countermeasure against Battleshock called Synapse. The Synaptic network is an aura around powerful leader beasts that compels Tyranids to fight on.

There is a sub-species of the Tyranid race called &quot;genestealers&quot;. When a human is infected by a genestealer, they are psychically enslaved and will sire children who are human-genestealer hybrids. These hybrids will form a secret society known as a genestealer cult within their host human society, steadily expanding their numbers and political influence. When a Tyranid fleet approaches their planet, they will launch an uprising to weaken the planet&#x27;s defences so that the Tyranids may more easily conquer it and consume its biomass.

In earlier editions of the game, Genestealer Cults could only be used as auxiliaries to a regular Tyranid army, but since 8th edition, they can be played as a separate army. Although there is a dedicated line of Genestealer Cult models, a player can also use models from the Imperial Guard (a sub-faction of the Imperium) in their Genestealer Cult army. This is an exception to the common-faction rule and is based on the logic that these &quot;human&quot; models are actually genestealer hybrids who look perfectly human. Like other Tyranids, Genestealers are fast and hard-hitting but fragile. All Genestealer Cult infantry and bikers have a trait called &quot;Cult Ambush&quot; that allows them to be set up off table and later be set up on the table, instead of being set up in the designated starting zones at the start of the game (similar to the Space Marines&#x27; &quot;Deep Strike&quot; ability).

The visual design of the Tyranids was inspired by the art of H. R. Giger, with the genestealer sub-race being further inspired by the Xenomorphs from the Alien franchise.

===T&#x27;au===

The T&#x27;au are a young race of blue-skinned humanoid aliens inhabiting a relatively small but growing empire located on the fringe of the Imperium of Man. The T&#x27;au Empire is the only playable faction in the setting that integrates different alien species into their society. They seek to unite all other races under an ideology they call &quot;the Greater Good&quot;. Some human worlds have willingly defected from the Imperium to join the T&#x27;au Empire. Such humans tend to have a better quality of life than Imperial citizens because the T&#x27;au practise humane ethics and encourage scientific progress. The T&#x27;au are divided into five endogamous castes: the Ethereals, who are the spiritual leaders; the Fire Caste, who form the T&#x27;au military; the Air Caste, who operate starships; the Water Caste, who are merchants and diplomats; and the Earth Caste, who are scientists, engineers, and labourers.

The T&#x27;au are oriented towards ranged combat and generally shun melee. They have some of the most powerful firearms in the game in terms of both range and stopping power. For instance, their pulse rifle surpasses the firepower of the Space Marine boltgun, and the railgun on their main battle tank (the Hammerhead) is more powerful than its Imperium counterparts. The T&#x27;au do not have any psykers. Most T&#x27;au vehicles are classified as flyers or skimmers, meaning they can move swiftly over difficult terrain. The T&#x27;au also incorporate alien auxiliaries into their army: the Kroot provide melee support and the insectoid Vespids serve as fast-attack infantry.

===Leagues of Votann===

The Leagues of Votann are a confederation of abhumans known interchangeably as Squats and Kin, which are based on the dwarves of fantasy fiction. They are a spiritual successor to an earlier Squat faction that was removed from the setting for not fitting in aesthetically.

Though Squats are a subspecies of humanity, the Leagues of Votann stand independent of the Imperium of Man. Unlike the Imperium, the Leagues of Votann have no qualms about using artificial intelligence, treating their androids as fellow Kin. Kin culture is centred around the Votann, extremely powerful supercomputers responsible for managing the majority of Kin society and keeping records. The Kin are extremely competitive and capitalistic, with powerful corporations (referred to as Guilds) regularly strip-mining entire planets for resources. While the Kin have no natural psychic abilities, they do have artificial psykers referred to as Grimnyrs, who are responsible for communicating with the Votann.

The Leagues have a preference for ranged combat and siege tactics. Their infantry is slow but sturdy.

==History==
In 1982, Rick Priestley joined Citadel Miniatures, a company started with support from Games Workshop that produced miniature figurines for use in &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. Bryan Ansell (the manager of Citadel) asked Priestley to develop a medieval-fantasy miniature wargame that would be given away for free to customers so as to encourage them to buy more miniatures. &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; did not require players to use miniature figurines, and even when players used them, they rarely needed more than a handful. The result was &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot;, which was released in 1983 to great success.

&quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot; was principally a medieval fantasy game in the vein of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, but Priestley and his fellow designers added a smattering of optional science fiction elements, namely in the form of advanced technological artefacts (e.g., laser weapons) left behind by a long-gone race of spacefarers. &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was an evolution of this taken to the opposite extreme (i.e., mostly science-fiction but with some fantasy elements).

Since before working for Games Workshop, Priestley had been developing a spaceship combat tabletop wargame called &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;, which mixed science fiction with classic fantasy elements. Priestley integrated many elements of the lore of &quot;Rogue Trader&quot; into &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;, chiefly those concerning space travel, but he discarded the ship combat rules for lack of space in the book.

Games Workshop planned to sell conversion kits by which players could modify their &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot; models to wield futuristic weaponry such as laser weapons, but eventually Games Workshop decided to create a dedicated line of models for &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;.

Initially, Priestley&#x27;s new game was simply to be titled &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;, but shortly before release Games Workshop signed a contract with 2000 AD to develop a board game based on their comic book &quot;Rogue Trooper&quot;. So as not to confuse customers and to satisfy the demand for the Rogue Trader game which had been promised since 1983, Games Workshop renamed Priestley&#x27;s game &quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot; and marketed it as a spin-off of &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot; (which in many ways, it was).

&quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot; received its first full preview in &quot;White Dwarf&quot; issue number 93 (September 1987).

&quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot; was released in October 1987. It was a success and became Games Workshop&#x27;s most important product. In the January 1988 edition of &quot;Dragon&quot; (issue 129), Ken Rolston raved about this game, calling it &quot;colossal, stupendous, and spectacular... This is the first science-fiction/fantasy to make my blood boil.&quot;

===First edition (&quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot;) (1987)===

The first edition of the game was titled &quot;Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader&quot;, and its rules are based on &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot;. &quot;Rogue Trader&quot; had been the game&#x27;s working title during development. The &quot;Rogue Trader&quot; subtitle was dropped in subsequent editions. It was published in 1987. Game designer Rick Priestley created the original rules set (based on the contemporary second edition of &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot;) alongside the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; gameworld. The gameplay of &quot;Rogue Trader&quot; was more oriented toward role-playing rather than strict wargaming with instructions for a third person to act as gamesmaster to umpire the game. This original version came as a very detailed, though rather jumbled, rulebook, which made it most suitable for fighting small skirmishes. Much of the composition of the units was determined randomly, by rolling dice. A few elements of the setting (bolters, lasguns, frag grenades, Terminator armour) can be seen in a set of earlier wargaming rules called &quot;Laserburn&quot; (produced by the now defunct company Tabletop Games) written by Bryan Ansell. These rules were later expanded by both Ansell and Richard Halliwell (both of whom ended up working for Games Workshop), although the rules were not a precursor to &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;.

Supplemental material was continually published in &quot;White Dwarf&quot; magazine, which provided rules for new units and models. Eventually, &quot;White Dwarf&quot; provided proper &quot;army lists&quot; that could be used to create larger and more coherent forces than were given in the main rulebook. These articles were from time to time released in expansion books along with new rules, background materials and illustrations. Ten books were released for the original edition of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;: &quot;Chapter Approved—Book of the Astronomican&quot;, &quot;Compendium&quot;, &quot;Warhammer 40,000 Compilation&quot;, &quot;Waaagh—Orks&quot;, two &quot;Realm of Chaos&quot; (&quot;Slaves to Darkness&quot; and &quot;The Lost and the Damned&quot; - the books covering both WFB and WH40K), Ere we Go&quot; and &quot;Freebooterz&quot; (for Ork players), &quot;Battle Manual&quot;, and &quot;Vehicle Manual&quot;. The &quot;Battle Manual&quot; changed and codified the combat rules and provided updated stats for most of the weapons in the game. The &quot;Vehicle Manual&quot; contained a new system for vehicle management on the tabletop which was intended to supersede the clunky rules given in the base hardback manual and in the red softback compendium; it had an inventive target location system which used acetate crosshairs to simulate weapon hits on the vehicle silhouettes with different armour values for different locations (such as tracks, engine compartment, ammo store, and so on). &quot;Waaagh—Orks&quot; was an introductory manual to Orkish culture and physiology. It contained no rules, but background material. The other Ork-themed books had army lists for major Ork clans and also for pirate and mercenary outfits.

Games Workshop released two important supplementary rulebooks for this edition: &quot;Realm of Chaos: Slaves to Darkness&quot; and &quot;Realm of Chaos: The Lost and the Damned&quot;. These two books added the Chaos Gods and their daemons to the setting along with the Horus Heresy origin story.

The artwork of the 1st edition books was a mishmash of styles from a variety of science-fiction works, such as H. R. Giger, &quot;Star Wars&quot;, and &quot;2000AD&quot; comics. In subsequent editions, the artwork of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; moved towards a more coherent aesthetic based around gothic architecture and art.

===Second edition (1993)===
The second edition of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was published in late 1993. The starter set included Space Marines and Orks. The box artwork (by John Blanche) and studio army depicted the Blood Angels Space Marine Chapter.

This new course for the game was forged under the direction of editor Andy Chambers. Chambers reshaped the lore in a way that was more serious and pessimistic in tone (a direction which Rick Priestley lamented). The new theme of the setting is that humanity&#x27;s situation is not merely dire but hopeless, as the Imperium does not have the strength to defeat its myriad enemies and will collapse in time. This was not the case in the first edition; the first edition rulebook suggested that humanity could eventually triumph and prosper if it can survive long enough to complete its evolution into a fully psychic race, and this was the Emperor&#x27;s goal.

The second edition of the game introduced army lists, putting constraints on the composition of a player&#x27;s army. At least 75% of an army&#x27;s strength (by point value) had to be of units from the same faction. This way, the battles that the players would play would fit the factional rivalries described in the setting. An expansion box set titled &quot;Dark Millennium&quot; was later released, which included rules for psychic powers. Another trait of the game was the attention given to &quot;special characters&quot; representing specific individuals from the setting, who had access to equipment and abilities beyond those of regular units; the earlier edition only had three generic &quot;heroic&quot; profiles for each army: &quot;champion&quot;, &quot;minor hero&quot; and &quot;major hero&quot;. A player could spend up to 50% of their army points on a special character. Such heroic characters were so powerful that the second edition was nicknamed &quot;Herohammer&quot;.

The second edition introduced major revisions to the lore and would go on to define the general character of the lore up until the 8th edition. The Adeptus Mechanicus&#x27; prohibition on artificial intelligence was added, stemming from an ancient cataclysmic war between humans and sentient machines; this was inspired by the &quot;Dune&quot; novels.

===Third edition (1998)===
The third edition of the game was released in 1998 and, like the second edition, concentrated on streamlining the rules for larger battles. Third-edition rules were notably simpler. The rulebook was available alone, or as a starter boxed set with miniatures of Space Marines and the newly introduced Dark Eldar. The system of army &quot;&#x27;codexes&#x27;&quot; continued in third edition. The box artwork and studio army depicted the Black Templars Space Marine Chapter.

Towards the end of the third edition, four new army codexes were introduced: the xeno (that is, alien) races of the Necron and the T&#x27;au and two armies of the Inquisition: the Ordo Malleus (called Daemonhunters), and the Ordo Hereticus (called Witchhunters); elements of the latter two armies had appeared before in supplementary material (such as &quot;Realm of Chaos&quot; and &quot;Codex: Sisters of Battle&quot;). At the end of the third edition, these armies were re-released with all-new artwork and army lists. The release of the T&#x27;au coincided with a rise in popularity for the game in the United States.

===Fourth edition (2004)===
The fourth edition of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was released in 2004. This edition did not feature as many major changes as prior editions and was &quot;backwards compatible&quot; with each army&#x27;s third-edition codex. The fourth edition was released in three forms: the first was a standalone hardcover version, with additional information on painting, scenery building, and background information about the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; universe. The second was a boxed set, called &quot;Battle for Macragge&quot;, which included a compact softcover version of the rules, scenery, dice, templates, and Space Marines and Tyranid miniatures. The third was a limited collector&#x27;s edition. &quot;Battle for Macragge&quot; was a &#x27;game in a box&#x27;, targeted primarily at beginners. &quot;Battle for Macragge&quot; was based on the Tyranid invasion of the Ultramarines&#x27; homeworld, Macragge. An expansion to this was released called &quot;The Battle Rages On!&quot;, which featured new scenarios and units, like the Tyranid Warrior.

===Fifth edition (2008)===
The fifth edition of Warhammer 40,000 was released on 12 July 2008. While there are some differences between the fourth and fifth editions, the general rule set shares many similarities. Codex books designed prior to the fifth edition are still compatible with only some changes to how those armies function. The starter set was called &quot;Assault on Black Reach&quot;, which featured a pocket-sized rulebook (containing the full ruleset but omitting the background and hobby sections of the full-sized rulebook), and starter armies for the Space Marines and Orks.

New additions to the rules included the ability for infantry models to &quot;Go to Ground&quot; when under fire, providing additional protection at the cost of mobility and shooting as they dive for cover. Actual line of sight is needed to fire at enemy models. Also introduced was the ability to run, whereby units may forgo shooting to cover more ground. In addition, cover was changed so that it is now easier for a unit to get a cover save. Damage to vehicles was simplified and significantly reduced, and tanks could ram other vehicles. Some of these rules were modelled after rules that existed in the Second Edition but were removed in the Third. Likewise, 5th edition codexes saw a return of many units that had been cut out in the previous edition for having unwieldy rules. These units were largely brought back with most of their old rules streamlined for the new edition. Fifth edition releases focused largely on Space Marine forces, including the abolishment of the Daemonhunters in favour of an army composed of Grey Knights, a special chapter of Space Marines, which, in previous editions, had provided the elite choices of the Daemonhunters&#x27; army list. Another major change was the shift from metal figures to resin kits.

===Sixth edition (2012)===
The sixth edition was released on June 23, 2012. Changes to this edition included the adoption of an optional Psychic Power card system similar to that of the game&#x27;s sister product &quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&quot; as well as the inclusion of full rules for flying vehicles and monsters and a major reworking of the manner in which damage is resolved against vehicles. It also included expanded rules for greater interaction with scenery and more dynamic close-combat. In addition to updating existing rules and adding new ones, 6th Edition introduced several other large changes: the Alliance system, in which players can bring units from other armies to work with their own, with varying levels of trust; the choice to take one fortification as part of your force; and Warlord traits, which will allow a player&#x27;s Commander to gain a categorically randomised trait that can aid their forces in different situations. The starter box set was titled &quot;Dark Vengeance&quot; which included Dark Angels Space Marines and a Crimson Slaughter Chaos Space Marine Warband. Some of the early release box sets of Dark Vengeance contained a limited-edition Interrogator-Chaplain for the Dark Angels.

The Imperial Knights (&quot;Codex: Imperial Knights&quot;) were a new addition to the Imperium of Man faction. Previously found in Epic large-scale battles, particularly the Titan Legions (2nd Edition) boxed set, the Imperial Knights are walkers that are smaller than proper Imperial Titans but nonetheless tower over all other Warhammer 40,000 vehicles and troops.

===Seventh edition (2014)===
The seventh edition of the game was announced in &quot;White Dwarf&quot; issue 15, pre-orders for 17 May and release date of 24 May 2014.

The 7th edition saw several major changes to the game, including a dedicated Psychic Phase, as well as the way psychic powers worked overall, and changeable mid-game Tactical Objectives. Tactical Objectives would give the players alternative ways to score Victory Points, and thus win games. These objectives could change at different points during the game.

As well as these additions, the 7th edition provided a new way to organise army lists. Players could play as either Battle-Forged, making a list in the same way as 6th edition, or Unbound, which allowed the player to use any models they desired, disregarding the Force Organisation Chart. Bonuses are given to Battle-Forged armies. Additionally, Lord of War units, which are powerful units previously only allowed in large-scale (&quot;Apocalypse&quot;) games, are now included in the standard rulebook, and are a normal part of the Force Organisation Chart.

===Eighth edition (2017)===
The eighth edition of the game was announced on 22 April 2017, pre-orders for 3 June and release date of 17 June 2017.

The 8th edition was the most radical revision to &quot;Warhammer 40,000&#x27;s&quot; rules since the third edition. The game introduced the Three Ways to Play concept: Open, Matched, and Narrative. The core ruleset was simplified down to 14 pages, and was available as a free PDF booklet on the Games Workshop website. The more complex rules are retained in the updated hardcover Rulebook. The narrative of the setting has also been updated: an enlarged Eye of Terror has split the galaxy in half, while the Primarch Roboute Guilliman returns to lead the Imperium as its Lord Commander, beginning with reclaiming devastated worlds through the Indomitus Crusade.

The 8th Edition introduced a new box set called &quot;Dark Imperium&quot;, which featured the next-generation Primaris Space Marines which are available as reinforcements to existing Space Marine Chapters, as well as introducing new characters and rules to the Death Guard Chaos Space Marines.

===Ninth edition (2020)===
The ninth edition was released in July 2020. With it came a redesigned logo, the first redesign since 3rd edition. The 9th edition was only a minor modification of the 8th edition&#x27;s rules. Codexes, supplements and the rules from the Psychic Awakening series made for 8th edition are compatible with 9th.

Ninth edition also introduced four new box sets: Indomitus, a limited release set that came out at the start of 9th edition, and the Recruit, Elite and Command editions. The four boxes feature revised designs and new units for the Necrons, and new units for the Primaris Space Marines.

===Tenth edition (2023)===
&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; 10th Edition was released by Games Workshop in June 2023. Significant alterations were made to the game. Tenth edition revolves around the 4th Tyrannic War, introducing fresh regulations and units for both Space Marines and Tyranids, along with significant modifications to the 41st Millennium&#x27;s setting. The game has a more straightforward structure, featuring more concise Indexes and a restriction of six stratagems per army. Instead of the current codices, free and downloadable indexes are accessible. The Psychic Phase has been eliminated, with &quot;Battleshock&quot; tests taking the place of the Morale Phase.

Much like Ninth edition, Tenth edition introduced four new box sets: Leviathan, a limited release set that came out at the start of 10th edition. Also, three &quot;starter sets&quot; were introduced: the Introductory set, Starter set and Ultimate Starter set.

==Supplements and expansions==
There are many variations to the rules and army lists that are available for use, typically with an opponent&#x27;s consent. These rules are found in the Games Workshop publication &quot;White Dwarf&quot;, on the Games Workshop website, or in the Forge World &quot;Imperial Armour&quot; publications.

The rules of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; are designed for games between 500 and 3000 points, with the limits of a compositional framework called the Force Organisation Chart making games with larger point values difficult to play. In response to player comments, the &quot;Apocalypse&quot; rules expansion was introduced to allow 3000+ point games to be played. Players might field an entire 1000-man Chapter of Space Marines rather than the smaller detachment of around 30–40 typically employed in a standard game. Apocalypse also contains rules for using larger war machines such as Titans. The latest rules for &quot;Apocalypse&quot; based on the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; rules are found in &#x27;&quot;Chapter Approved 2017&quot;, while a boxed set also entitled Apocalypse with an entirely different rules base was released in 2019.

&quot;Cities of Death&quot; (the revamp of &quot;Codex Battlezone: Cityfight&quot;) introduces rules for urban warfare and guerrilla warfare, and so-called &quot;stratagems&quot;, including traps and fortifications. It also has sections on modelling city terrain and provides examples of armies and army lists modeled around the theme of urban combat. This work was updated to 7th Edition with the release of &quot;Shield of Baal: Leviathan&quot; and to 8th edition in &quot;Chapter Approved 2018&quot;.

&quot;Planetstrike&quot;, released in 2009, sets rules allowing players to represent the early stages of a planetary invasion. It introduces new game dynamics, such as dividing the players into an attacker and a defender, each having various tactical benefits tailored to their role; for example, the attacker may deep strike all infantry, jump infantry and monstrous creatures onto the battlefield, while the defender may set up all the terrain on the battlefield. &quot;Planetstrike&quot; was updated to the 8th edition of the game in &quot;Chapter Approved 2017&quot;.

&quot;Planetary Empires&quot;, released in August 2009, allows players to coordinate full-scale campaigns containing multiple battles, each using standard rules or approved supplements such as &quot;Planetstrike&quot;, &quot;Cities of Death&quot; or &quot;Apocalypse&quot;. Progress through the campaign is tracked using hexagonal tiles to represent the current control of territories within the campaign. The structure is similar to &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&#x27;s Mighty Empires&quot;. The set has been out of production for many years.

&quot;Battle Missions&quot;, released in March 2010, contained a series of &#x27;missions&#x27; with specific objectives. Each faction had three specific missions which could be played; these missions are determined by a dice roll and are usually chosen from the missions meant for the two armies being used. They still used the standard rules from the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; rule book. The &quot;Battle Missions&quot; format was never updated for 8th or 9th editions and is no longer compatible with the current iteration of the game.

&quot;Spearhead&quot;, released in May 2010, allowed players to play games with a greater emphasis on armoured and mechanised forces. The most notable change to the game is the inclusion of special &quot;Spearhead Formations&quot; and greater flexibility in force organisation. &quot;Spearhead Formations&quot; represent a new and altogether optional addition to the force organisation system standard to &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;. Players now have the ability to use all, part or none of the standard force organisation. &quot;Spearhead&quot; also includes new deployment options and game scenarios. This expansion was released jointly through the Games Workshop website, as a free download, and through the company&#x27;s monthly hobby magazine &quot;White Dwarf&quot;. The &quot;Spearhead&quot; rules were never updated for 8th or 9th editions and are no longer compatible with the current iteration of the game, though the loosened force organization introduced in 8th edition makes them somewhat superfluous.

&quot;Death from the Skies&quot;, released February 2013, contains rules for playing games with an emphasis on aircraft. There are specific rules for each race&#x27;s aircraft, as well as playable missions. A notable inclusion in this release is &quot;warlord traits&quot; for each race that deal specifically with aircraft. This supplement still uses the same rules as the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; rulebook. It was updated to 7th Edition with &quot;Shield of Baal: Leviathan&quot;. &quot;Death From the Skies&quot; was not updated after 7th edition, but 8th edition and onward permit using aircraft in the core rules.

&quot;Stronghold Assault&quot;, released in December 2013, was a 48-page expansion that contains more rules for fortifications in the game, as well as rules for more fortifications than listed in the main 6th Edition rulebook. &quot;Stronghold Assault&quot; was updated for the 8th edition of the game in &quot;Chapter Approved 2017&quot;.

&quot;Escalation&quot;, released in December 2013, contained rules for playing games with super heavy vehicles, normally restricted to &quot;Apocalypse&quot; events, in normal events. &quot;Escalation&quot; was not updated, and in the current iteration of the game super heavy vehicles can be used in the core rules.

&quot;Boarding Actions&quot;, released in January 2023, was designed for smaller 500-point missions aboard spaceships. It generally follows the rules of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; with modifications such as distance being measured around terrain features rather than through, combat no longer working through walls, and models blocking line of sight. Vehicle and Monster units are not able to be played in Boarding Actions, making the game heavily focused on infantry units. Rules for Boarding Actions were released in the &quot;Arks of Omen: Abaddon&quot; book. New boxset releases called &quot;Boarding Patrols&quot; were also released to give players a starting force for use in Boarding Actions. In July 2024, a new supplement for &quot;Boarding Actions&quot; was released, adding new missions and bringing the rules fully into the 10th edition of the game.

==Spin-off games and other media==
Games Workshop has expanded the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; universe over the years to include several spin-off games and fictional works. This expansion began in 1987, when Games Workshop asked Scott Rohan to write the first series of &quot;literary tie-ins&quot;. This eventually led to the creation of Black Library, the publishing arm of Games Workshop, in 1997. The books published relate centrally to the backstory in the &quot;Warhammer&quot; universe. Black Library also publishes &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; graphic novels.

Several popular miniature game spin-offs were created, including &quot;Space Crusade&quot;, &quot;Space Hulk&quot;, &quot;Horus Heresy&quot;, &quot;Kill Team&quot;, &quot;Battlefleet Gothic&quot;, &quot;Epic 40,000&quot;, &quot;Inquisitor&quot;, &quot;Gorkamorka&quot;, &quot;Necromunda&quot; and &quot;Assassinorum: Execution Force&quot;. A collectible card game, &quot;Dark Millennium&quot;, was launched in October 2005 by Games Workshop subsidiary, Sabertooth Games. The story behind the card game begins at the end of the Horus Heresy arc in the game storyline and contains four factions: the Imperium, Orks, Aeldari and Chaos.

===Novels===
Following the 1987 initial release of Games Workshop&#x27;s &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; wargame the company began publishing background literature that expands previous material, adds new material, and describes the universe, its characters, and its events in detail. Since 1997 the bulk of background literature has been published by the affiliated imprint Black Library.

The increasing number of fiction works by an expanding list of authors is published in several formats and media, including audio, digital and print. Most of the works, which include full-length novels, novellas, short stories, graphic novels, and audio dramas, are parts of named book series. In 2018, a line of novels for readers aged 8 to 12 was announced, which led to some confusion among fans given the ultra-violent and grimdark nature of the setting.

====&quot;The Horus Heresy&quot;====
One of the most successful storylines to be produced by Black Library is &quot;the Horus Heresy&quot;, a prequel series set ten thousand years prior to the main setting of the wargame and depicting the downfall of the Emperor of Mankind, setting the conflict between Chaos and the Imperium in motion. The storyline is divided across multiple series of novels and comic books.

===Video games===
Games Workshop first licensed Electronic Arts to produce &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; video games, and EA published two games based on &quot;Space Hulk&quot; in 1993 and 1995. Games Workshop then passed the license to Strategic Simulations, which published three games in the late 1990s. After Strategic Simulations went defunct in 1994, Games Workshop then gave the license to THQ, and between 2003 and 2011, THQ published 13 games, which include the &quot;Dawn of War&quot; series. After 2011, Games Workshop changed its licensing strategy: instead of an exclusive license to a single publisher, it broadly licenses a variety of publishers.

===Board games and role-playing games===
Games Workshop have produced a number of standalone &quot;boxed games&quot; set within the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; setting; they have licensed the intellectual property to other game companies such as Fantasy Flight Games. The Games Workshop-produced boxed games tend to be sold under the aegis of the &quot;Specialist Games&quot; division. Titles include:
* &quot;Battle for Armageddon&quot;
** &quot;Chaos Attack&quot; (expansion for &quot;Battle for Armageddon&quot;)
* &quot;Doom of the Eldar&quot;
* &quot;Space Hulk&quot; (four editions were published; expansions are listed below)
** &quot;Deathwing&quot; (an expansion boxed set adding new Terminator weapons and a new campaign)
** &quot;Genestealer&quot; (an expansion boxed set adding rules for Genestealer hybrids and psychic powers)
** &quot;Space Hulk Campaigns&quot; (an expansion book released in both soft and hard-cover collecting reprinted four campaigns previously printed in &quot;White Dwarf&quot;)
* &quot;Advanced Space Crusade&quot;
* &quot;Assassinorum: Execution Force&quot;
* &quot;Bommerz over da Sulphur River&quot; (board game using Epic miniatures)
* &quot;Gorkamorka&quot; (a vehicle skirmish game set on a desert world, revolving principally around rival Ork factions)
** &quot;Digganob&quot; (an expansion for &quot;Gorkamorka&quot;, adding rebel gretchin and feral human factions)
* &quot;Lost Patrol&quot;
* &quot;Space Fleet&quot; (a simple spaceship combat game, later greatly expanded via &quot;White Dwarf&quot; magazine with material intended for the aborted &quot;Battleship Gothic&quot;, itself later relaunched as &quot;Battlefleet Gothic&quot;)
* &quot;Tyranid Attack&quot; (an introductory game reusing the boards from &quot;Advanced Space Crusade&quot;)
* &quot;Ultra Marines&quot; (an introductory game reusing the boards from &quot;Space Hulk&quot;)
* &quot;Blackstone Fortress&quot; (a cooperative board game set in the wreck of a large spaceship known as a Blackstone Fortress, using the &quot;Warhammer Fantasy&quot;-based &quot;Warhammer Quest&quot; system)

The success of the &quot;Horus Heresy&quot; line of novels lead to a launch in 2012 of a standalone &quot;Horus Heresy&quot; tabletop wargame and rulebook, with basic models representing the eighteen Space Marine legions that precede the chapters and warbands of the &quot;40,000&quot; setting and named characters representing the superhuman primarchs. The game is marketed on the Games Workshop website as a separate line from the main editions of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;, though some factions, like the Titans and Knights, include models or colour schemes designed to be playable in either setting.

Although there were plans to create a full-fledged &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; &quot;pen and paper&quot; role-playing game from the beginning, these did not come to fruition for many years, until an official &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; role-playing game was published only in 2008, with the release of &quot;Dark Heresy&quot; by Black Industries, a Games Workshop subsidiary. This system was later licensed to Fantasy Flight Games for continued support and expansion.

Formerly Games Workshop licensed a number of &quot;Warhammer 40K&quot; themed products to Fantasy Flight Games. They specialise in board, card and role-playing games. Included in the licensed product were:
* &quot;Horus Heresy&quot;: a board game focusing on the final battle of the Horus Heresy the battle for the Emperor&#x27;s Palace; this game is a re-imagining of a game by the same name created by Jervis Johnson in the 1990s.
* &quot;Space Hulk: Death Angel, The Card Game&quot;: the card game version of &quot;Space Hulk&quot;. Players cooperate as Space Marines in order to clear out the infestation of Genestealers on a derelict spaceship.
* &quot;Warhammer 40,000: Conquest&quot;: a Living Card Game where players control various factions of the &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; setting in order to rule the sector.
* &quot;Forbidden Stars&quot;: a board game that pits four popular &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; factions against one another to control objectives and secure the sector for themselves.
* &quot;Relic&quot;: an adaptation of the board game &quot;Talisman&quot; to the &quot;Warhammer: 40,000&quot; setting.
* The &quot;Warhammer 40,000 Roleplay&quot; series of tabletop role-playing games, which share many core mechanics as well as the setting:
** &quot;Dark Heresy&quot;: players may assume the roles of a cell of Inquisitorial acolytes, or assume a different and equally small-scale scenario following the game&#x27;s rules. The recommended scenarios and ruleset present a balance between investigation and combat encounters.
** &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;: players assume the roles of Explorers, whose rank and escalated privileges allow for travelling outside the Imperium&#x27;s borders. Due to extensive expansions for &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;, campaigns can be largely different and altered by game masters. Its most significant difference from any of the other &quot;Warhammer 40,000 Roleplay&quot; titles is that it contains rules for capital spaceship design and space combat.
** &quot;Deathwatch&quot;: the game allows players to role-play the Space Marines of the Adeptus Astartes, who are the gene-enhanced superhuman elite combat units of the Imperium of Man. In light of this, its ruleset heavily emphasises combat against difficult or numerically superior enemies, rather than negotiation and investigation, compared to &quot;Dark Heresy&quot; or &quot;Rogue Trader&quot;.
** &quot;Black Crusade&quot;: &quot;Black Crusade&quot; allows players to role-play Chaos-corrupted characters. This instalment will be concluded with supplements. It is notably different in that it allows much more free-form character development, with experience costs being determined by affiliation with a Chaos God.
** &quot;Only War&quot;: &quot;Only War&quot; puts players in the boots of the Imperial Guard, the foot soldiers of the Imperium of Man. Despite the human-level capabilities of the characters, it also emphasises combat over interaction, much like &quot;Deathwatch&quot;.

Games from other publishers include:
* &quot;Risk: Warhammer 40,000&quot;: This is a &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;-themed variant of the board game &quot;Risk&quot;, published by The OP.
* &quot;Monopoly: Warhammer 40,000&quot;: A &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;-themed version of the board game &quot;Monopoly&quot;, published by The OP.
* &quot;Munchkin Warhammer 40,000&quot;: a &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;-themed edition of &quot;Munchkin&quot;, released in 2019 by Steve Jackson Games.
* &quot;Magic: the Gathering Universes Beyond: Warhammer 40,000&quot; collaboration: A series of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;-themed pre-constructed decks and limited edition collections of &quot;&quot;.

===TV===
On July 17, 2019, Games Workshop and Big Light Productions announced the development of a live-action TV series based on the character Gregor Eisenhorn, who is an Imperial Inquisitor. Frank Spotnitz was to be the showrunner for the series. The series was expected to be based on the novels written by Dan Abnett.

In September 2022, Games Workshop released the animated series &quot;Hammer and Bolter&quot; on the Warhammer+ streaming service. Each of the 15 half-hour episodes focused on a specific faction from the 40k universe, including the Imperium of Man, Chaos Space Marines, Orks, Tyranids, and Necrons.

In December 2022, Amazon MGM Studios acquired the TV and film rights to the game after months of negotiations and fending off rival companies that also sought the rights. Vertigo Entertainment&#x27;s Roy Lee and Natalie Viscuso worked with Henry Cavill to obtain the IP before taking it to Amazon Studios. Vertigo will executive produce with Games Workshop&#x27;s Andy Smillie and Max Bottrill alongside Amazon MGM Studios. Henry Cavill will star and also serve as an executive producer of the series and further planned franchise.

In August 2024, it was revealed that the franchise would be featured in &quot;Secret Level&quot;, a video game anthology series created by Tim Miller for Amazon Prime Video.

===Film===
On December 13, 2010, &quot;&quot; was released directly to DVD. It is a CGI science fiction film, based around the Ultramarines Chapter of Space Marines. The screenplay was written by Dan Abnett, a Games Workshop Black Library author. The film was produced by Codex Pictures, a UK-based company, under license from Games Workshop. It utilised animated facial capture technology from Image Metrics. It was received poorly.

===Music===
The album &quot;Realms of Chaos: Slaves to Darkness&quot; by British death metal band Bolt Thrower features lyrics as well as artwork based on the &quot;Warhammer&quot; and &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; brands, with the album&#x27;s title design being identical to that of the eponymous Games Workshop books.

In the early 1990s Games Workshop set up their own label, Warhammer Records. The band D-Rok were signed to this label; their only album, &quot;Oblivion&quot;, featured songs based on &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;.

The song &quot;Chaos Space Marine&quot; by British experimental rock band Black Country, New Road is named after the Chaos Space Marine in &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot;.

==Reception==
In Issue 35 of &quot;Challenge&quot; (1988), John A. Theisen said &quot;If this were intended as a serious science-fiction game, my criticisms would be enormous. However, it is not; it is undeniably action-oriented science-fantasy. As a result, by openly acknowledging that it is a fantasy game set in the far future, any comments on internal consistency, suspension of disbelief, and game rationale can be thrown out the nearest window. This is basically cosmic hack-and-slash, not an extrapolation of future-history-yet-to-come. And if that&#x27;s the way you like to play, this game is fun, fun, fun.&quot;

In Issue 12 of the French magazine &quot;Backstab&quot; (1998), Croc noted that the rules in the 3rd edition had been immensely simplified, saying, &quot;It&#x27;s clear, Games Workshop is trying to lower the age of its players even further. The rules of &quot;WH40K&quot; are much simpler than previous ones, really bringing this edition closer to &quot;Space Marine&quot;. Units fire together, not figure by figure. No more alerting, no more hiding.&quot; His only complaint with the game was the sculpting of the Dark Eldar figurines, which he called, &quot;ugly and badly sculpted, I don&#x27;t know where they got the sculptor who did this but he should buy some glasses.&quot; Croc concluded by only giving the Dark Eldar figurines a rating of 5 out of 10, but giving the overall game 7 out of 10, saying, &quot;It&#x27;s a real treat for both old and new players.&quot;

Ken Carpenter reviewed the second edition of &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; in &quot;White Wolf&quot; #44 (June, 1994), rating it a 4 out of 5 and stated that &quot;&quot;WH40K&quot; is [...] a perfect game for beginners to miniatures gaming because of its low initial investment [...] &quot;WH40K&quot; is a colorful, visual way to represent battles in a dark future.&quot;

==Awards==
&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; 2nd Edition won the 1993 Origins Award for &quot;Best Miniatures Rules&quot;.

In 2004, &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; was inducted into the Origins Hall of Fame.

&quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; 8th Edition won the 2017 Origins Awards for Best Miniatures Game and Fan Favorite Miniatures Game.

==See also==
* &quot;Grimdark Future&quot;
* God Emperor Trump

==References==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* &quot;Warhammer 40,000&quot; Core Rules (free PDF)
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q532716" start="82" end="99" title="miniature wargame" label="miniature wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="112" end="126" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053894" start="423" end="439" title="Miniature model (gaming)" label="miniature models"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901288" start="1168" end="1181" title="Black Library" label="Black Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="1312" end="1336" title="Warhammer (game)" label="Warhammer Fantasy Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q603291" start="1346" end="1362" title="medieval fantasy" label="medieval fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501543" start="1363" end="1370" title="wargame" label="wargame"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338354" start="1680" end="1688" title="grimdark" label="grimdark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="1698" end="1717" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004095" start="2130" end="2140" title="Space Hulk" label="Space Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q583009" start="2293" end="2311" title="Battlefleet Gothic" label="Battlefleet Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840713" start="2325" end="2342" title="Adeptus Titanicus" label="Adeptus Titanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346928" start="2358" end="2372" title="Epic (game)" label="Warhammer Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061708" start="2416" end="2427" title="Dawn of War" label="Dawn of War"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2448" end="2460" title="Warhammer 40,000: Space Marine" label="Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="2722" end="2736" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="3447" end="3458" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q852372" start="3543" end="3549" title="pewter" label="pewter"/>
<link wikidata="Q143983" start="3553" end="3564" title="epoxy resin" label="epoxy resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810983" start="4399" end="4409" title="BattleTech" label="BattleTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="5114" end="5135" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Tactical Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6391" end="6399" title="#Factions" label="factions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="7148" end="7169" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Tactical Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="8276" end="8288" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="8897" end="8909" title="Space Marines (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="11425" end="11440" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="11667" end="11684" title="Warhammer Fantasy Battle" label="Warhammer Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="11715" end="11729" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="11760" end="11782" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="11790" end="11804" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338354" start="13060" end="13068" title="grimdark" label="grimdark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="13316" end="13329" title="Space Marines (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="13992" end="14004" title="clairvoyance" label="clairvoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069787" start="14010" end="14021" title="pyrokinesis" label="pyrokinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635546" start="14754" end="14768" title="Rick Priestley" label="Rick Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="14775" end="14791" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="14793" end="14808" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="14816" end="14820" title="Dune (franchise)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="14834" end="14847" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="14865" end="14872" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="15191" end="15207" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="15267" end="15280" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331230" start="15688" end="15704" title="Forbidden Planet" label="Forbidden Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q304741" start="15937" end="15953" title="Leto Atreides II" label="Leto Atreides II"/>
<link wikidata="Q401619" start="15975" end="15994" title="God Emperor of Dune" label="God Emperor of Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="16004" end="16017" title="Frank Herbert" label="Frank Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027821" start="16042" end="16063" title="The History of the Runestaff" label="&amp;quot;Runestaff&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="16074" end="16090" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="16391" end="16395" title="Dune (franchise)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="17032" end="17047" title="capital offence" label="capital offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="17053" end="17067" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="18147" end="18160" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641550" start="18851" end="18862" title="body horror" label="body horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448865" start="18867" end="18880" title="Lovecraftian horror" label="cosmic horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q194061" start="22621" end="22624" title="orc" label="orc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="22722" end="22729" title="Cockney" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611246" start="24149" end="24158" title="Group mind (science fiction)" label="hive mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="24618" end="24631" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="26342" end="26353" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="26415" end="26425" title="Alien (creature in Alien franchise)" label="Xenomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990792" start="26435" end="26450" title="Alien (franchise)" label="Alien franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="27125" end="27135" title="endogamy" label="endogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="27136" end="27141" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="27633" end="27645" title="Space Marine (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827277" start="27955" end="27966" title="auxiliaries" label="auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155016" start="28256" end="28275" title="spiritual successor" label="spiritual successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="28551" end="28574" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="28803" end="28815" title="Capitalism" label="capitalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="28878" end="28890" title="Strip mine" label="strip-mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635546" start="29207" end="29221" title="Rick Priestley" label="Rick Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974377" start="29229" end="29247" title="Citadel Miniatures" label="Citadel Miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q587270" start="29285" end="29299" title="Games Workshop" label="Games Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="29351" end="29373" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979952" start="29381" end="29393" title="Bryan Ansell" label="Bryan Ansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="29759" end="29783" title="Warhammer Fantasy Battle" label="Warhammer Fantasy Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="31180" end="31187" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048401" start="31244" end="31257" title="Rogue Trooper" label="Rogue Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="31657" end="31668" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31716" end="31746" title="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader" label="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="31894" end="31900" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q287063" start="31920" end="31931" title="Ken Rolston" label="Ken Rolston"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32205" end="32235" title="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader" label="Warhammer 40,000: Rogue Trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q928197" start="32276" end="32300" title="Warhammer Fantasy Battle" label="Warhammer Fantasy Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635546" start="32506" end="32520" title="Rick Priestley" label="Rick Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32579" end="32633" title="Warhammer Fantasy Battle#Second edition" label="second edition of &amp;quot;Warhammer Fantasy Battle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="32755" end="32767" title="Role-playing game" label="role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="33003" end="33013" title="skirmisher" label="skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="33088" end="33092" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6493117" start="33238" end="33247" title="Laserburn" label="Laserburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q106695420" start="33383" end="33400" title="Richard Halliwell (game designer)" label="Richard Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="33580" end="33591" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="34189" end="34215" title="Realm of Chaos (Warhammer)" label="&amp;quot;Realm of Chaos&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="35681" end="35692" title="H. R. Giger" label="H. R. Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q211174" start="35727" end="35733" title="2000 AD (comics)" label="2000AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849088" start="36224" end="36237" title="Andy Chambers" label="Andy Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18011049" start="38139" end="38143" title="Dune (franchise)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682041" start="38523" end="38542" title="Codex (Warhammer 40,000)" label="&amp;#x27;codexes&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="39467" end="39487" title="Backward compatibility" label="backwards compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="39921" end="39934" title="Space Marines (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="39939" end="39946" title="Tyranids" label="Tyranid"/>
<link wikidata="Q145205" start="42189" end="42194" title="resin" label="resin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43609" end="43636" title="Epic (game)#2nd edition" label="Titan Legions (2nd Edition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="47774" end="47797" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;White Dwarf&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994760" start="47858" end="47873" title="Imperial Armour" label="Imperial Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565663" start="48308" end="48321" title="Space Marines (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q860251" start="48844" end="48857" title="urban warfare" label="urban warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="48862" end="48879" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901288" start="54406" end="54419" title="Black Library" label="Black Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="54619" end="54632" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970025" start="54707" end="54720" title="Space Crusade" label="Space Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004095" start="54734" end="54744" title="Space Hulk" label="Space Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q583009" start="54807" end="54825" title="Battlefleet Gothic" label="Battlefleet Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346928" start="54839" end="54850" title="Epic (game)" label="Epic 40,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151489" start="54864" end="54874" title="Inquisitor (game)" label="Inquisitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420716" start="54888" end="54898" title="Gorkamorka" label="Gorkamorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973302" start="54912" end="54922" title="Necromunda" label="Necromunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="54978" end="54999" title="collectible card game" label="collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223322" start="55007" end="55022" title="Dark Millennium" label="Dark Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835920" start="55089" end="55105" title="Sabertooth Games" label="Sabertooth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901288" start="55642" end="55655" title="Black Library" label="Black Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338354" start="56085" end="56093" title="grimdark" label="grimdark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731389" start="56234" end="56250" title="the Horus Heresy" label="the Horus Heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="56260" end="56267" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="56580" end="56595" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004095" start="56691" end="56701" title="Space Hulk" label="Space Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268871" start="56768" end="56789" title="Strategic Simulations" label="Strategic Simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q580866" start="56928" end="56931" title="THQ" label="THQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061708" start="57008" end="57019" title="Dawn of War" label="Dawn of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029276" start="57441" end="57461" title="Fantasy Flight Games" label="Fantasy Flight Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870152" start="57605" end="57626" title="Battle for Armageddon" label="Battle for Armageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004095" start="57751" end="57761" title="Space Hulk" label="Space Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756086" start="57837" end="57846" title="Deathwing (board game)" label="Deathwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762986" start="57936" end="57947" title="Genestealer (board game)" label="Genestealer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970025" start="58218" end="58240" title="Advanced Space Crusade" label="Advanced Space Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420716" start="58378" end="58388" title="Gorkamorka" label="Gorkamorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572348" start="58640" end="58651" title="Space Fleet (board game)" label="Space Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q64678774" start="58888" end="58902" title="Tyranid Attack" label="Tyranid Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880468" start="58999" end="59012" title="Ultra Marines" label="Ultra Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082969" start="59271" end="59286" title="Warhammer Quest" label="Warhammer Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="60016" end="60033" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q912418" start="60220" end="60231" title="Warhammer 40,000 Roleplay" label="Dark Heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952039" start="60241" end="60257" title="Black Industries" label="Black Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029276" start="60322" end="60342" title="Fantasy Flight Games" label="Fantasy Flight Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350069" start="60595" end="60607" title="Horus Heresy (2010 board game)" label="Horus Heresy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61039" end="61065" title="Warhammer 40,000: Conquest" label="Warhammer 40,000: Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029276" start="61075" end="61091" title="Living Card Game" label="Living Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140139" start="61448" end="61456" title="Talisman (board game)" label="Talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="61563" end="61589" title="tabletop role-playing game" label="tabletop role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160044" start="61657" end="61668" title="Dark Heresy (role-playing game)" label="Dark Heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21233618" start="61940" end="61952" title="Rogue Trader (role-playing game)" label="Rogue Trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160081" start="62396" end="62406" title="Deathwatch (role-playing game)" label="Deathwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20313364" start="62798" end="62811" title="Black Crusade (role-playing game)" label="Black Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="63529" end="63545" title="Risk (game)" label="&amp;quot;Risk&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="63674" end="63694" title="Monopoly (game)" label="&amp;quot;Monopoly&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q729935" start="63807" end="63827" title="Munchkin (card game)" label="&amp;quot;Munchkin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q762392" start="63849" end="63868" title="Steve Jackson Games" label="Steve Jackson Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558191" start="64121" end="64142" title="Big light productions" label="Big Light Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505584" start="64219" end="64235" title="Gregor Eisenhorn" label="Gregor Eisenhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558191" start="64268" end="64282" title="Frank Spotnitz" label="Frank Spotnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="64297" end="64307" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q720317" start="64385" end="64395" title="Dan Abnett" label="Dan Abnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857704" start="64467" end="64484" title="Hammer and Bolter" label="Hammer and Bolter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="64509" end="64526" title="streaming media" label="streaming service"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64629" end="64644" title="Imperium of Man" label="Imperium of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64646" end="64665" title="Chaos Space Marines" label="Chaos Space Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64667" end="64671" title="Ork (Warhammer 40,000)" label="Orks"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64673" end="64681" title="Tyranids" label="Tyranids"/>
<link wikidata="Q209026" start="64687" end="64694" title="Necrons" label="Necrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740868" start="64715" end="64733" title="Amazon MGM Studios" label="Amazon MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556262" start="64868" end="64889" title="Vertigo Entertainment" label="Vertigo Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990920" start="64897" end="64904" title="Roy Lee" label="Roy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q295498" start="64937" end="64949" title="Henry Cavill" label="Henry Cavill"/>
<link wikidata="Q129504978" start="65308" end="65320" title="Secret Level" label="Secret Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="65341" end="65350" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561563" start="65369" end="65379" title="Tim Miller (director)" label="Tim Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="65384" end="65402" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q720317" start="65601" end="65611" title="Dan Abnett" label="Dan Abnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140229" start="65677" end="65691" title="Codex Pictures" label="Codex Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428562" start="65769" end="65794" title="Facial motion capture" label="facial capture technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002160" start="65800" end="65813" title="Image Metrics" label="Image Metrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205217" start="65862" end="65909" title="Realm of Chaos (album)" label="&amp;quot;Realms of Chaos: Slaves to Darkness&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="65921" end="65932" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q662463" start="65938" end="65950" title="Bolt Thrower" label="Bolt Thrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203281" start="66247" end="66252" title="D-Rok" label="D-Rok"/>
<link wikidata="Q109570526" start="66384" end="66414" title="Ants from Up There" label="&amp;quot;Chaos Space Marine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641839" start="66426" end="66443" title="experimental rock" label="experimental rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q66759333" start="66449" end="66472" title="Black Country, New Road" label="Black Country, New Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068887" start="66580" end="66589" title="Challenge (game magazine)" label="Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003137" start="67234" end="67238" title="Croc (game designer)" label="Croc"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815399" start="68131" end="68141" title="White Wolf (magazine)" label="White Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206771" start="68678" end="68692" title="Origins Awards" label="Origins Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560653" start="68774" end="68789" title="Grimdark Future" label="Grimdark Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q122199360" start="68798" end="68815" title="God Emperor Trump" label="God Emperor Trump"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89635" wikidata="Q440617" url="?curid=89635" title="Kerri Green">
<text>Kerri Green is an American actress best known for her roles in &quot;The Goonies&quot; (1985), &quot;Summer Rental&quot; (1985), and &quot;Lucas&quot; (1986). She co-wrote and directed the film &quot;Bellyfruit&quot; (1999).

==Early life==
Green grew up in Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey north of Hackensack, and graduated from Pascack Hills High School in Montvale bordering New York, and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York south of Albany. She worked at a Roy Rogers restaurant near Woodcliff Lake, made commercials for Jordache jeans and Bold 3 detergent, and auditioned in New York City for acting jobs.

==Career==
Green is best known for her roles as a young teen in a string of teen flicks in the 1980s, including &quot;Summer Rental&quot; (1985). Her big break came in the 1985 film &quot;The Goonies&quot; playing cheerleader-turned-adventurer Andrea &quot;Andy&quot; Carmichael. Two months later, she worked in &quot;Summer Rental&quot; where she portrayed Jennifer Chester. She gained further critical acclaim for her performance in &quot;Lucas&quot; (1986) starring as the center of a love triangle between the characters of Corey Haim and Charlie Sheen. However, her next film &quot;Three for the Road&quot; (1987), which featured Sheen and Alan Ruck, did not fare as well. She appeared in a 1990 episode of &quot;In the Heat of the Night&quot;, performed in an independent film called &quot;Blue Flame&quot;, and played the role of secretary to Paul Reiser&#x27;s character in two episodes of the television sitcom &quot;Mad About You&quot;.

Green eventually co-founded a film production company, Independent Women Artists with Bonnie Dickenson. With Dickenson, she co-wrote and directed the film adaptation of a play about teen pregnancy called &quot;Bellyfruit&quot; (1999).

==Personal life==
Green took a break from acting to study art at Vassar College, where she was roommates with Marisa Tomei&#x27;s brother, Adam and with video game &quot;BioShock&quot; developer Ken Levine.

==Filmography==


==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440617" start="0" end="11" title="Kerri Green" label="Kerri Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="69" end="80" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110527" start="101" end="114" title="Summer Rental" label="Summer Rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q507214" start="139" end="144" title="Lucas (1986 film)" label="Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884260" start="200" end="210" title="Bellyfruit" label="Bellyfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082846" start="258" end="272" title="Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey" label="Woodcliff Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="274" end="284" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138458" start="294" end="304" title="Hackensack, New Jersey" label="Hackensack"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705839" start="325" end="350" title="Pascack Hills High School" label="Pascack Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q178277" start="354" end="362" title="Montvale, New Jersey" label="Montvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="373" end="381" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="387" end="401" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="405" end="427" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="437" end="443" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373311" start="461" end="471" title="Roy Rogers Restaurants" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276279" start="525" end="533" title="Jordache" label="Jordache"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939044" start="544" end="550" title="Bold (detergent)" label="Bold 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="580" end="593" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146335" start="688" end="699" title="teen movie" label="teen flicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110527" start="730" end="743" title="Summer Rental" label="Summer Rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="800" end="811" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110527" start="930" end="943" title="Summer Rental" label="Summer Rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q507214" start="1053" end="1058" title="Lucas (1986 film)" label="Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070872" start="1100" end="1113" title="love triangle" label="love triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q342370" start="1140" end="1150" title="Corey Haim" label="Corey Haim"/>
<link wikidata="Q103939" start="1155" end="1168" title="Charlie Sheen" label="Charlie Sheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257200" start="1199" end="1217" title="Three for the Road (1987 film)" label="Three for the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q498263" start="1257" end="1266" title="Alan Ruck" label="Alan Ruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247708" start="1330" end="1354" title="In the Heat of the Night (TV series)" label="In the Heat of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929114" start="1408" end="1418" title="Blue Flame (movie)" label="Blue Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q430922" start="1462" end="1473" title="Paul Reiser" label="Paul Reiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q752365" start="1538" end="1551" title="Mad About You" label="Mad About You"/>
<link wikidata="Q535691" start="1742" end="1756" title="teen pregnancy" label="teen pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884260" start="1770" end="1780" title="Bellyfruit" label="Bellyfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093794" start="1861" end="1875" title="Vassar College" label="Vassar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q191828" start="1906" end="1918" title="Marisa Tomei" label="Marisa Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q57270" start="1966" end="1974" title="BioShock" label="BioShock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155636" start="1991" end="2001" title="Ken Levine (game developer)" label="Ken Levine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89637" wikidata="Q1521634" url="?curid=89637" title="Vulgarism">
<text>In the study of language and literary style, a vulgarism is an expression or usage considered non-standard or characteristic of uneducated speech or writing. In colloquial or lexical English, &quot;vulgarism&quot; or &quot;vulgarity&quot; may be synonymous with profanity or obscenity, but a linguistic or literary vulgarism encompasses a broader category of perceived fault not confined to scatological or sexual offensiveness. These faults may include errors of pronunciation, misspellings, word malformations, and malapropisms. &quot;&quot; is generally used in the more restricted sense. In regular and mostly informal conversations, the presence of vulgarity, if any, are mostly for intensifying, exclaiming or scolding. In modern times, vulgarism continues to be frequently used by people. A research paper produced by Oxford University in 2005 shows that the age group of 10–20 years old speak more vulgarity than the rest of the world&#x27;s population combined. The frequent and prevalent usage of vulgarity as a whole has led to a paradox, in which people use vulgarity so often that it becomes less and less offensive to people, according to &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

==Classicism==
The English word &quot;vulgarism&quot; derives ultimately from Latin &quot;vulgus,&quot; &quot;the common people&quot;, often as a pejorative meaning &quot;the [unwashed] masses, undifferentiated herd, a mob&quot;. In classical studies, Vulgar Latin as the Latin of everyday life is conventionally contrasted to Classical Latin, the literary language exemplified by the &quot;Golden Age&quot; canon (Cicero, Caesar, Vergil, Ovid, among others). This distinction was always an untenable mode of literary criticism, unduly problematizing, for instance, the so-called &quot;Silver Age&quot; novelist Petronius, whose complex and sophisticated prose style in the &quot;Satyricon&quot; is full of conversational vulgarisms.

==Social class==
Vulgarism has been a particular concern of British English traditionalists. In the 1920s, the English lexicographer Henry Wyld defined &quot;vulgarism&quot; as:a peculiarity which intrudes itself into Standard English, and is of such a nature as to be associated with the speech of vulgar or uneducated speakers. The origin of pure &quot;vulgarisms&quot; is usually that they are importations, not from a regional but from a class dialect—in this case from a dialect which is not that of a province, but of a low or uneducated social class. ... [A vulgarism] is usually a variety of Standard English, but a bad variety. The moral and aesthetic values explicit in such a definition depends on class hierarchy viewed as authoritative. For instance, the &quot;misuse&quot; of aspiration (H-dropping, such as pronouncing &quot;have&quot; as ave&quot;) has been considered a mark of the lower classes in England at least since the late 18th century, as dramatized in &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;. Because linguistic vulgarism betrayed social class, its avoidance became an aspect of etiquette. In 19th-century England, books such as &quot;The Vulgarisms and Improprieties of the English Language&quot; (1833) by W. H. Savage, reflected upper-middle-class anxieties about &quot;correctness and good breeding&quot;.

Vulgarisms in a literary work may be used deliberately to further characterization, by use of &quot;eye dialect&quot; or simply by vocabulary choice.

==See also==
* Barbarism (linguistics)
* Disputes in English grammar
* Euphemism
* Grotesque body
* Heteroglossia
* Linguistic purism
* Solecism
* Vernacular

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2243831" start="29" end="43" title="literary style" label="literary style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521634" start="47" end="56" title="Vulgarism" label="vulgarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="94" end="106" title="standard language" label="non-standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="161" end="171" title="colloquial" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187657" start="175" end="182" title="Lexical definition" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128384" start="223" end="232" title="vulgarity" label="vulgarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="246" end="253" title="synonym" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="262" end="271" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="275" end="284" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337766" start="391" end="403" title="scatology" label="scatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="454" end="477" title="Received Pronunciation" label="errors of pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="479" end="491" title="orthography" label="misspellings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057682" start="517" end="528" title="malapropism" label="malapropism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="798" end="806" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="825" end="842" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="950" end="960" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="1041" end="1048" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1159" end="1177" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1264" end="1269" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="1332" end="1342" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1419" end="1436" title="classical studies" label="classical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="1438" end="1450" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="1513" end="1528" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="1534" end="1551" title="literary language" label="literary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="1571" end="1593" title="Latin literature" label="&amp;quot;Golden Age&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033171" start="1594" end="1599" title="literary canon" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1601" end="1607" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1609" end="1615" title="Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1617" end="1623" title="Vergil" label="Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1625" end="1629" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="1695" end="1713" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47180" start="1798" end="1807" title="Petronius" label="Petronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q246732" start="1866" end="1875" title="Satyricon" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="1981" end="1996" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="2040" end="2053" title="lexicographer" label="lexicographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719254" start="2054" end="2064" title="Henry Wyld" label="Henry Wyld"/>
<link wikidata="Q14437894" start="2139" end="2155" title="Standard English" label="Standard English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="2369" end="2376" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="2630" end="2645" title="social class" label="class hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="2711" end="2721" title="Aspirated consonant" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071528" start="2723" end="2733" title="H-dropping" label="H-dropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="2906" end="2918" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q188907" start="3012" end="3021" title="etiquette" label="etiquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667413" start="3310" end="3326" title="characterization" label="characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422649" start="3344" end="3355" title="eye dialect" label="eye dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="3375" end="3385" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q720113" start="3410" end="3433" title="Barbarism (linguistics)" label="Barbarism (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996101" start="3436" end="3463" title="Disputes in English grammar" label="Disputes in English grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="3466" end="3475" title="Euphemism" label="Euphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107775" start="3478" end="3492" title="Grotesque body" label="Grotesque body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068733" start="3495" end="3508" title="Heteroglossia" label="Heteroglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192227" start="3511" end="3528" title="Linguistic purism" label="Linguistic purism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545853" start="3531" end="3539" title="Solecism" label="Solecism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="3542" end="3552" title="Vernacular" label="Vernacular"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="89641" wikidata="Q267383" url="?curid=89641" title="Martha Plimpton">
<text>Martha Plimpton (born November 16, 1970) is an American actress and member of the Carradine family. Her feature-film debut was in &quot;Rollover&quot; (1981); she subsequently rose to prominence in the Richard Donner film &quot;The Goonies&quot; (1985). She has also appeared in &quot;The Mosquito Coast&quot; (1986), &quot;Shy People&quot; (1987), &quot;Running on Empty&quot; (1988), &quot;Parenthood&quot; (1989), &quot;Samantha&quot; (1991), &quot;Small Town Murder Songs&quot; (2011), &quot;Frozen II&quot; (2019), and &quot;Mass&quot; (2021).

She appeared on Broadway in &quot;The Coast of Utopia&quot; (2006–2007), &quot;Shining City&quot; (2006–2007), &quot;Top Girls&quot; (2007–2008), and &quot;Pal Joey&quot; (2008–2009). Other theatre productions in which she has performed include &quot;The Playboy of the Western World&quot;, &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;, &quot;The Glass Menagerie&quot;, &quot;The Sisters Rosensweig&quot;, and &quot;Uncle Vanya&quot;. She returned to Broadway in the fall of 2014 in a revival of &quot;A Delicate Balance&quot;, and starred in the ABC sitcom &quot;The Real O&#x27;Neals&quot; from March 2016 to March 2017.

She played Virginia Chance in the Fox sitcom &quot;Raising Hope&quot;, which earned her a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series. She has also received three Tony Award nominations, as well as Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series for the NBC crime drama &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot; in 2002 and for the CBS legal drama &quot;The Good Wife&quot; in 2012, winning for the latter.

==Early life==
Plimpton was born in New York City. She is the daughter of actors Keith Carradine and Shelley Plimpton. Her parents met while performing in the original Broadway run of &quot;Hair&quot;. Her paternal grandfather was actor John Carradine. She is an eighth cousin once removed of writer and editor George Plimpton. She is also related to cartoonist Bill Plympton, despite the different spelling. She attended the Professional Children&#x27;s School in Manhattan. Her first stage appearance was when her mother brought her on stage in costume for the curtain call of the short-lived Broadway play &quot;The Leaf People&quot; then another play in &quot;The Ass and the Heart&quot;.

==Career==

===1980s===
Plimpton began her career as a model, securing an early 1980s campaign for Calvin Klein, making an impression as a sophisticated but tomboyish little girl. She made her feature film debut in 1981 with a small role in the film &quot;Rollover&quot;. In 1984, she appeared in the Deep South drama &quot;The River Rat&quot; opposite Tommy Lee Jones, as his &quot;hoydenish daughter&quot;. Her breakthrough performance was as Stef Steinbrenner in the 1985 film &quot;The Goonies&quot;. She also appeared that year in the sitcom &quot;Family Ties&quot;. This began Plimpton being cast in the role of a rebellious tomboy, beginning with her performance as the Reverend Spellgood (Andre Gregory)&#x27;s daughter in the 1986 film &quot;The Mosquito Coast&quot;, starring Harrison Ford. The critically praised but commercially unsuccessful 1987 film &quot;Shy People&quot; was followed by a performance in the 1988 ensemble comedy &quot;Stars and Bars&quot;. This was released shortly before &quot;Running on Empty&quot;, an Oscar-nominated film, in which Plimpton appeared opposite River Phoenix, her boyfriend, both 17–18 years of age, like their characters. For this role, she was nominated for a Young Artist Award.

In her late teenaged years, Plimpton was also active in theater, performing in regional theater in Seattle, Washington, where her mother was living at the time. She also began a career making small independent film appearances with supporting roles in big-budget films. She appeared in the 1988 Woody Allen film &quot;Another Woman&quot;. She starred as a cancer patient in the German film &quot;Zwei Frauen&quot; (1990) (released in America as &quot;Silence Like Glass&quot;). The film was nominated for a German Film Award as Best Fiction Film. Plimpton shaved her head to play a cancer patient in &quot;Zwei Frauen&quot;. She played the independent teenage daughter of Dianne Wiest&#x27;s character in &quot;Parenthood&quot;. &quot;Parenthood&quot; grossed over $126 million and received two Oscar nominations, one of her most successful movie appearances since &quot;The Goonies&quot;.

===1990s===

Plimpton appeared in the Robert De Niro-Jane Fonda 1990 romantic drama &quot;Stanley &amp; Iris&quot; in a supporting role. She also appeared in the 1991 TV movie &quot;A Woman At War&quot; in the lead role as Helene Moskiewicz. Plimpton played the starring role of Samantha in the film &quot;Samantha&quot; (1991). She appeared as an activist in the independent film &quot;Inside Monkey Zetterland&quot; released in 1993. She appeared in the television film &quot;Daybreak&quot; (1993, HBO). She appeared in the Showtime television film &quot;Chantilly Lace&quot;. She had a featured role in the film &quot;Josh and S.A.M.&quot; (1993) as a runaway who takes care of the two boys. She played the lead in &quot;The Beans of Egypt, Maine&quot;, based on the Carolyn Chute novel. Plimpton also appeared as herself in the independent film by Eric Schaeffer &quot;My Life&#x27;s in Turnaround&quot; (1993), a movie about filmmakers trying to make a movie. She appeared as a close friend of radical feminist Valerie Solanas in the film &quot;I Shot Andy Warhol&quot; (1996).

In 1997, the Showtime Network cast Plimpton as the female lead in a television film, &quot;The Defenders: Payback&quot;. Two more episodes (&quot;The Defenders: Choice of Evils&quot; and &quot;The Defenders: Taking the First&quot;) were aired in 1998. This show was a retooling of the classic television show by the same name, and the characters were descendants of Lawrence Preston, a role reprised by actor E. G. Marshall. Plimpton played the granddaughter, M.J. Preston. The intent was to spin the program off as a series, but Marshall died in 1998. The decision was made to not continue production due to Marshall&#x27;s death. Plimpton became involved with the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago, appearing in &quot;Hedda Gabler&quot; (2001) among others. She appeared in the John Waters film &quot;Pecker&quot; in 1998. The film received mixed reviews—for example, the &quot;SF Gate&quot; reviewer wrote, &quot;...Waters&#x27; patented brand of off-color fun is watered down&quot;, but wrote that Plimpton&#x27;s work was &quot;solid&quot;. The 1999 film &quot;200 Cigarettes&quot; received generally negative reviews, but the AllMovie reviewer wrote of Plimpton: &quot;...woefully underappreciated Martha Plimpton gets laughs as a bundle of neuroses who grows more and more stressed out as people fail to appear for her party...&quot; In 1999, Plimpton had a recurring role in the sixth season of the NBC medical drama &quot;ER&quot; as Meg Corwyn.

===2000s===
In 2001, she starred in &quot;The Sleepy Time Gal&quot;. In 2002, she appeared in the documentary &quot;Searching for Debra Winger&quot; and was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for her guest appearance on the television drama &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;. Plimpton was the voice of Miss Crumbles in the 2004 animated film &quot;Hair High&quot; by Bill Plympton. In 2004, she guest-starred in an episode of &quot;7th Heaven&quot;. She wrote the episode of the show entitled &quot;Red Socks&quot;, which aired in 2005. She had a recurring role in the NBC show &quot;Surface&quot; (2005–06). From October 2006 to May 2007, she was in the stage play &quot;The Coast of Utopia&quot;, a trilogy of plays by Tom Stoppard at Lincoln Center. She won a Drama Desk Award and was nominated for a Tony Award for Featured Actress in a Play. From August to September 2007, Plimpton appeared in &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; in the Public Theater Shakespeare in the Park production as &quot;Helena&quot;.

She co-founded a production company, Everything is Horrible, which has produced short films for the Internet. Plimpton received her second nomination for a Tony Award in 2008, Best Performance by a Featured Actress In a Play, for her work in &quot;Top Girls&quot; at the Biltmore Theater. In November 2008, she earned a positive review from Ben Brantley in &quot;The New York Times&quot; for her role as Gladys Bumps in the Roundabout Theatre Company production of &quot;Pal Joey&quot; on Broadway: &quot;...the ever-daring Ms. Plimpton exudes a been-there, frowzy sensuality that summons a host of hard-bitten dames from 1930s movie melodramas. Leading the nightclub act &#x27;That Terrific Rainbow,&#x27; she has the period style down pat and a more than passable voice.&quot; She received her third consecutive Tony nomination, for Best Featured Actress in a Musical. Plimpton appeared in the 2008 &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; photo issue spread as one of &quot;The Hardest Working Actors In Showbiz&quot;. Plimpton said in the write-up, &quot;I went to jury duty the other day, and somebody said, &#x27;You always play drug addicts!&#x27; I&#x27;ve played a few on TV, and I imagine because the shows get replayed, it seems like more. But yeah, people tend to see me as this pregnant teenage heroin addict.&quot; In 2008, Plimpton performed a duet with singer Lucy Wainwright Roche on Roche&#x27;s EP &quot;8 More&quot;, singing the Bruce Springsteen song &quot;Hungry Heart&quot;. The two had performed the song in 2008 at Joe&#x27;s Pub and later in 2008 at the Zipper Factory. In 2009, she was profiled by &quot;The New York Times&quot; for their &quot;A Night Out With...&quot; series, in which Plimpton hosted an evening of poker at The Players.

===2010s===
In 2010, she sang another Springsteen song, &quot;Thunder Road&quot;, on the public radio program &quot;Studio 360 with Kurt Andersen&quot;, accompanied by whistler Eric Gilliland. She has appeared multiple times as a guest on public radio&#x27;s &quot;The Leonard Lopate Show&quot;, and performed in a roast of Lopate celebrating the 25th anniversary of his radio program. Plimpton is on the board of directors of The Players, a New York City social club founded in 1888 by actor Edwin Booth. In November 2009, Plimpton signed on for the Fox sitcom &quot;Raising Hope&quot;. The show premiered on September 21, 2010, receiving strong reviews for Plimpton and the pilot. &quot;The New York Times&quot; called &quot;Raising Hope&quot; &quot;the most promising of the best new fall shows&quot;, and said &quot;Plimpton isn&#x27;t the only reason &quot;Raising Hope&quot; could be the best new sitcom of the season, but she is the main reason.&quot; Plimpton was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her portrayal of Virginia Chance in &quot;Raising Hope&quot;. In January 2010, she performed a one-woman show, &quot;Martha Plimpton Sings?&quot; for the Lincoln Center&#x27;s &quot;American Songbook&quot; program. This show explored her experiences growing up in 1970s New York City. Her performance, well received by critics, included songs &quot;Jolly Coppers on Parade&quot;, &quot;Woman Is the Nigger of the World&quot;, and The Smiths&#x27;s &quot;Ask&quot; tied together with humorous monologues. Plimpton also narrates audiobooks, including the novels &quot;Diary&quot; by Chuck Palahniuk and &quot;Mrs. Kimble&quot; by Jennifer Haigh.

She had a recurring role in the CBS legal drama &quot;The Good Wife&quot; from 2009 to 2013, playing attorney Patti Nyholm, who appeared through four seasons. Her performance earned her a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series in 2012. Plimpton sang &quot;God Bless America&quot; during the seventh inning stretch of Game 3 of the 2010 World Series in Texas on Fox, October 30, 2010. On December 15, 2010, Chicago&#x27;s Steppenwolf Theatre announced that Plimpton would be the guest of honor at their second-annual &quot;Salute to Women in the Arts&quot;. In 2010, she starred in Ed Gass-Donnelly&#x27;s independent crime thriller &quot;Small Town Murder Songs&quot;, and was given a trophy for best actress by the Whistler Film Festival. In 2014, Plimpton returned to Broadway as Julia, the daughter of Glenn Close and John Lithgow in a revival of Edward Albee&#x27;s &quot;A Delicate Balance&quot;. The limited engagement ran 18 weeks at the Golden Theatre. Plimpton starred in &quot;The Real O&#x27;Neals&quot;, an ABC sitcom that premiered on March 2, 2016. In July 2019, it was revealed that Plimpton had left the Steppenwolf Theater ensemble. In September 2019, it was revealed that Plimpton would voice Yelena in &quot;Frozen II&quot;.

=== 2020s ===
Plimpton appeared as one of four leads in the drama film &quot;Mass&quot;, which was released in 2021 to positive reviews, and earned her nominations for the Dorian Award for Best Supporting Film Performance and the San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actress. She also shared the Independent Spirit Robert Altman Award with the cast of &quot;Mass&quot;. She played a conservative mother in the HBO dramedy series &quot;Generation&quot;, which was cancelled after one season. She starred in the HBO miniseries &quot;The Regime&quot;. 

==Personal life==

In 1985, Plimpton met actor River Phoenix. They did not initially get along well, but began a romantic relationship in February 1986 while co-starring in Peter Weir&#x27;s &quot;The Mosquito Coast&quot;. They went on to co-star in the Sidney Lumet film &quot;Running on Empty&quot;. Their relationship ended in June 1989 due to Phoenix&#x27;s substance abuse, but they remained close friends until his death in 1993. Plimpton later stated, &quot;When we split up, a lot of it was that I had learned that screaming, fighting, and begging wasn&#x27;t going to change him. He had to change himself, and he didn&#x27;t want to yet.&quot;

Plimpton resides part-time in London, her visa allowing her to stay until 2024.

==Political campaigns==
Plimpton is an abortion-rights campaigner who has lobbied Congress on behalf of Planned Parenthood and is on the board of directors of the women&#x27;s-rights organization &quot;A Is For&quot;; according to the organization&#x27;s website, Plimpton has been politically active in abortion rights since her teenage years and speaks at campuses and rallies. In 2014, Plimpton wrote a lengthy article decrying both U.S. Supreme Court decisions in &quot;Burwell v. Hobby Lobby&quot; and &quot;McCullen v. Coakley&quot; and revealing in part that she herself has had an abortion more than once. She wrote that her purpose was &quot;A) to contribute to the dismantling of an oppressive, artificial and unfair shaming of women who seek abortion care, B) make clear just how normal, common, and healthy a decision it is for the women who make it, and C) to encourage women who are part of this one third to be unashamed and come out of the abortion closet.&quot; In September 2017, Plimpton created controversy when she again said she had multiple abortions and said one she received at Planned Parenthood in Seattle was her &quot;best one&quot;.

She has also advocated for LGBT rights causes. In a Twitter post in March 2016, she stated that transgender rights and abortion rights are linked.

==Theatre==
==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267383" start="0" end="15" title="Martha Plimpton" label="Martha Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065018" start="82" end="98" title="Carradine family" label="Carradine family"/>
<link wikidata="Q113171" start="136" end="144" title="Rollover (film)" label="Rollover"/>
<link wikidata="Q262130" start="202" end="216" title="Richard Donner" label="Richard Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="228" end="239" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479291" start="285" end="303" title="The Mosquito Coast (film)" label="The Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280511" start="324" end="334" title="Shy People" label="Shy People"/>
<link wikidata="Q544780" start="355" end="371" title="Running on Empty (1988 film)" label="Running on Empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137831" start="392" end="402" title="Parenthood (film)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406283" start="423" end="431" title="Samantha (film)" label="Samantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486849" start="452" end="475" title="Small Town Murder Songs" label="Small Town Murder Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24733929" start="496" end="505" title="Frozen II" label="Frozen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104213702" start="524" end="540" title="Mass (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mass&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="566" end="574" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913558" start="584" end="603" title="The Coast of Utopia" label="The Coast of Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7497537" start="629" end="641" title="Shining City" label="Shining City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824551" start="667" end="676" title="Top Girls" label="Top Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046738" start="706" end="714" title="Pal Joey (musical)" label="Pal Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q451517" start="801" end="833" title="The Playboy of the Western World" label="The Playboy of the Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="847" end="877" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q678832" start="891" end="910" title="The Glass Menagerie" label="The Glass Menagerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984646" start="924" end="946" title="The Sisters Rosensweig" label="The Sisters Rosensweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q753298" start="964" end="975" title="Uncle Vanya" label="Uncle Vanya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656398" start="1050" end="1068" title="A Delicate Balance (play)" label="A Delicate Balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866736" start="1112" end="1133" title="The Real O&amp;#x27;Neals" label="The Real O&amp;#x27;Neals"/>
<link wikidata="Q34669" start="1183" end="1198" title="Virginia Chance" label="Virginia Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34669" start="1223" end="1235" title="Raising Hope" label="Raising Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="1262" end="1282" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287335" start="1298" end="1341" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1371" end="1381" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="1443" end="1486" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1517" end="1554" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="1603" end="1616" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q433417" start="1738" end="1753" title="Keith Carradine" label="Keith Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493813" start="1758" end="1774" title="Shelley Plimpton" label="Shelley Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165499" start="1847" end="1851" title="Hair (musical)" label="Hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q312878" start="1894" end="1908" title="John Carradine" label="John Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508079" start="1968" end="1983" title="George Plimpton" label="George Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q862383" start="2019" end="2032" title="Bill Plympton" label="Bill Plympton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247941" start="2083" end="2118" title="Professional Children&amp;#x27;s School" label="Professional Children&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q214800" start="2450" end="2462" title="Calvin Klein" label="Calvin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="2508" end="2514" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113171" start="2607" end="2615" title="Rollover (film)" label="Rollover"/>
<link wikidata="Q969402" start="2675" end="2688" title="The River Rat" label="The River Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170587" start="2704" end="2719" title="Tommy Lee Jones" label="Tommy Lee Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q636043" start="2837" end="2848" title="The Goonies" label="The Goonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144624" start="2904" end="2915" title="Family Ties" label="Family Ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754791" start="3048" end="3061" title="Andre Gregory" label="Andre Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479291" start="3102" end="3120" title="The Mosquito Coast (film)" label="The Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="3137" end="3150" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280511" start="3221" end="3231" title="Shy People" label="Shy People"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602329" start="3302" end="3316" title="Stars and Bars (1988 film)" label="Stars and Bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q544780" start="3363" end="3379" title="Running on Empty (1988 film)" label="Running on Empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3390" end="3395" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514" start="3448" end="3461" title="River Phoenix" label="River Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="3565" end="3583" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="3685" end="3704" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="3784" end="3800" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="3881" end="3892" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q541185" start="3904" end="3917" title="Another Woman (1988 film)" label="Another Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232007" start="3982" end="3993" title="Zwei Frauen" label="Zwei Frauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q708731" start="4093" end="4110" title="German Film Award" label="German Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q217573" start="4258" end="4270" title="Dianne Wiest" label="Dianne Wiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137831" start="4297" end="4307" title="Parenthood (film)" label="Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="4515" end="4529" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41142" start="4530" end="4540" title="Jane Fonda" label="Jane Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547262" start="4567" end="4585" title="Stanley &amp;amp; Iris" label="Stanley &amp;amp; Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406283" start="4783" end="4791" title="Samantha (movie)" label="Samantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186678" start="4864" end="4888" title="Inside Monkey Zetterland" label="Inside Monkey Zetterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390347" start="4955" end="4963" title="Daybreak (1993 film)" label="Daybreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072675" start="5034" end="5048" title="Chantilly Lace (film)" label="Chantilly Lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708524" start="5098" end="5113" title="Josh and S.A.M." label="Josh and S.A.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q2081311" start="5201" end="5226" title="The Beans of Egypt, Maine" label="The Beans of Egypt, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045328" start="5247" end="5260" title="Carolyn Chute" label="Carolyn Chute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11093" start="5493" end="5508" title="Valerie Solanas" label="Valerie Solanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582860" start="5527" end="5545" title="I Shot Andy Warhol" label="I Shot Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="5574" end="5590" title="Showtime Network" label="Showtime Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248754" start="5854" end="5886" title="The Defenders (1961 TV series)" label="television show by the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q706165" start="5970" end="5984" title="E. G. Marshall" label="E. G. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611082" start="6227" end="6254" title="Steppenwolf Theatre Company" label="Steppenwolf Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q176465" start="6286" end="6298" title="Hedda Gabler" label="Hedda Gabler"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="6346" end="6357" title="John Waters (filmmaker)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474562" start="6369" end="6375" title="Pecker (film)" label="Pecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q40071" start="6632" end="6646" title="200 Cigarettes" label="200 Cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="6973" end="6976" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207375" start="6997" end="6999" title="ER (TV series)" label="ER"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764814" start="7064" end="7083" title="The Sleepy Time Gal" label="The Sleepy Time Gal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101775" start="7138" end="7164" title="Searching for Debra Winger" label="Searching for Debra Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="7195" end="7215" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7271" end="7308" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639485" start="7388" end="7397" title="Hair High" label="Hair High"/>
<link wikidata="Q862383" start="7407" end="7420" title="Bill Plympton" label="Bill Plympton"/>
<link wikidata="Q504023" start="7472" end="7482" title="7th Heaven (TV series)" label="7th Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q470118" start="7624" end="7631" title="Surface (2005 TV series)" label="Surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913558" start="7712" end="7731" title="The Coast of Utopia" label="The Coast of Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="7777" end="7791" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="7803" end="7819" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="7844" end="7854" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="7945" end="7975" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="7989" end="8003" title="Public Theater" label="Public Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824551" start="8311" end="8320" title="Top Girls" label="Top Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935075" start="8334" end="8350" title="Samuel J. Friedman Theatre" label="Biltmore Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885332" start="8404" end="8416" title="Ben Brantley" label="Ben Brantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8426" end="8444" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371225" start="8487" end="8513" title="Roundabout Theatre Company" label="Roundabout Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046738" start="8534" end="8542" title="Pal Joey (musical)" label="Pal Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="8970" end="8990" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698548" start="9431" end="9452" title="Lucy Wainwright Roche" label="Lucy Wainwright Roche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9478" end="9484" title="8 More" label="8 More"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="9504" end="9521" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59504" start="9533" end="9545" title="Hungry Heart" label="Hungry Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573287" start="9885" end="9897" title="Thunder Road (song)" label="Thunder Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="9912" end="9924" title="public radio" label="public radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330982" start="9939" end="9968" title="Studio 360" label="Studio 360 with Kurt Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386581" start="10000" end="10014" title="Eric Gilliland" label="Eric Gilliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525514" start="10088" end="10111" title="The Leonard Lopate Show" label="The Leonard Lopate Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447768" start="10138" end="10143" title="roast (comedy)" label="roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107096" start="10250" end="10261" title="The Players (club)" label="The Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q798506" start="10316" end="10327" title="Edwin Booth" label="Edwin Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="10374" end="10377" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q34669" start="10391" end="10403" title="Raising Hope" label="Raising Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287335" start="10813" end="10881" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q581044" start="11040" end="11054" title="Lincoln Center" label="Lincoln Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865642" start="11150" end="11169" title="History of New York City (1946–1977)" label="1970s New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316859" start="11235" end="11258" title="Little Criminals" label="Jolly Coppers on Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003650" start="11272" end="11304" title="Woman Is the Nigger of the World" label="Woman Is the Nigger of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="11316" end="11326" title="The Smiths" label="The Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625154" start="11340" end="11343" title="Ask (song)" label="Ask"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="11413" end="11422" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738660" start="11452" end="11457" title="Diary (novel)" label="Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q268181" start="11467" end="11482" title="Chuck Palahniuk" label="Chuck Palahniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929798" start="11493" end="11504" title="Mrs. Kimble" label="Mrs. Kimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178396" start="11514" end="11528" title="Jennifer Haigh" label="Jennifer Haigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="11563" end="11566" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570" start="11585" end="11598" title="The Good Wife" label="The Good Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="11719" end="11739" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="11744" end="11787" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533599" start="11817" end="11834" title="God Bless America" label="God Bless America"/>
<link wikidata="Q928040" start="11892" end="11909" title="2010 World Series" label="2010 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301896" start="11922" end="11925" title="Major League Baseball on Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611082" start="11982" end="12001" title="Steppenwolf Theatre" label="Steppenwolf Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047173" start="12142" end="12158" title="Ed Gass-Donnelly" label="Ed Gass-Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486849" start="12199" end="12222" title="Small Town Murder Songs" label="Small Town Murder Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922295" start="12277" end="12299" title="Whistler Film Festival" label="Whistler Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q372311" start="12366" end="12377" title="Glenn Close" label="Glenn Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q311271" start="12382" end="12394" title="John Lithgow" label="John Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q219420" start="12411" end="12423" title="Edward Albee" label="Edward Albee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656398" start="12437" end="12455" title="A Delicate Balance (play)" label="A Delicate Balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235625" start="12506" end="12520" title="Golden Theatre" label="Golden Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866736" start="12548" end="12569" title="The Real O&amp;#x27;Neals" label="The Real O&amp;#x27;Neals"/>
<link wikidata="Q24733929" start="12788" end="12797" title="Frozen II" label="Frozen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q104213702" start="12877" end="12893" title="Mass (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Mass&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297773" start="12978" end="12990" title="Dorian Awards" label="Dorian Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7413657" start="13036" end="13100" title="San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905095" start="13122" end="13160" title="Independent Spirit Robert Altman Award" label="Independent Spirit Robert Altman Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="13236" end="13239" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="13240" end="13247" title="dramedy" label="dramedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038288" start="13255" end="13277" title="Generation (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Generation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="13340" end="13350" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q114607759" start="13351" end="13373" title="The Regime (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;The Regime&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514" start="13424" end="13437" title="River Phoenix" label="River Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q55424" start="13550" end="13560" title="Peter Weir" label="Peter Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479291" start="13574" end="13592" title="The Mosquito Coast (film)" label="The Mosquito Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="13631" end="13643" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="Q544780" start="13655" end="13671" title="Running on Empty (1988 film)" label="Running on Empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331070" start="14151" end="14166" title="abortion-rights movement" label="abortion-rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14194" end="14202" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="14216" end="14234" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="14249" end="14267" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="14548" end="14566" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961547" start="14586" end="14608" title="Burwell v. Hobby Lobby" label="Burwell v. Hobby Lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151447" start="14625" end="14644" title="McCullen v. Coakley" label="McCullen v. Coakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q664194" start="15303" end="15314" title="LGBT rights in the United States" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="15328" end="15335" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517456" start="15372" end="15390" title="Transgender rights in the United States" label="transgender rights"/>
</links>
</doc>
