<doc id="85631" wikidata="Q254183" url="?curid=85631" title="Augmented reality">
<text>Augmented reality (AR) is an interactive experience that combines the real world and computer-generated 3D content. The content can span multiple sensory modalities, including visual, auditory, haptic, somatosensory and olfactory. AR can be defined as a system that incorporates three basic features: a combination of real and virtual worlds, real-time interaction, and accurate 3D registration of virtual and real objects. The overlaid sensory information can be constructive (i.e. additive to the natural environment), or destructive (i.e. masking of the natural environment). As such, it is one of the key technologies in the reality-virtuality continuum. 

This experience is seamlessly interwoven with the physical world such that it is perceived as an immersive aspect of the real environment. In this way, augmented reality alters one&#x27;s ongoing perception of a real-world environment, whereas virtual reality completely replaces the user&#x27;s real-world environment with a simulated one.

Augmented reality is largely synonymous with mixed reality. There is also overlap in terminology with extended reality and computer-mediated reality.

The primary value of augmented reality is the manner in which components of the digital world blend into a person&#x27;s perception of the real world, not as a simple display of data, but through the integration of immersive sensations, which are perceived as natural parts of an environment. The earliest functional AR systems that provided immersive mixed reality experiences for users were invented in the early 1990s, starting with the Virtual Fixtures system developed at the U.S. Air Force&#x27;s Armstrong Laboratory in 1992. Commercial augmented reality experiences were first introduced in entertainment and gaming businesses. Subsequently, augmented reality applications have spanned commercial industries such as education, communications, medicine, and entertainment. In education, content may be accessed by scanning or viewing an image with a mobile device or by using markerless AR techniques.

Augmented reality can be used to enhance natural environments or situations and offers perceptually enriched experiences. With the help of advanced AR technologies (e.g. adding computer vision, incorporating AR cameras into smartphone applications, and object recognition) the information about the surrounding real world of the user becomes interactive and digitally manipulated. Information about the environment and its objects is overlaid on the real world. This information can be virtual. Augmented Reality is any experience which is artificial and which adds to the already existing reality. or real, e.g. seeing other real sensed or measured information such as electromagnetic radio waves overlaid in exact alignment with where they actually are in space. Augmented reality also has a lot of potential in the gathering and sharing of tacit knowledge. Augmentation techniques are typically performed in real-time and in semantic contexts with environmental elements. Immersive perceptual information is sometimes combined with supplemental information like scores over a live video feed of a sporting event. This combines the benefits of both augmented reality technology and heads up display technology (HUD).

==Comparison with virtual reality==
In virtual reality (VR), the users&#x27; perception is completely computer-generated, whereas with augmented reality (AR), it is partially generated and partially from the real world. For example, in architecture, VR can be used to create a walk-through simulation of the inside of a new building; and AR can be used to show a building&#x27;s structures and systems super-imposed on a real-life view. Another example is through the use of utility applications. Some AR applications, such as Augment, enable users to apply digital objects into real environments, allowing businesses to use augmented reality devices as a way to preview their products in the real world. Similarly, it can also be used to demo what products may look like in an environment for customers, as demonstrated by companies such as Mountain Equipment Co-op or Lowe&#x27;s who use augmented reality to allow customers to preview what their products might look like at home through the use of 3D models.

Augmented reality (AR) differs from virtual reality (VR) in the sense that in AR part of the surrounding environment is &#x27;real&#x27; and AR is just adding layers of virtual objects to the real environment. On the other hand, in VR the surrounding environment is completely virtual and computer generated. A demonstration of how AR layers objects onto the real world can be seen with augmented reality games. WallaMe is an augmented reality game application that allows users to hide messages in real environments, utilizing geolocation technology in order to enable users to hide messages wherever they may wish in the world. Such applications have many uses in the world, including in activism and artistic expression.

== History ==
* 1901: L. Frank Baum, an author, in his sci-fi novel &quot;The Master Key&quot; first mentions the idea of an electronic display/spectacles that overlays data onto real life (in this case &#x27;people&#x27;). It is named a &#x27;character marker&#x27;.
* 1957–62: Morton Heilig, a cinematographer, creates and patents a simulator called Sensorama with visuals, sound, vibration, and smell.
* 1968: Ivan Sutherland creates the first head-mounted display that has graphics rendered by a computer.
* 1975: Myron Krueger creates Videoplace to allow users to interact with virtual objects.
* 1980: The research by Gavan Lintern of the University of Illinois is the first published work to show the value of a heads up display for teaching real-world flight skills.
* 1980: Steve Mann creates the first wearable computer, a computer vision system with text and graphical overlays on a photographically mediated scene.
* 1986: Within IBM, Ron Feigenblatt describes the most widely experienced form of AR today (viz. &quot;magic window,&quot; e.g. smartphone-based Pokémon Go), use of a small, &quot;smart&quot; flat panel display positioned and oriented by hand.
* 1987: Douglas George and Robert Morris create a working prototype of an astronomical telescope-based &quot;heads-up display&quot; system (a precursor concept to augmented reality) which superimposed in the telescope eyepiece, over the actual sky images, multi-intensity star, and celestial body images, and other relevant information.
* 1990: The term &quot;augmented reality&quot; is attributed to Thomas P. Caudell, a former Boeing researcher.
* 1992: Louis Rosenberg developed one of the first functioning AR systems, called Virtual Fixtures, at the United States Air Force Research Laboratory—Armstrong, that demonstrated benefit to human perception.
* 1992: Steven Feiner, Blair MacIntyre and Doree Seligmann present an early paper on an AR system prototype, KARMA, at the Graphics Interface conference.
* 1993: The CMOS active-pixel sensor, a type of metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) image sensor, was developed at NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. CMOS sensors are later widely used for optical tracking in AR technology.
* 1993: Mike Abernathy, et al., report the first use of augmented reality in identifying space debris using Rockwell WorldView by overlaying satellite geographic trajectories on live telescope video.
* 1993: A widely cited version of the paper above is published in Communications of the ACM – Special issue on computer augmented environments, edited by Pierre Wellner, Wendy Mackay, and Rich Gold.
* 1993: Loral WDL, with sponsorship from STRICOM, performed the first demonstration combining live AR-equipped vehicles and manned simulators. Unpublished paper, J. Barrilleaux, &quot;Experiences and Observations in Applying Augmented Reality to Live Training&quot;, 1999.
* 1994: Julie Martin creates first &#x27;Augmented Reality Theater production&#x27;, Dancing in Cyberspace, funded by the Australia Council for the Arts, features dancers and acrobats manipulating body–sized virtual object in real time, projected into the same physical space and performance plane. The acrobats appeared immersed within the virtual object and environments. The installation used Silicon Graphics computers and Polhemus sensing system.
*1996: General Electric develops system for projecting information from 3D CAD models onto real-world instances of those models.
* 1998: Spatial augmented reality introduced at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill by Ramesh Raskar, Greg Welch, Henry Fuchs.
* 1999: Frank Delgado, Mike Abernathy et al. report successful flight test of LandForm software video map overlay from a helicopter at Army Yuma Proving Ground overlaying video with runways, taxiways, roads and road names.
* 1999: The US Naval Research Laboratory engages on a decade-long research program called the Battlefield Augmented Reality System (BARS) to prototype some of the early wearable systems for dismounted soldier operating in urban environment for situation awareness and training.
* 1999: NASA X-38 flown using LandForm software video map overlays at Dryden Flight Research Center.
* 2000: Rockwell International Science Center demonstrates tetherless wearable augmented reality systems receiving analog video and 3-D audio over radio-frequency wireless channels. The systems incorporate outdoor navigation capabilities, with digital horizon silhouettes from a terrain database overlain in real time on the live outdoor scene, allowing visualization of terrain made invisible by clouds and fog.
*2004: An outdoor helmet-mounted AR system was demonstrated by Trimble Navigation and the Human Interface Technology Laboratory (HIT lab).
*2006: Outland Research develops AR media player that overlays virtual content onto a users view of the real world synchronously with playing music, thereby providing an immersive AR entertainment experience.
* 2008: Wikitude AR Travel Guide launches on 20 Oct 2008 with the G1 Android phone.
* 2009: ARToolkit was ported to Adobe Flash (FLARToolkit) by Saqoosha, bringing augmented reality to the web browser.
* 2012: Launch of Lyteshot, an interactive AR gaming platform that utilizes smart glasses for game data
* 2013: Niantic releases &quot;Ingress&quot;, an augmented reality mobile game for iOS and Android operating systems (and a predecessor of &quot;Pokémon Go&quot;).
* 2015: Microsoft announced the HoloLens augmented reality headset, which uses various sensors and a processing unit to display virtual imagery over the real world.
* 2015: Snap, Inc. releases &quot;Lenses&quot;, augmented reality filters in the Snapchat application. 
* 2016: Niantic released &quot;Pokémon Go&quot; for iOS and Android in July 2016. The game quickly became one of the most popular smartphone applications and in turn spikes the popularity of augmented reality games.
* 2018: Magic Leap launched the Magic Leap One augmented reality headset. Leap Motion announced the Project North Star augmented reality headset, and later released it under an open source license.
* 2019: Microsoft announced HoloLens 2 with significant improvements in terms of field of view and ergonomics.
* 2022: Magic Leap launched the Magic Leap 2 headset.
* 2024: Meta Platforms revealed the Orion AR glasses prototype. 

== Hardware ==
Augmented reality requires hardware components including a processor, display, sensors, and input devices. Modern mobile computing devices like smartphones and tablet computers contain these elements, which often include a camera and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) sensors such as an accelerometer, GPS, and solid state compass, making them suitable AR platforms.

===Displays===
Various technologies can be used to display augmented reality, including optical projection systems, monitors, and handheld devices. Two of the display technologies used in augmented reality are diffractive waveguides and reflective waveguides.

A head-mounted display (HMD) is a display device worn on the forehead, such as a harness or helmet-mounted. HMDs place images of both the physical world and virtual objects over the user&#x27;s field of view. Modern HMDs often employ sensors for six degrees of freedom monitoring that allow the system to align virtual information to the physical world and adjust accordingly with the user&#x27;s head movements. When using AR technology, the HMDs only require relatively small displays. In this situation, liquid crystals on silicon (LCOS) and micro-OLED (organic light-emitting diodes) are commonly used. HMDs can provide VR users with mobile and collaborative experiences. Specific providers, such as uSens and Gestigon, include gesture controls for full virtual immersion.

Vuzix is a company that has produced a number of head-worn optical see through displays marketed for augmented reality.

====Eyeglasses====

AR displays can be rendered on devices resembling eyeglasses. Versions include eyewear that employs cameras to intercept the real world view and re-display its augmented view through the eyepieces and devices in which the AR imagery is projected through or reflected off the surfaces of the eyewear lens pieces.

The EyeTap (also known as Generation-2 Glass) captures rays of light that would otherwise pass through the center of the lens of the wearer&#x27;s eye, and substitutes synthetic computer-controlled light for each ray of real light. The Generation-4 Glass (Laser EyeTap) is similar to the VRD (i.e. it uses a computer-controlled laser light source) except that it also has infinite depth of focus and causes the eye itself to, in effect, function as both a camera and a display by way of exact alignment with the eye and resynthesis (in laser light) of rays of light entering the eye.

=====HUD=====

A head-up display (HUD) is a transparent display that presents data without requiring users to look away from their usual viewpoints. A precursor technology to augmented reality, heads-up displays were first developed for pilots in the 1950s, projecting simple flight data into their line of sight, thereby enabling them to keep their &quot;heads up&quot; and not look down at the instruments. Near-eye augmented reality devices can be used as portable head-up displays as they can show data, information, and images while the user views the real world. Many definitions of augmented reality only define it as overlaying the information. This is basically what a head-up display does; however, practically speaking, augmented reality is expected to include registration and tracking between the superimposed perceptions, sensations, information, data, and images and some portion of the real world.

====Contact lenses====

Contact lenses that display AR imaging are in development. These bionic contact lenses might contain the elements for display embedded into the lens including integrated circuitry, LEDs and an antenna for wireless communication.

The first contact lens display was patented in 1999 by Steve Mann and was intended to work in combination with AR spectacles, but the project was abandoned, then 11 years later in 2010–2011. Another version of contact lenses, in development for the U.S. military, is designed to function with AR spectacles, allowing soldiers to focus on close-to-the-eye AR images on the spectacles and distant real world objects at the same time.

At CES 2013, a company called Innovega also unveiled similar contact lenses that required being combined with AR glasses to work.

Many scientists have been working on contact lenses capable of different technological feats. A patent filed by Samsung describes an AR contact lens, that, when finished, will include a built-in camera on the lens itself. The design is intended to control its interface by blinking an eye. It is also intended to be linked with the user&#x27;s smartphone to review footage, and control it separately. When successful, the lens would feature a camera, or sensor inside of it. It is said that it could be anything from a light sensor, to a temperature sensor.

The first publicly unveiled working prototype of an AR contact lens not requiring the use of glasses in conjunction was developed by Mojo Vision and announced and shown off at CES 2020.

====Virtual retinal display====

A virtual retinal display (VRD) is a personal display device under development at the University of Washington&#x27;s Human Interface Technology Laboratory under Dr. Thomas A. Furness III. With this technology, a display is scanned directly onto the retina of a viewer&#x27;s eye. This results in bright images with high resolution and high contrast. The viewer sees what appears to be a conventional display floating in space.

Several of tests were done to analyze the safety of the VRD. In one test, patients with partial loss of vision—having either macular degeneration (a disease that degenerates the retina) or keratoconus—were selected to view images using the technology. In the macular degeneration group, five out of eight subjects preferred the VRD images to the cathode-ray tube (CRT) or paper images and thought they were better and brighter and were able to see equal or better resolution levels. The Keratoconus patients could all resolve smaller lines in several line tests using the VRD as opposed to their own correction. They also found the VRD images to be easier to view and sharper. As a result of these several tests, virtual retinal display is considered safe technology.

Virtual retinal display creates images that can be seen in ambient daylight and ambient room light. The VRD is considered a preferred candidate to use in a surgical display due to its combination of high resolution and high contrast and brightness. Additional tests show high potential for VRD to be used as a display technology for patients that have low vision.

====Handheld====

A Handheld display employs a small display that fits in a user&#x27;s hand. All handheld AR solutions to date opt for video see-through. Initially handheld AR employed fiducial markers, and later GPS units and MEMS sensors such as digital compasses and six degrees of freedom accelerometer–gyroscope. Today simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) markerless trackers such as PTAM (parallel tracking and mapping) are starting to come into use. Handheld display AR promises to be the first commercial success for AR technologies. The two main advantages of handheld AR are the portable nature of handheld devices and the ubiquitous nature of camera phones. The disadvantages are the physical constraints of the user having to hold the handheld device out in front of them at all times, as well as the distorting effect of classically wide-angled mobile phone cameras when compared to the real world as viewed through the eye.

====Projection mapping====

Projection mapping augments real-world objects and scenes without the use of special displays such as monitors, head-mounted displays or hand-held devices. Projection mapping makes use of digital projectors to display graphical information onto physical objects. The key difference in projection mapping is that the display is separated from the users of the system. Since the displays are not associated with each user, projection mapping scales naturally up to groups of users, allowing for collocated collaboration between users.

Examples include shader lamps, mobile projectors, virtual tables, and smart projectors. Shader lamps mimic and augment reality by projecting imagery onto neutral objects. This provides the opportunity to enhance the object&#x27;s appearance with materials of a simple unit—a projector, camera, and sensor.

Other applications include table and wall projections. Virtual showcases, which employ beam splitter mirrors together with multiple graphics displays, provide an interactive means of simultaneously engaging with the virtual and the real.

A projection mapping system can display on any number of surfaces in an indoor setting at once. Projection mapping supports both a graphical visualization and passive haptic sensation for the end users. Users are able to touch physical objects in a process that provides passive haptic sensation.

===Tracking===

Modern mobile augmented-reality systems use one or more of the following motion tracking technologies: digital cameras and/or other optical sensors, accelerometers, GPS, gyroscopes, solid state compasses, radio-frequency identification (RFID). These technologies offer varying levels of accuracy and precision. These technologies are implemented in the ARKit API by Apple and ARCore API by Google to allow tracking for their respective mobile device platforms.

===Input devices===

Techniques include speech recognition systems that translate a user&#x27;s spoken words into computer instructions, and gesture recognition systems that interpret a user&#x27;s body movements by visual detection or from sensors embedded in a peripheral device such as a wand, stylus, pointer, glove or other body wear. Products which are trying to serve as a controller of AR headsets include Wave by Seebright Inc. and Nimble by Intugine Technologies.

===Computer===

Computers are responsible for graphics in augmented reality. For camera-based 3D tracking methods, a computer analyzes the sensed visual and other data to synthesize and position virtual objects. With the improvement of technology and computers, augmented reality is going to lead to a drastic change on ones perspective of the real world.

Computers are improving at a very fast rate, leading to new ways to improve other technology. Computers are the core of augmented reality. The computer receives data from the sensors which determine the relative position of an objects&#x27; surface. This translates to an input to the computer which then outputs to the users by adding something that would otherwise not be there. The computer comprises memory and a processor. The computer takes the scanned environment then generates images or a video and puts it on the receiver for the observer to see. The fixed marks on an object&#x27;s surface are stored in the memory of a computer. The computer also withdraws from its memory to present images realistically to the onlooker.

=== Projector ===
Projectors can also be used to display AR contents. The projector can throw a virtual object on a projection screen and the viewer can interact with this virtual object. Projection surfaces can be many objects such as walls or glass panes.

===Networking===
Mobile augmented reality applications are gaining popularity because of the wide adoption of mobile and especially wearable devices. However, they often rely on computationally intensive computer vision algorithms with extreme latency requirements. To compensate for the lack of computing power, offloading data processing to a distant machine is often desired. Computation offloading introduces new constraints in applications, especially in terms of latency and bandwidth. Although there are a plethora of real-time multimedia transport protocols, there is a need for support from network infrastructure as well.

==Software and algorithms==

A key measure of AR systems is how realistically they integrate virtual imagery with the real world. The software must derive real world coordinates, independent of camera, and camera images. That process is called image registration, and uses different methods of computer vision, mostly related to video tracking. Many computer vision methods of augmented reality are inherited from visual odometry.

Usually those methods consist of two parts. The first stage is to detect interest points, fiducial markers or optical flow in the camera images. This step can use feature detection methods like corner detection, blob detection, edge detection or thresholding, and other image processing methods. The second stage restores a real world coordinate system from the data obtained in the first stage. Some methods assume objects with known geometry (or fiducial markers) are present in the scene. In some of those cases the scene 3D structure should be calculated beforehand. If part of the scene is unknown simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) can map relative positions. If no information about scene geometry is available, structure from motion methods like bundle adjustment are used. Mathematical methods used in the second stage include: projective (epipolar) geometry, geometric algebra, rotation representation with exponential map, kalman and particle filters, nonlinear optimization, robust statistics.

In augmented reality, the distinction is made between two distinct modes of tracking, known as &quot;marker&quot; and &quot;markerless&quot;. Markers are visual cues which trigger the display of the virtual information. A piece of paper with some distinct geometries can be used. The camera recognizes the geometries by identifying specific points in the drawing. Markerless tracking, also called instant tracking, does not use markers. Instead, the user positions the object in the camera view preferably in a horizontal plane. It uses sensors in mobile devices to accurately detect the real-world environment, such as the locations of walls and points of intersection.

Augmented Reality Markup Language (ARML) is a data standard developed within the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), which consists of Extensible Markup Language (XML) grammar to describe the location and appearance of virtual objects in the scene, as well as ECMAScript bindings to allow dynamic access to properties of virtual objects.
To enable rapid development of augmented reality applications, software development applications have emerged, including Lens Studio from Snapchat and Spark AR from Facebook. Augmented reality Software Development Kits (SDKs) have been launched by Apple and Google.

==Development==
AR systems rely heavily on the immersion of the user. The following lists some considerations for designing augmented reality applications:

===Environmental/context design===

Context Design focuses on the end-user&#x27;s physical surrounding, spatial space, and accessibility that may play a role when using the AR system. Designers should be aware of the possible physical scenarios the end-user may be in such as:
* Public, in which the users use their whole body to interact with the software
* Personal, in which the user uses a smartphone in a public space
* Intimate, in which the user is sitting with a desktop and is not really moving
* Private, in which the user has on a wearable.

By evaluating each physical scenario, potential safety hazards can be avoided and changes can be made to greater improve the end-user&#x27;s immersion. UX designers will have to define user journeys for the relevant physical scenarios and define how the interface reacts to each.

Another aspect of context design involves the design of the system&#x27;s functionality and its ability to accommodate user preferences. While accessibility tools are common in basic application design, some consideration should be made when designing time-limited prompts (to prevent unintentional operations), audio cues and overall engagement time. In some situations, the application&#x27;s functionality may hinder the user&#x27;s ability. For example, applications that is used for driving should reduce the amount of user interaction and use audio cues instead.

===Interaction design===

Interaction design in augmented reality technology centers on the user&#x27;s engagement with the end product to improve the overall user experience and enjoyment. The purpose of interaction design is to avoid alienating or confusing the user by organizing the information presented. Since user interaction relies on the user&#x27;s input, designers must make system controls easier to understand and accessible. A common technique to improve usability for augmented reality applications is by discovering the frequently accessed areas in the device&#x27;s touch display and design the application to match those areas of control. It is also important to structure the user journey maps and the flow of information presented which reduce the system&#x27;s overall cognitive load and greatly improves the learning curve of the application.

In interaction design, it is important for developers to utilize augmented reality technology that complement the system&#x27;s function or purpose. For instance, the utilization of exciting AR filters and the design of the unique sharing platform in Snapchat enables users to augment their in-app social interactions. In other applications that require users to understand the focus and intent, designers can employ a reticle or raycast from the device.

===Visual design===
To improve the graphic interface elements and user interaction, developers may use visual cues to inform the user what elements of UI are designed to interact with and how to interact with them. Visual cue design can make interactions seem more natural.

In some augmented reality applications that use a 2D device as an interactive surface, the 2D control environment does not translate well in 3D space, which can make users hesitant to explore their surroundings. To solve this issue, designers should apply visual cues to assist and encourage users to explore their surroundings.

It is important to note the two main objects in AR when developing VR applications: 3D volumetric objects that are manipulated and realistically interact with light and shadow; and animated media imagery such as images and videos which are mostly traditional 2D media rendered in a new context for augmented reality. When virtual objects are projected onto a real environment, it is challenging for augmented reality application designers to ensure a perfectly seamless integration relative to the real-world environment, especially with 2D objects. As such, designers can add weight to objects, use depths maps, and choose different material properties that highlight the object&#x27;s presence in the real world. Another visual design that can be applied is using different lighting techniques or casting shadows to improve overall depth judgment. For instance, a common lighting technique is simply placing a light source overhead at the 12 o’clock position, to create shadows on virtual objects.

==Uses==
Augmented reality has been explored for many uses, including gaming, medicine, and entertainment. It has also been explored for education and business. Example application areas described below include archaeology, architecture, commerce and education. Some of the earliest cited examples include augmented reality used to support surgery by providing virtual overlays to guide medical practitioners, to AR content for astronomy and welding.

===Archaeology===
AR has been used to aid archaeological research. By augmenting archaeological features onto the modern landscape, AR allows archaeologists to formulate possible site configurations from extant structures. Computer generated models of ruins, buildings, landscapes or even ancient people have been recycled into early archaeological AR applications. For example, implementing a system like VITA (Visual Interaction Tool for Archaeology) will allow users to imagine and investigate instant excavation results without leaving their home. Each user can collaborate by mutually &quot;navigating, searching, and viewing data&quot;. Hrvoje Benko, a researcher in the computer science department at Columbia University, points out that these particular systems and others like them can provide &quot;3D panoramic images and 3D models of the site itself at different excavation stages&quot; all the while organizing much of the data in a collaborative way that is easy to use. Collaborative AR systems supply multimodal interactions that combine the real world with virtual images of both environments.

===Architecture===
AR can aid in visualizing building projects. Computer-generated images of a structure can be superimposed onto a real-life local view of a property before the physical building is constructed there; this was demonstrated publicly by Trimble Navigation in 2004. AR can also be employed within an architect&#x27;s workspace, rendering animated 3D visualizations of their 2D drawings. Architecture sight-seeing can be enhanced with AR applications, allowing users viewing a building&#x27;s exterior to virtually see through its walls, viewing its interior objects and layout.

With continual improvements to GPS accuracy, businesses are able to use augmented reality to visualize georeferenced models of construction sites, underground structures, cables and pipes using mobile devices. Augmented reality is applied to present new projects, to solve on-site construction challenges, and to enhance promotional materials. Examples include the Daqri Smart Helmet, an Android-powered hard hat used to create augmented reality for the industrial worker, including visual instructions, real-time alerts, and 3D mapping.

Following the Christchurch earthquake, the University of Canterbury released CityViewAR, which enabled city planners and engineers to visualize buildings that had been destroyed. This not only provided planners with tools to reference the previous cityscape, but it also served as a reminder of the magnitude of the resulting devastation, as entire buildings had been demolished.

===Education and Training===
In educational settings, AR has been used to complement a standard curriculum. Text, graphics, video, and audio may be superimposed into a student&#x27;s real-time environment. Textbooks, flashcards and other educational reading material may contain embedded &quot;markers&quot; or triggers that, when scanned by an AR device, produced supplementary information to the student rendered in a multimedia format. The 2015 Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality: 7th International Conference mentioned Google Glass as an example of augmented reality that can replace the physical classroom. First, AR technologies help learners engage in authentic exploration in the real world, and virtual objects such as texts, videos, and pictures are supplementary elements for learners to conduct investigations of the real-world surroundings.

As AR evolves, students can participate interactively and interact with knowledge more authentically. Instead of remaining passive recipients, students can become active learners, able to interact with their learning environment. Computer-generated simulations of historical events allow students to explore and learning details of each significant area of the event site.

In higher education, Construct3D, a Studierstube system, allows students to learn mechanical engineering concepts, math or geometry. Chemistry AR apps allow students to visualize and interact with the spatial structure of a molecule using a marker object held in the hand. Others have used HP Reveal, a free app, to create AR notecards for studying organic chemistry mechanisms or to create virtual demonstrations of how to use laboratory instrumentation. Anatomy students can visualize different systems of the human body in three dimensions. Using AR as a tool to learn anatomical structures has been shown to increase the learner knowledge and provide intrinsic benefits, such as increased engagement and learner immersion.

AR has been used to develop different safety training applications for several types of disasters, such as, earthquakes and building fire, and health and safety tasks. Further, several AR solutions have been proposed and tested to navigate building evacuees towards safe places in both large scale and small scale disasters. AR applications can have several overlapping with many other digital technologies, such as BIM, internet of things and artificial intelligence, to generate smarter safety training and navigation solutions.

=== Industrial manufacturing ===
AR is used to substitute paper manuals with digital instructions which are overlaid on the manufacturing operator&#x27;s field of view, reducing mental effort required to operate. AR makes machine maintenance efficient because it gives operators direct access to a machine&#x27;s maintenance history. Virtual manuals help manufacturers adapt to rapidly-changing product designs, as digital instructions are more easily edited and distributed compared to physical manuals.

Digital instructions increase operator safety by removing the need for operators to look at a screen or manual away from the working area, which can be hazardous. Instead, the instructions are overlaid on the working area. The use of AR can increase operators&#x27; feeling of safety when working near high-load industrial machinery by giving operators additional information on a machine&#x27;s status and safety functions, as well as hazardous areas of the workspace.

===Commerce===


AR is used to integrate print and video marketing. Printed marketing material can be designed with certain &quot;trigger&quot; images that, when scanned by an AR-enabled device using image recognition, activate a video version of the promotional material. A major difference between augmented reality and straightforward image recognition is that one can overlay multiple media at the same time in the view screen, such as social media share buttons, the in-page video even audio and 3D objects. Traditional print-only publications are using augmented reality to connect different types of media.

AR can enhance product previews such as allowing a customer to view what&#x27;s inside a product&#x27;s packaging without opening it. AR can also be used as an aid in selecting products from a catalog or through a kiosk. Scanned images of products can activate views of additional content such as customization options and additional images of the product in its use.

By 2010, virtual dressing rooms had been developed for e-commerce.

In 2012, a mint used AR techniques to market a commemorative coin for Aruba. The coin itself was used as an AR trigger, and when held in front of an AR-enabled device it revealed additional objects and layers of information that were not visible without the device.

In 2018, Apple announced Universal Scene Description (USDZ) AR file support for iPhones and iPads with iOS 12. Apple has created an AR QuickLook Gallery that allows masses to experience augmented reality on their own Apple device.

In 2018, Shopify, the Canadian e-commerce company, announced AR Quick Look integration. Their merchants will be able to upload 3D models of their products and their users will be able to tap on the models inside the Safari browser on their iOS devices to view them in their real-world environments.

In 2018, Twinkl released a free AR classroom application. Pupils can see how York looked over 1,900 years ago. Twinkl launched the first ever multi-player AR game, &quot;Little Red&quot; and has over 100 free AR educational models.

Augmented reality is becoming more frequently used for online advertising. Retailers offer the ability to upload a picture on their website and &quot;try on&quot; various clothes which are overlaid on the picture. Even further, companies such as Bodymetrics install dressing booths in department stores that offer full-body scanning. These booths render a 3-D model of the user, allowing the consumers to view different outfits on themselves without the need of physically changing clothes. For example, JC Penney and Bloomingdale&#x27;s use &quot;virtual dressing rooms&quot; that allow customers to see themselves in clothes without trying them on. Another store that uses AR to market clothing to its customers is Neiman Marcus. Neiman Marcus offers consumers the ability to see their outfits in a 360-degree view with their &quot;memory mirror&quot;. Makeup stores like L&#x27;Oreal, Sephora, Charlotte Tilbury, and Rimmel also have apps that utilize AR. These apps allow consumers to see how the makeup will look on them. According to Greg Jones, director of AR and VR at Google, augmented reality is going to &quot;reconnect physical and digital retail&quot;.

AR technology is also used by furniture retailers such as IKEA, Houzz, and Wayfair. These retailers offer apps that allow consumers to view their products in their home prior to purchasing anything. 
In 2017, Ikea announced the Ikea Place app. It contains a catalogue of over 2,000 products—nearly the company&#x27;s full collection of sofas, armchairs, coffee tables, and storage units which one can place anywhere in a room with their phone. The app made it possible to have 3D and true-to-scale models of furniture in the customer&#x27;s living space. IKEA realized that their customers are not shopping in stores as often or making direct purchases anymore. Shopify&#x27;s acquisition of Primer, an AR app aims to push small and medium-sized sellers towards interactive AR shopping with easy to use AR integration and user experience for both merchants and consumers. AR helps the retail industry reduce operating costs. Merchants upload product information to the AR system, and consumers can use mobile terminals to search and generate 3D maps.

=== Literature ===
The first description of AR as it is known today was in &quot;Virtual Light&quot;, the 1994 novel by William Gibson. In 2011, AR was blended with poetry by ni ka from Sekai Camera in Tokyo, Japan. The prose of these AR poems come from Paul Celan, &quot;Die Niemandsrose&quot;, expressing the aftermath of the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami.

===Visual art===
AR applied in the visual arts allows objects or places to trigger artistic multidimensional experiences and interpretations of reality.

The Australian new media artist Jeffrey Shaw pioneered Augmented Reality in three artworks: &quot;Viewpoint&quot; in 1975, &quot;Virtual Sculptures&quot; in 1987 and &quot;The Golden Calf&quot; in 1993. He continues to explore new permutations of AR in numerous recent works.

Manifest.AR was an international artists&#x27; collective founded in 2010 that specialized in augmented reality (AR) art and interventions. The collective typically created site-specific AR installations that could be viewed through mobile devices using custom-developed applications. Their work often challenged traditional notions of art exhibition and ownership by placing virtual artworks in spaces without institutional permission. The collective gained prominence in 2010 when they staged an unauthorized virtual exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York City, overlaying their digital artworks throughout the museum&#x27;s spaces using AR technology. The collective&#x27;s unauthorized AR intervention at MoMA involved placing virtual artworks throughout the museum&#x27;s spaces, viewable through mobile devices. In 2011, members of Manifest.AR created AR artworks that were virtually placed throughout the Venice Biennial, creating an unofficial parallel exhibition accessible through mobile devices. During the Occupy Wall Street movement in 2011, the collective created AR installations in and around Zuccotti Park, adding a digital dimension to the physical protests. Key members of the collective have included: Mark Skwarek; John Craig Freeman; Will Pappenheimer; Tamiko Thiel; and Sander Veenhof. The group published their &quot;AR Art Manifesto&quot; in 2011, which outlined their artistic philosophy and approach to augmented reality as a medium. The manifesto emphasized the democratic potential of AR technology and its ability to challenge traditional institutional control over public space and art display. Manifest.AR has been influential in: Pioneering artistic applications of AR technology; Developing new forms of institutional critique; Expanding concepts of public art and digital space; and Influencing subsequent generations of new media artists. Their work has been documented and discussed in various publications about digital art and new media, and has influenced contemporary discussions about virtual and augmented reality in artistic practice.

Augmented reality can aid in the progression of visual art in museums by allowing museum visitors to view artwork in galleries in a multidimensional way through their phone screens. The Museum of Modern Art in New York has created an exhibit in their art museum showcasing AR features that viewers can see using an app on their smartphone. The museum has developed their personal app, called MoMAR Gallery, that museum guests can download and use in the augmented reality specialized gallery in order to view the museum&#x27;s paintings in a different way. This allows individuals to see hidden aspects and information about the paintings, and to be able to have an interactive technological experience with artwork as well.

AR technology was used in Nancy Baker Cahill&#x27;s &quot;Margin of Error&quot; and &quot;Revolutions,&quot; the two public art pieces she created for the 2019 Desert X exhibition.

AR technology aided the development of eye tracking technology to translate a disabled person&#x27;s eye movements into drawings on a screen.

A Danish artist, Olafur Eliasson, has placed objects like burning suns, extraterrestrial rocks, and rare animals, into the user&#x27;s environment. Martin &amp; Muñoz started using Augmented Reality (AR) technology in 2020 to create and place virtual works, based on their snow globes, in their exhibitions and in user&#x27;s environments. Their first AR work was presented at the Cervantes Institute in New York in early 2022.

===Fitness===
AR hardware and software for use in fitness includes smart glasses made for biking and running, with performance analytics and map navigation projected onto the user&#x27;s field of vision, and boxing, martial arts, and tennis, where users remain aware of their physical environment for safety. Fitness-related games and software include Pokémon Go and Jurassic World Alive.

===Human–computer interaction===

Human–computer interaction (HCI) is an interdisciplinary area of computing that deals with design and implementation of systems that interact with people. Researchers in HCI come from a number of disciplines, including computer science, engineering, design, human factor, and social science, with a shared goal to solve problems in the design and the use of technology so that it can be used more easily, effectively, efficiently, safely, and with satisfaction.

According to a 2017 &quot;Time&quot; article, in about 15 to 20 years it is predicted that augmented reality and virtual reality are going to become the primary use for computer interactions.

===Remote collaboration===
Primary school children learn easily from interactive experiences. As an example, astronomical constellations and the movements of objects in the solar system were oriented in 3D and overlaid in the direction the device was held, and expanded with supplemental video information. Paper-based science book illustrations could seem to come alive as video without requiring the child to navigate to web-based materials.

In 2013, a project was launched on Kickstarter to teach about electronics with an educational toy that allowed children to scan their circuit with an iPad and see the electric current flowing around. While some educational apps were available for AR by 2016, it was not broadly used. Apps that leverage augmented reality to aid learning included SkyView for studying astronomy, AR Circuits for building simple electric circuits, and SketchAR for drawing.

AR would also be a way for parents and teachers to achieve their goals for modern education, which might include providing more individualized and flexible learning, making closer connections between what is taught at school and the real world, and helping students to become more engaged in their own learning.

===Emergency management/search and rescue===

Augmented reality systems are used in public safety situations, from super storms to suspects at large.

As early as 2009, two articles from &quot;Emergency Management&quot; discussed AR technology for emergency management. The first was &quot;Augmented Reality—Emerging Technology for Emergency Management&quot;, by Gerald Baron. According to Adam Crow,: &quot;Technologies like augmented reality (ex: Google Glass) and the growing expectation of the public will continue to force professional emergency managers to radically shift when, where, and how technology is deployed before, during, and after disasters.&quot;

Another early example was a search aircraft looking for a lost hiker in rugged mountain terrain. Augmented reality systems provided aerial camera operators with a geographic awareness of forest road names and locations blended with the camera video. The camera operator was better able to search for the hiker knowing the geographic context of the camera image. Once located, the operator could more efficiently direct rescuers to the hiker&#x27;s location because the geographic position and reference landmarks were clearly labeled.

===Social interaction===
AR can be used to facilitate social interaction. An augmented reality social network framework called Talk2Me enables people to disseminate information and view others&#x27; advertised information in an augmented reality way. The timely and dynamic information sharing and viewing functionalities of Talk2Me help initiate conversations and make friends for users with people in physical proximity. However, use of an AR headset can inhibit the quality of an interaction between two people if one isn&#x27;t wearing one if the headset becomes a distraction.

Augmented reality also gives users the ability to practice different forms of social interactions with other people in a safe, risk-free environment. Hannes Kauffman, Associate Professor for virtual reality at TU Vienna, says: &quot;In collaborative augmented reality multiple users may access a shared space populated by virtual objects, while remaining grounded in the real world. This technique is particularly powerful for educational purposes when users are collocated and can use natural means of communication (speech, gestures, etc.), but can also be mixed successfully with immersive VR or remote collaboration.&quot; Hannes cites education as a potential use of this technology.

===Video games===

The gaming industry embraced AR technology. A number of games were developed for prepared indoor environments, such as AR air hockey, &quot;Titans of Space&quot;, collaborative combat against virtual enemies, and AR-enhanced pool table games.

In 2010, Ogmento became the first AR gaming startup to receive VC Funding. The company went on to produce early location-based AR games for titles like Paranormal Activity: Sanctuary, NBA: King of the Court, and Halo: King of the Hill. The companies computer vision technology was eventually repackaged and sold to Apple, became a major contribution to ARKit.

Augmented reality allows video game players to experience digital game play in a real-world environment. Niantic released the augmented reality mobile game &quot;Pokémon Go&quot;. Disney has partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality game &quot;Star Wars: Jedi Challenges&quot; that works with a Lenovo Mirage AR headset, a tracking sensor and a Lightsaber controller, scheduled to launch in December 2017.

===Industrial design===

AR allows industrial designers to experience a product&#x27;s design and operation before completion. Volkswagen has used AR for comparing calculated and actual crash test imagery. AR has been used to visualize and modify car body structure and engine layout. It has also been used to compare digital mock-ups with physical mock-ups to find discrepancies between them.

===Healthcare planning, practice and education===

One of the first applications of augmented reality was in healthcare, particularly to support the planning, practice, and training of surgical procedures. As far back as 1992, enhancing human performance during surgery was a formally stated objective when building the first augmented reality systems at U.S. Air Force laboratories. Since 2005, a device called a near-infrared vein finder that films subcutaneous veins, processes and projects the image of the veins onto the skin has been used to locate veins. AR provides surgeons with patient monitoring data in the style of a fighter pilot&#x27;s heads-up display, and allows patient imaging records, including functional videos, to be accessed and overlaid. Examples include a virtual X-ray view based on prior tomography or on real-time images from ultrasound and confocal microscopy probes, visualizing the position of a tumor in the video of an endoscope, or radiation exposure risks from X-ray imaging devices. AR can enhance viewing a fetus inside a mother&#x27;s womb. Siemens, Karl Storz and IRCAD have developed a system for laparoscopic liver surgery that uses AR to view sub-surface tumors and vessels.
AR has been used for cockroach phobia treatment and to reduce the fear of spiders. Patients wearing augmented reality glasses can be reminded to take medications. Augmented reality can be very helpful in the medical field. It could be used to provide crucial information to a doctor or surgeon without having them take their eyes off the patient. On 30 April 2015 Microsoft announced the Microsoft HoloLens, their first attempt at augmented reality. The HoloLens has advanced through the years and is capable of projecting holograms for near infrared fluorescence based image guided surgery. As augmented reality advances, it finds increasing applications in healthcare. Augmented reality and similar computer based-utilities are being used to train medical professionals. In healthcare, AR can be used to provide guidance during diagnostic and therapeutic interventions e.g. during surgery. Magee et al., for instance, describe the use of augmented reality for medical training in simulating ultrasound-guided needle placement. Similarly, Javaid, Mohd, Haleem, and Abid found that virtual reality provided medical students&#x27; brains with an experience that simulates motion and the surgery experience. A very recent study by Akçayır, Akçayır, Pektaş, and Ocak (2016) revealed that AR technology both improves university students&#x27; laboratory skills and helps them to build positive attitudes relating to physics laboratory work. Recently, augmented reality began seeing adoption in neurosurgery, a field that requires heavy amounts of imaging before procedures.

===Spatial immersion and interaction===

Augmented reality applications, running on handheld devices utilized as virtual reality headsets, can also digitize human presence in space and provide a computer generated model of them, in a virtual space where they can interact and perform various actions. Such capabilities are demonstrated by Project Anywhere, developed by a postgraduate student at ETH Zurich, which was dubbed as an &quot;out-of-body experience&quot;.

===Flight training===
Building on decades of perceptual-motor research in experimental psychology, researchers at the Aviation Research Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign used augmented reality in the form of a flight path in the sky to teach flight students how to land an airplane using a flight simulator. An adaptive augmented schedule in which students were shown the augmentation only when they departed from the flight path proved to be a more effective training intervention than a constant schedule. Flight students taught to land in the simulator with the adaptive augmentation learned to land a light aircraft more quickly than students with the same amount of landing training in the simulator but with constant augmentation or without any augmentation.

===Military===

An interesting early application of AR occurred when Rockwell International created video map overlays of satellite and orbital debris tracks to aid in space observations at Air Force Maui Optical System. In their 1993 paper &quot;Debris Correlation Using the Rockwell WorldView System&quot; the authors describe the use of map overlays applied to video from space surveillance telescopes. The map overlays indicated the trajectories of various objects in geographic coordinates. This allowed telescope operators to identify satellites, and also to identify and catalog potentially dangerous space debris.

Starting in 2003 the US Army integrated the SmartCam3D augmented reality system into the Shadow Unmanned Aerial System to aid sensor operators using telescopic cameras to locate people or points of interest. The system combined fixed geographic information including street names, points of interest, airports, and railroads with live video from the camera system. The system offered a &quot;picture in picture&quot; mode that allows it to show a synthetic view of the area surrounding the camera&#x27;s field of view. This helps solve a problem in which the field of view is so narrow that it excludes important context, as if &quot;looking through a soda straw&quot;. The system displays real-time friend/foe/neutral location markers blended with live video, providing the operator with improved situational awareness.

Researchers at USAF Research Lab (Calhoun, Draper et al.) found an approximately two-fold increase in the speed at which UAV sensor operators found points of interest using this technology. This ability to maintain geographic awareness quantitatively enhances mission efficiency. The system is in use on the US Army RQ-7 Shadow and the MQ-1C Gray Eagle Unmanned Aerial Systems.

In combat, AR can serve as a networked communication system that renders useful battlefield data onto a soldier&#x27;s goggles in real time. From the soldier&#x27;s viewpoint, people and various objects can be marked with special indicators to warn of potential dangers. Virtual maps and 360° view camera imaging can also be rendered to aid a soldier&#x27;s navigation and battlefield perspective, and this can be transmitted to military leaders at a remote command center. The combination of 360° view cameras visualization and AR can be used on board combat vehicles and tanks as circular review system.

AR can be an effective tool for virtually mapping out the 3D topologies of munition storages in the terrain, with the choice of the munitions combination in stacks and distances between them with a visualization of risk areas. The scope of AR applications also includes visualization of data from embedded munitions monitoring sensors.

===Navigation===


The NASA X-38 was flown using a hybrid synthetic vision system that overlaid map data on video to provide enhanced navigation for the spacecraft during flight tests from 1998 to 2002. It used the LandForm software which was useful for times of limited visibility, including an instance when the video camera window frosted over leaving astronauts to rely on the map overlays. The LandForm software was also test flown at the Army Yuma Proving Ground in 1999. In the photo at right one can see the map markers indicating runways, air traffic control tower, taxiways, and hangars overlaid on the video.

AR can augment the effectiveness of navigation devices. Information can be displayed on an automobile&#x27;s windshield indicating destination directions and meter, weather, terrain, road conditions and traffic information as well as alerts to potential hazards in their path. Since 2012, a Swiss-based company WayRay has been developing holographic AR navigation systems that use holographic optical elements for projecting all route-related information including directions, important notifications, and points of interest right into the drivers&#x27; line of sight and far ahead of the vehicle. Aboard maritime vessels, AR can allow bridge watch-standers to continuously monitor important information such as a ship&#x27;s heading and speed while moving throughout the bridge or performing other tasks.

===Workplace===

Augmented reality may have a positive impact on work collaboration as people may be inclined to interact more actively with their learning environment. It may also encourage tacit knowledge renewal which makes firms more competitive. AR was used to facilitate collaboration among distributed team members via conferences with local and virtual participants. AR tasks included brainstorming and discussion meetings utilizing common visualization via touch screen tables, interactive digital whiteboards, shared design spaces and distributed control rooms.

In industrial environments, augmented reality is proving to have a substantial impact with more and more use cases emerging across all aspect of the product lifecycle, starting from product design and new product introduction (NPI) to manufacturing to service and maintenance, to material handling and distribution. For example, labels were displayed on parts of a system to clarify operating instructions for a mechanic performing maintenance on a system. Assembly lines benefited from the usage of AR. In addition to Boeing, BMW and Volkswagen were known for incorporating this technology into assembly lines for monitoring process improvements. Big machines are difficult to maintain because of their multiple layers or structures. AR permits people to look through the machine as if with an x-ray, pointing them to the problem right away.

As AR technology has evolved and second and third generation AR devices come to market, the impact of AR in enterprise continues to flourish. In the &quot;Harvard Business Review&quot;, Magid Abraham and Marco Annunziata discuss how AR devices are now being used to &quot;boost workers&#x27; productivity on an array of tasks the first time they&#x27;re used, even without prior training&quot;. They contend that &quot;these technologies increase productivity by making workers more skilled and efficient, and thus have the potential to yield both more economic growth and better jobs&quot;.

===Broadcast and live events===

Weather visualizations were the first application of augmented reality in television. It has now become common in weather casting to display full motion video of images captured in real-time from multiple cameras and other imaging devices. Coupled with 3D graphics symbols and mapped to a common virtual geospatial model, these animated visualizations constitute the first true application of AR to TV.

AR has become common in sports telecasting. Sports and entertainment venues are provided with see-through and overlay augmentation through tracked camera feeds for enhanced viewing by the audience. Examples include the yellow &quot;first down&quot; line seen in television broadcasts of American football games showing the line the offensive team must cross to receive a first down. AR is also used in association with football and other sporting events to show commercial advertisements overlaid onto the view of the playing area. Sections of rugby fields and cricket pitches also display sponsored images. Swimming telecasts often add a line across the lanes to indicate the position of the current record holder as a race proceeds to allow viewers to compare the current race to the best performance. Other examples include hockey puck tracking and annotations of racing car performance and snooker ball trajectories.

AR has been used to enhance concert and theater performances. For example, artists allow listeners to augment their listening experience by adding their performance to that of other bands/groups of users.

===Tourism and sightseeing===

Travelers may use AR to access real-time informational displays regarding a location, its features, and comments or content provided by previous visitors. Advanced AR applications include simulations of historical events, places, and objects rendered into the landscape.

AR applications linked to geographic locations present location information by audio, announcing features of interest at a particular site as they become visible to the user.

===Translation===

AR systems such as Word Lens can interpret the foreign text on signs and menus and, in a user&#x27;s augmented view, re-display the text in the user&#x27;s language. Spoken words of a foreign language can be translated and displayed in a user&#x27;s view as printed subtitles.

===Music===

It has been suggested that augmented reality may be used in new methods of music production, mixing, control and visualization.

In a proof-of-concept project Ian Sterling, an interaction design student at California College of the Arts, and software engineer Swaroop Pal demonstrated a HoloLens app whose primary purpose is to provide a 3D spatial UI for cross-platform devices—the Android Music Player app and Arduino-controlled Fan and Light—and also allow interaction using gaze and gesture control.

Research by members of the CRIStAL at the University of Lille makes use of augmented reality to enrich musical performance. The ControllAR project allows musicians to augment their MIDI control surfaces with the remixed graphical user interfaces of music software. The Rouages project proposes to augment digital musical instruments to reveal their mechanisms to the audience and thus improve the perceived liveness. Reflets is a novel augmented reality display dedicated to musical performances where the audience acts as a 3D display by revealing virtual content on stage, which can also be used for 3D musical interaction and collaboration.

===Snapchat===

Snapchat users have access to augmented reality in the app through use of camera filters. In September 2017, Snapchat updated its app to include a camera filter that allowed users to render an animated, cartoon version of themselves called &quot;Bitmoji&quot;. These animated avatars would be projected in the real world through the camera, and can be photographed or video recorded. In the same month, Snapchat also announced a new feature called &quot;Sky Filters&quot; that will be available on its app. This new feature makes use of augmented reality to alter the look of a picture taken of the sky, much like how users can apply the app&#x27;s filters to other pictures. Users can choose from sky filters such as starry night, stormy clouds, beautiful sunsets, and rainbow.

==Concerns==

===Reality modifications===
In a paper titled &quot;Death by Pokémon GO&quot;, researchers at Purdue University&#x27;s Krannert School of Management claim the game caused &quot;a disproportionate increase in vehicular crashes and associated vehicular damage, personal injuries, and fatalities in the vicinity of locations, called PokéStops, where users can play the game while driving.&quot; Using data from one municipality, the paper extrapolates what that might mean nationwide and concluded &quot;the increase in crashes attributable to the introduction of Pokémon GO is 145,632 with an associated increase in the number of injuries of 29,370 and an associated increase in the number of fatalities of 256 over the period of 6 July 2016, through 30 November 2016.&quot; The authors extrapolated the cost of those crashes and fatalities at between $2bn and $7.3 billion for the same period. Furthermore, more than one in three surveyed advanced Internet users would like to edit out disturbing elements around them, such as garbage or graffiti. They would like to even modify their surroundings by erasing street signs, billboard ads, and uninteresting shopping windows. So it seems that AR is as much a threat to companies as it is an opportunity. Although, this could be a nightmare to numerous brands that do not manage to capture consumer imaginations it also creates the risk that the wearers of augmented reality glasses may become unaware of surrounding dangers. Consumers want to use augmented reality glasses to change their surroundings into something that reflects their own personal opinions. Around two in five want to change the way their surroundings look and even how people appear to them. 

Next, to the possible privacy issues that are described below, overload and over-reliance issues are the biggest danger of AR. For the development of new AR-related products, this implies that the user-interface should follow certain guidelines as not to overload the user with information while also preventing the user from over-relying on the AR system such that important cues from the environment are missed. This is called the virtually-augmented key. Once the key is ignored, people might not desire the real world anymore.

===Privacy concerns===
The concept of modern augmented reality depends on the ability of the device to record and analyze the environment in real time. Because of this, there are potential legal concerns over privacy.

In late 2024, Meta&#x27;s collaboration with Ray-Ban on smart glasses faced heightened scrutiny due to significant privacy concerns. A notable incident involved two Harvard students who developed a program named I-XRAY, which utilized the glasses&#x27; camera in conjunction with facial recognition software to identify individuals in real-time.

While the First Amendment to the United States Constitution allows for such recording in the name of public interest, the constant recording of an AR device makes it difficult to do so without also recording outside of the public domain. Legal complications would be found in areas where a right to a certain amount of privacy is expected or where copyrighted media are displayed.

In terms of individual privacy, there exists the ease of access to information that one should not readily possess about a given person. This is accomplished through facial recognition technology. Assuming that AR automatically passes information about persons that the user sees, there could be anything seen from social media, criminal record, and marital status.

The Code of Ethics on Human Augmentation, which was originally introduced by Steve Mann in 2004 and further refined with Ray Kurzweil and Marvin Minsky in 2013, was ultimately ratified at the virtual reality Toronto conference on 25 June 2017.

== Property law ==

The interaction of location-bound augmented reality with property law is largely undefined. Several models have been analysed for how this interaction may be resolved in a common law context: an extension of real property rights to also cover augmentations on or near the property with a strong notion of trespassing, forbidding augmentations unless allowed by the owner; an &#x27;open range&#x27; system, where augmentations are allowed unless forbidden by the owner; and a &#x27;freedom to roam&#x27; system, where real property owners have no control over non-disruptive augmentations.

One issue experienced during the Pokémon Go craze was the game&#x27;s players disturbing owners of private property while visiting nearby location-bound augmentations, which may have been on the properties or the properties may have been &quot;en route&quot;. The terms of service of Pokémon Go explicitly disclaim responsibility for players&#x27; actions, which may limit (but may not totally extinguish) the liability of its producer, Niantic, in the event of a player trespassing while playing the game: by Niantic&#x27;s argument, the player is the one committing the trespass, while Niantic has merely engaged in permissible free speech. A theory advanced in lawsuits brought against Niantic is that their placement of game elements in places that will lead to trespass or an exceptionally large flux of visitors can constitute nuisance, despite each individual trespass or visit only being tenuously caused by Niantic.

Another claim raised against Niantic is that the placement of profitable game elements on land without permission of the land&#x27;s owners is unjust enrichment. More hypothetically, a property may be augmented with advertising or disagreeable content against its owner&#x27;s wishes. Under American law, these situations are unlikely to be seen as a violation of real property rights by courts without an expansion of those rights to include augmented reality (similarly to how English common law came to recognise air rights).

An article in the &quot;Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review&quot; argues that there are three bases for this extension, starting with various understanding of property. The personality theory of property, outlined by Margaret Radin, is claimed to support extending property rights due to the intimate connection between personhood and ownership of property; however, her viewpoint is not universally shared by legal theorists. Under the utilitarian theory of property, the benefits from avoiding the harms to real property owners caused by augmentations and the tragedy of the commons, and the reduction in transaction costs by making discovery of ownership easy, were assessed as justifying recognising real property rights as covering location-bound augmentations, though there does remain the possibility of a tragedy of the anticommons from having to negotiate with property owners slowing innovation. Finally, following the &#x27;property as the law of things&#x27; identification as supported by Thomas Merrill and Henry E Smith, location-based augmentation is naturally identified as a &#x27;thing&#x27;, and, while the non-rivalrous and ephemeral nature of digital objects presents difficulties to the excludeability prong of the definition, the article argues that this is not insurmountable.

Some attempts at legislative regulation have been made in the United States. Milwaukee County, Wisconsin attempted to regulate augmented reality games played in its parks, requiring prior issuance of a permit, but this was criticised on free speech grounds by a federal judge; and Illinois considered mandating a notice and take down procedure for location-bound augmentations.

An article for the &quot;Iowa Law Review&quot; observed that dealing with many local permitting processes would be arduous for a large-scale service, and, while the proposed Illinois mechanism could be made workable, it was reactive and required property owners to potentially continually deal with new augmented reality services; instead, a national-level geofencing registry, analogous to a do-not-call list, was proposed as the most desirable form of regulation to efficiently balance the interests of both providers of augmented reality services and real property owners. An article in the &quot;Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law&quot;, however, analyses a monolithic do-not-locate registry as an insufficiently flexible tool, either permitting unwanted augmentations or foreclosing useful applications of augmented reality. Instead, it argues that an &#x27;open range&#x27; model, where augmentations are permitted by default but property owners may restrict them on a case-by-case basis (and with noncompliance treated as a form of trespass), will produce the socially-best outcome.

== Notable researchers ==

* Ronald Azuma is a scientist and author of works on AR.
* Jeri Ellsworth headed a research effort for Valve on augmented reality (AR), later taking that research to her own start-up CastAR. The company, founded in 2013, eventually shuttered. Later, she created another start-up based on the same technology called Tilt Five; another AR start-up formed by her with the purpose of creating a device for digital board games.
* Steve Mann formulated an earlier concept of mediated reality in the 1970s and 1980s, using cameras, processors, and display systems to modify visual reality to help people see better (dynamic range management), building computerized welding helmets, as well as &quot;augmediated reality&quot; vision systems for use in everyday life. He is also an adviser to Meta.
* Dieter Schmalstieg and Daniel Wagner developed a marker tracking systems for mobile phones and PDAs in 2009.
* Ivan Sutherland invented the first VR head-mounted display at Harvard University.

== In media ==
The futuristic short film &quot;Sight&quot; features contact lens-like augmented reality devices.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== References ==
== Sources ==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="0" end="17" title="Augmented reality" label="Augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="19" end="21" title="Augmented reality" label="AR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888030" start="154" end="164" title="Modality (human–computer interaction)" label="modalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="176" end="182" title="visual" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="184" end="192" title="Hearing" label="auditory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289489" start="194" end="200" title="haptic perception" label="haptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="202" end="215" title="Somatosensory system" label="somatosensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="220" end="229" title="olfactory" label="olfactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q924436" start="629" end="657" title="Reality–virtuality continuum" label="reality-virtuality continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660060" start="758" end="767" title="immersion (virtual reality)" label="immersive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="905" end="920" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="1048" end="1061" title="mixed reality" label="mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052165" start="1105" end="1121" title="extended reality" label="extended reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157399" start="1126" end="1151" title="computer-mediated reality" label="computer-mediated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935103" start="1594" end="1610" title="Virtual Fixtures" label="Virtual Fixtures"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793950" start="1657" end="1677" title="Armstrong Laboratory" label="Armstrong Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080138" start="1687" end="1715" title="Commercial augmented reality" label="Commercial augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="2241" end="2256" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971661" start="2317" end="2335" title="object recognition" label="object recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q839721" start="2406" end="2417" title="interactive" label="interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q501688" start="3001" end="3009" title="context awareness" label="contexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="3248" end="3264" title="heads up display" label="heads up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="3323" end="3338" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q22317481" start="3811" end="3818" title="Augment (app)" label="Augment"/>
<link wikidata="Q610918" start="4126" end="4150" title="Mountain Equipment Co-op" label="Mountain Equipment Co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373493" start="4154" end="4165" title="Lowe&amp;#x27;s" label="Lowe&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895038" start="4709" end="4716" title="WallaMe" label="WallaMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="5044" end="5057" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750594" start="5096" end="5110" title="The Master Key (Baum novel)" label="The Master Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914872" start="5301" end="5314" title="Morton Heilig" label="Morton Heilig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093450" start="5374" end="5383" title="Sensorama" label="Sensorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q62866" start="5435" end="5450" title="Ivan Sutherland" label="Ivan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="5469" end="5489" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243085" start="5540" end="5553" title="Myron Krueger" label="Myron Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928037" start="5562" end="5572" title="Videoplace" label="Videoplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="5741" end="5757" title="Head-up display" label="heads up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="5805" end="5815" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="6077" end="6087" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="6094" end="6104" title="Pokémon Go" label="Pokémon Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q518461" start="6302" end="6318" title="Head-up display" label="heads-up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="6622" end="6628" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751495" start="6649" end="6664" title="Louis B. Rosenberg" label="Louis Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935103" start="6723" end="6739" title="Virtual fixture" label="Virtual Fixtures"/>
<link wikidata="Q23772058" start="6858" end="6871" title="Steven K. Feiner" label="Steven Feiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q50591737" start="6873" end="6888" title="Blair MacIntyre" label="Blair MacIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="7016" end="7020" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q210745" start="7021" end="7040" title="active-pixel sensor" label="active-pixel sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="7052" end="7077" title="metal–oxide–semiconductor" label="metal–oxide–semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="7084" end="7096" title="image sensor" label="image sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7115" end="7119" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="7127" end="7152" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q461210" start="7336" end="7344" title="Rockwell Collins" label="Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120519" start="7494" end="7519" title="Communications of the ACM" label="Communications of the ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678757" start="7635" end="7644" title="Loral Corporation" label="Loral WDL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889522" start="7668" end="7675" title="United States Army Simulation and Training Technology Center" label="STRICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823575" start="8022" end="8052" title="Australia Council for the Arts" label="Australia Council for the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193036" start="8075" end="8083" title="acrobatics" label="acrobats"/>
<link wikidata="Q623459" start="8296" end="8312" title="Silicon Graphics" label="Silicon Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="8529" end="8557" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735003" start="8576" end="8589" title="Ramesh Raskar" label="Ramesh Raskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721658" start="8603" end="8614" title="Henry Fuchs" label="Henry Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="8851" end="8879" title="United States Naval Research Laboratory" label="US Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q305443" start="9187" end="9216" title="Dryden Flight Research Center" label="Dryden Flight Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="9226" end="9248" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297063" start="9694" end="9712" title="Trimble Navigation" label="Trimble Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q727665" start="10045" end="10061" title="HTC Dream" label="G1 Android phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="10095" end="10106" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811573" start="10199" end="10207" title="LyteShot" label="Lyteshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462819" start="10293" end="10300" title="Niantic, Inc." label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q63352" start="10316" end="10323" title="Ingress (video game)" label="Ingress"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="10368" end="10371" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="10376" end="10383" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="10430" end="10440" title="Pokémon Go" label="Pokémon Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="10457" end="10466" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844389" start="10481" end="10489" title="HoloLens" label="HoloLens"/>
<link wikidata="Q27022329" start="10622" end="10632" title="Snap, Inc." label="Snap, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q115818673" start="10680" end="10687" title="Filter_(social_media)" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462819" start="10726" end="10733" title="Niantic, Inc." label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="10749" end="10759" title="Pokémon Go" label="Pokémon Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="10770" end="10773" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="10778" end="10785" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351488" start="10942" end="10952" title="Magic Leap" label="Magic Leap"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351488" start="10966" end="10980" title="Magic Leap One" label="Magic Leap One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="11140" end="11149" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077112" start="11160" end="11170" title="HoloLens 2" label="HoloLens 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q380" start="11305" end="11319" title="Meta Platforms" label="Meta Platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738570" start="11492" end="11508" title="mobile computing" label="mobile computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="11522" end="11532" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="11538" end="11553" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175561" start="11644" end="11648" title="MEMS" label="MEMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="11669" end="11682" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="11684" end="11687" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="11693" end="11712" title="Digital magnetic compass" label="solid state compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105103" start="11838" end="11864" title="optical head-mounted display" label="optical projection systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="11866" end="11874" title="computer monitor" label="monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="11880" end="11896" title="mobile device" label="handheld devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191702" start="11972" end="11982" title="Waveguide (optics)" label="waveguides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="12013" end="12033" title="head-mounted display" label="head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q939130" start="12103" end="12117" title="Helmet-mounted display" label="helmet-mounted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480745" start="12261" end="12279" title="Degrees of freedom (mechanics)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909579" start="12715" end="12720" title="uSens" label="uSens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24913786" start="12725" end="12733" title="Gestigon" label="Gestigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519524" start="12743" end="12759" title="Gesture recognition" label="gesture controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660060" start="12777" end="12786" title="Immersion (virtual reality)" label="immersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943726" start="12789" end="12794" title="Vuzix" label="Vuzix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654126" start="13155" end="13162" title="Imagery intelligence" label="imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385694" start="13247" end="13253" title="EyeTap" label="EyeTap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599856" start="14832" end="14851" title="bionic contact lens" label="bionic contact lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="15673" end="15680" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q467178" start="16342" end="16365" title="virtual retinal display" label="virtual retinal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="16426" end="16450" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="16590" end="16596" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27429789" start="16894" end="16914" title="macular degeneration" label="macular degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q611984" start="16958" end="16969" title="keratoconus" label="keratoconus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="17115" end="17131" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469893" start="18089" end="18104" title="fiducial marker" label="fiducial marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071507" start="18174" end="18196" title="six degrees of freedom" label="six degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="18211" end="18220" title="gyroscope" label="gyroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203659" start="18228" end="18265" title="simultaneous localization and mapping" label="simultaneous localization and mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q776483" start="18879" end="18897" title="Projection mapping" label="Projection mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17123635" start="19430" end="19442" title="shader lamps" label="shader lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289489" start="20126" end="20132" title="Haptic perception" label="haptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="20346" end="20361" title="motion capture" label="motion tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="20376" end="20390" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q209121" start="20405" end="20420" title="image sensor" label="optical sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="20478" end="20508" title="radio-frequency identification" label="radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="20632" end="20635" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="20639" end="20644" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48839221" start="20649" end="20655" title="ARCore" label="ARCore"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="20663" end="20669" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q189436" start="20775" end="20793" title="speech recognition" label="speech recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q861092" start="23438" end="23456" title="image registration" label="image registration"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="23488" end="23503" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931635" start="23523" end="23537" title="video tracking" label="video tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110915" start="23608" end="23623" title="visual odometry" label="visual odometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q93586" start="23699" end="23714" title="interest point detection" label="interest points"/>
<link wikidata="Q736111" start="23736" end="23748" title="optical flow" label="optical flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q93586" start="23789" end="23806" title="Feature detection (computer vision)" label="feature detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q697320" start="23820" end="23836" title="corner detection" label="corner detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026711" start="23838" end="23852" title="blob detection" label="blob detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513153" start="23854" end="23868" title="edge detection" label="edge detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256906" start="23872" end="23884" title="Thresholding (image processing)" label="thresholding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="23896" end="23912" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625099" start="24355" end="24376" title="structure from motion" label="structure from motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020763" start="24390" end="24407" title="bundle adjustment" label="bundle adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q177409" start="24473" end="24483" title="projective geometry" label="projective"/>
<link wikidata="Q200904" start="24485" end="24493" title="Epipolar geometry" label="epipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186649" start="24505" end="24522" title="geometric algebra" label="geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370306" start="24524" end="24547" title="Rotation formalisms in three dimensions" label="rotation representation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24553" end="24568" title="Rotation matrix#Exponential map" label="exponential map"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="24570" end="24576" title="Kalman filter" label="kalman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151499" start="24581" end="24589" title="Particle filter" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q769909" start="24599" end="24621" title="nonlinear optimization" label="nonlinear optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665389" start="24623" end="24640" title="robust statistics" label="robust statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="24767" end="24777" title="Markerless motion capture" label="markerless"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004788" start="25315" end="25348" title="Augmented Reality Markup Language" label="Augmented Reality Markup Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q776903" start="25396" end="25422" title="Open Geospatial Consortium" label="Open Geospatial Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="25476" end="25479" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274178" start="25573" end="25583" title="ECMAScript for XML" label="ECMAScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="25789" end="25797" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="25816" end="25824" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047808" start="26780" end="26792" title="User experience" label="UX designers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061656" start="27505" end="27523" title="Interaction design" label="Interaction design"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="28596" end="28604" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391868" start="28764" end="28771" title="reticle" label="reticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940131" start="28775" end="28782" title="Ray casting" label="raycast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="29493" end="29503" title="volumetric" label="volumetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157551" start="30182" end="30190" title="computer graphics lighting" label="lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="30901" end="30915" title="Archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="31567" end="31586" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q738567" start="31876" end="31898" title="multimodal interaction" label="multimodal interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297063" start="32223" end="32241" title="Trimble Navigation" label="Trimble Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="32595" end="32598" title="Global Positioning System" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q772007" start="32667" end="32679" title="georeference" label="georeference"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080784" start="32929" end="32934" title="Daqri" label="Daqri"/>
<link wikidata="Q151850" start="33117" end="33140" title="Christchurch earthquake" label="Christchurch earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935974" start="33351" end="33360" title="cityscape" label="cityscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q575092" start="34009" end="34021" title="Google Glass" label="Google Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q842017" start="35859" end="35862" title="Building information modeling" label="BIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="35864" end="35882" title="internet of things" label="internet of things"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="35887" end="35910" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="38280" end="38285" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q60997373" start="38296" end="38323" title="Universal Scene Description" label="Universal Scene Description"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501150" start="38512" end="38519" title="Shopify" label="Shopify"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936435" start="38812" end="38818" title="Twinkl" label="Twinkl"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="38880" end="38884" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q154055" start="39350" end="39368" title="full-body scanning" label="full-body scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="39540" end="39549" title="J. C. Penney" label="JC Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="39554" end="39573" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q962716" start="39584" end="39605" title="virtual dressing room" label="virtual dressing room"/>
<link wikidata="Q743497" start="39753" end="39766" title="Neiman Marcus" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156077" start="39910" end="39922" title="L&amp;#x27;Oréal" label="L&amp;#x27;Oreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408041" start="39924" end="39931" title="Sephora" label="Sephora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086166" start="39933" end="39950" title="Charlotte Tilbury" label="Charlotte Tilbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q966846" start="39956" end="39962" title="Rimmel" label="Rimmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="40261" end="40265" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055479" start="40267" end="40272" title="Houzz" label="Houzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540193" start="40278" end="40285" title="Wayfair" label="Wayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="40412" end="40416" title="Ikea" label="Ikea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="40909" end="40912" title="Application software" label="app"/>
<link wikidata="Q897105" start="41336" end="41349" title="Virtual Light" label="Virtual Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17209971" start="41430" end="41435" title="ni ka" label="ni ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q153905" start="41509" end="41519" title="Paul Celan" label="Paul Celan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17632220" start="41527" end="41543" title="Die Niemandsrose" label="Die Niemandsrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="41583" end="41617" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176729" start="41806" end="41818" title="Jeffrey Shaw" label="Jeffrey Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="44332" end="44356" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="The Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q75452977" start="44902" end="44927" title="Nancy Baker Cahill" label="Nancy Baker Cahill&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324863" start="45036" end="45044" title="Desert X" label="Desert X"/>
<link wikidata="Q970687" start="45097" end="45109" title="eye tracking" label="eye tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q365691" start="45218" end="45233" title="Olafur Eliasson" label="Olafur Eliasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774838" start="45349" end="45367" title="Martin &amp;amp; Muñoz" label="Martin &amp;amp; Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978715" start="45697" end="45710" title="smart glasses" label="smart glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="45982" end="45992" title="Pokémon Go" label="Pokémon Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q56871793" start="45997" end="46017" title="Jurassic World Alive" label="Jurassic World Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="46054" end="46080" title="Human–computer interaction" label="Human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="46543" end="46547" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="47190" end="47201" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q294240" start="48008" end="48021" title="Public security" label="public safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983144" start="48039" end="48051" title="Superstorm" label="super storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="49923" end="49929" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="50350" end="50359" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462819" start="51129" end="51136" title="Niantic, Inc." label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="51204" end="51210" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q14799" start="51230" end="51236" title="Lenovo" label="Lenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="51280" end="51289" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873" start="51381" end="51391" title="Lightsaber" label="Lightsaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="51570" end="51580" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314049" start="52252" end="52277" title="near-infrared vein finder" label="near-infrared vein finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="52628" end="52633" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q841267" start="52654" end="52664" title="tomography" label="tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="52693" end="52703" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q902045" start="52708" end="52727" title="confocal microscopy" label="confocal microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q580725" start="52791" end="52800" title="endoscope" label="endoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="52883" end="52888" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="52912" end="52916" title="womb" label="womb"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="52976" end="52988" title="Laparoscopy" label="laparoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844389" start="53444" end="53462" title="Microsoft HoloLens" label="Microsoft HoloLens"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="54546" end="54558" title="neurosurgery" label="neurosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="55249" end="55291" title="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="55957" end="55979" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q65670791" start="58294" end="58316" title="circular review system" label="circular review system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550791" start="58679" end="58688" title="NASA X-38" label="NASA X-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372856" start="59105" end="59124" title="Yuma Proving Ground" label="Yuma Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q30336026" start="59588" end="59594" title="WayRay" label="WayRay"/>
<link wikidata="Q139989" start="62763" end="62773" title="first down" label="first down"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="62818" end="62835" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="63075" end="63080" title="rugby football" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="63092" end="63099" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034296" start="64176" end="64185" title="Word Lens" label="Word Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="64523" end="64539" title="music production" label="music production"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="64541" end="64547" title="music mixing" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223175" start="64549" end="64556" title="Media controls" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q758903" start="64561" end="64574" title="music visualization" label="visualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026804" start="64654" end="64684" title="California College of the Arts" label="California College of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551621" start="64995" end="65014" title="University of Lille" label="University of Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="65134" end="65138" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="65173" end="65197" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041413" start="65202" end="65216" title="music software" label="music software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="65258" end="65285" title="Electronic musical instrument" label="digital musical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="65614" end="65622" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11961178" start="65860" end="65867" title="Bitmoji" label="Bitmoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="66454" end="66485" title="Pokémon Go" label="&amp;quot;Death by Pokémon GO&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="66502" end="66519" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436111" start="66527" end="66556" title="Krannert School of Management" label="Krannert School of Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="69227" end="69276" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="70043" end="70053" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q298341" start="70087" end="70099" title="Ray Kurzweil" label="Ray Kurzweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204815" start="70104" end="70117" title="Marvin Minsky" label="Marvin Minsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149275" start="70288" end="70300" title="property law" label="property law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="70403" end="70413" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="70439" end="70452" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838810" start="70536" end="70547" title="trespassing" label="trespassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="70612" end="70622" title="open range" label="open range"/>
<link wikidata="Q688646" start="70712" end="70727" title="freedom to roam" label="freedom to roam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20966579" start="70854" end="70864" title="Pokémon Go" label="Pokémon Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462819" start="71258" end="71265" title="Niantic (company)" label="Niantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838810" start="71292" end="71303" title="trespassing" label="trespassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="71451" end="71462" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156462" start="71654" end="71662" title="nuisance" label="nuisance"/>
<link wikidata="Q818977" start="71890" end="71907" title="unjust enrichment" label="unjust enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="71963" end="71974" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="72111" end="72124" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="72226" end="72244" title="English common law" label="English common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698374" start="72263" end="72273" title="air rights" label="air rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837754" start="72301" end="72354" title="Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review" label="Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759822" start="72512" end="72526" title="Margaret Radin" label="Margaret Radin"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="72732" end="72762" title="utilitarian theory of property" label="utilitarian theory of property"/>
<link wikidata="Q334622" start="72857" end="72879" title="tragedy of the commons" label="tragedy of the commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="72902" end="72919" title="transaction costs" label="transaction costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q931155" start="73108" end="73134" title="tragedy of the anticommons" label="tragedy of the anticommons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792399" start="73297" end="73311" title="Thomas Merrill" label="Thomas Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73316" end="73329" title="Henry E Smith" label="Henry E Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901966" start="73422" end="73435" title="non-rivalrous" label="non-rivalrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="73660" end="73673" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q502294" start="73675" end="73702" title="Milwaukee County, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="73835" end="73846" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="73879" end="73887" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063007" start="73911" end="73931" title="notice and take down" label="notice and take down"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064504" start="74002" end="74017" title="Iowa Law Review" label="Iowa Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502889" start="74334" end="74344" title="geofencing" label="geofencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286411" start="74370" end="74386" title="do-not-call list" label="do-not-call list"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914456" start="74577" end="74631" title="Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law" label="Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265864" start="75117" end="75129" title="Ronald Azuma" label="Ronald Azuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34965" start="75174" end="75188" title="Jeri Ellsworth" label="Jeri Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="75218" end="75223" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511871" start="75298" end="75304" title="CastAR" label="CastAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="75525" end="75535" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q62899" start="75540" end="75550" title="Steve Mann (inventor)" label="Steve Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157399" start="75584" end="75600" title="mediated reality" label="mediated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811574" start="75899" end="75903" title="Meta (augmented reality company)" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18720236" start="75907" end="75925" title="Dieter Schmalstieg" label="Dieter Schmalstieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62866" start="76018" end="76033" title="Ivan Sutherland" label="Ivan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767749" start="76047" end="76076" title="The Sword of Damocles (virtual reality)" label="first VR head-mounted display"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="76080" end="76098" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="76120" end="76130" title="science fiction" label="futuristic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85633" wikidata="Q1195817" url="?curid=85633" title="Elagabalus (deity)">
<text>Elagabalus (), Aelagabalus, Heliogabalus, () or simply Elagabal (Aramaic: 𐡀𐡋𐡄𐡀𐡂𐡁𐡋 &quot;ʾĕlāhaʾgabāl&quot;) was an Arab-Roman sun god, initially venerated in Emesa (modern-day Homs), Syria. Although there were many variations of the name, the god was consistently referred to as &quot;Elagabalus&quot; in Roman coins and inscriptions from AD 218 on, during the reign of emperor Elagabalus.

==Cult==
Elagabalus was initially venerated at Emesa in Syria, where the Arab Emesan dynasty acted as its priests. The name is the Latinised form of the Arabic &quot;Ilah al-Jabal&quot; (&quot;إله الجبل&quot;), the Emesene manifestation of the deity, which is Arabic for &quot;God of the Mountain.&quot; Elagabalus was the religious &quot;lord&quot;, or Ba&#x27;al, of Emesa. The deity successfully preserved Arab characteristics, both in his names and representations.

The cult of the deity spread to other parts of the Roman Empire in the second century, where he would be revered as Elagabalos (Ἐλαγάβαλος &quot;Elagábalos&quot;) by the Greeks and Elagabalus by the Romans. For example, a dedication has been found as far away as Woerden, in the modern-day Netherlands.

==In Rome==
The cult stone or baetyl was taken to Rome by the Emperor Elagabalus, who, before his accession, was the hereditary high priest at Emesa and was commonly called Elagabalus after the deity. The Syrian deity was assimilated with the Roman sun god known as Sol and became known as Sol Invictus (&quot;the unconquered Sun&quot;) among the Romans.

A temple called the Elagabalium was built on the east face of the Palatine Hill to house the holy stone of the Emesa temple, a black conical meteorite. Herodian writes of that stone:


Herodian also related that Elagabalus forced senators to watch while he danced around his deity&#x27;s altar to the sound of drums and cymbals, and at each summer solstice celebrated a great festival, popular with the masses because of food distributions, during which he placed the holy stone on a chariot adorned with gold and jewels, which he paraded through the city:

Herodian&#x27;s description strongly suggests that the Emesene cult was inspired by the Babylonian Akitu-festival.

According to Cassius Dio, the Emperor also tried to bring about a union of Roman and Syrian religion under the supremacy of his deity, which he placed even above Jupiter, and to which he assigned either Astarte, Minerva or Urania, or some combination of the three, as wife. The most sacred relics from the Roman religion were transferred from their respective shrines to the Elagabalium, including &quot;the emblem of the Great Mother, the fire of Vesta, the Palladium, the shields of the Salii, and all that the Romans held sacred&quot;. He reportedly also declared that Jews, Samaritans and Christians must transfer their rites to his temple so that it &quot;might include the mysteries of every form of worship&quot;.

According to Herodian, after the emperor was killed in 222, his religious edicts were reversed and the cult of Elagabalus returned to Emesa.

==See also==
* Black Stone
* Homs
* Hubal
* Royal family of Emesa

==References==
==Further reading==
* M. Pietrzykowsky, &quot;Die Religionspolitik des Kaisers Elagabal&quot;, in: &quot;Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt&quot; II 16.3 (1986) 806–1825

==External links==
*Livius.org: Elagabal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="0" end="10" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="15" end="26" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Aelagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="28" end="41" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Heliogabalus,"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="55" end="63" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Elagabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26978" start="65" end="72" title="Aramaic alphabet" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q446021" start="115" end="119" title="Ancient Semitic religion" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="120" end="125" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="126" end="133" title="sun god" label="sun god"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="158" end="163" title="Emesa" label="Emesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="176" end="180" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="183" end="188" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="370" end="377" title="Emperor of Rome" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="378" end="388" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="447" end="452" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="469" end="483" title="Emesan dynasty" label="Emesan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="522" end="531" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="745" end="755" title="Ba&amp;#x27;al" label="Ba&amp;#x27;al"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="913" end="925" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128" start="1125" end="1132" title="Woerden" label="Woerden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1152" end="1163" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q664990" start="1196" end="1202" title="baetyl" label="baetyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="1228" end="1235" title="Roman emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="1236" end="1246" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="1432" end="1435" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="1456" end="1468" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q969344" start="1542" end="1553" title="Elagabalium" label="Elagabalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="1588" end="1601" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q664990" start="1649" end="1672" title="Baetylus" label="black conical meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q313056" start="1674" end="1682" title="Herodian" label="Herodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="1863" end="1878" title="solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="2006" end="2013" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="2168" end="2177" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419358" start="2179" end="2193" title="Akitu" label="Akitu-festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="2209" end="2220" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="2358" end="2365" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="2399" end="2406" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="2408" end="2415" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q104002" start="2419" end="2425" title="Urania" label="Urania"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="2614" end="2630" title="Cybele" label="the Great Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="2644" end="2649" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q829650" start="2655" end="2664" title="Palladium (mythology)" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q489353" start="2670" end="2677" title="Ancile" label="shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q366880" start="2685" end="2690" title="Salii" label="Salii"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2768" end="2772" title="Judaism" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="2774" end="2784" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2789" end="2799" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q715286" start="3075" end="3086" title="Black Stone" label="Black Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="3089" end="3093" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q289933" start="3096" end="3101" title="Hubal" label="Hubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="3104" end="3125" title="Royal family of Emesa" label="Royal family of Emesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q736345" start="3247" end="3289" title="Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt" label="Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85636" wikidata="Q7563745" url="?curid=85636" title="Sors">
<text>In Roman mythology, Sors, a lesser deity, was a god of luck. Derived from the Greek model of Tyche, and supposedly a son of Fortuna.

Scarcely mentioned in mythology, a handful of quotes cite him in such expressions &quot;By the luck of Sors&quot;, or &quot;Lived by a hairs breadth of Sors&quot;. Sors is also a popular name in poker, as are both sayings. Sors is also a common term in gambling. Opera singer Joe Volpe composed a piece that mentioned Sors. “Legend says Sors still exists somewhere beyond. Acolytes say he is among gods. Non-believers say he never existed. But it is said he is eternally found.”

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563745" start="20" end="24" title="Sors" label="Sors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="124" end="131" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q80131" start="329" end="334" title="poker" label="poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="387" end="395" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85637" wikidata="Q1482478" url="?curid=85637" title="Spes">
<text>Spes (Latin for &quot;Hope&quot;) was worshipped as a goddess in ancient Roman religion. Numerous temples to Spes are known, and inscriptions indicate that she received private devotion as well as state cult.

==Republican Hope==

During the Republic, a temple to &quot;ancient Hope&quot; () was supposed to have been located near the Praenestine Gate. It was associated with events that occurred in the 5th century BC, but its existence as anything except perhaps a private shrine has been doubted.

A well-documented Temple of Spes was built by Aulus Atilius Calatinus along with Fides, as the result of vows () made to these goddesses during the First Punic War. This was built at the vegetable market () just outside the Carmental Gate. It was twice burnt down and restored, first in 213 BC and then again in AD 7.

At Capua in 110 BC, a temple was built to the triad of Spes, Fides, and Fortuna.

==Imperial Hope==
Spes was one of the divine personifications in the Imperial cult of the Virtues. Spes Augusta was Hope associated with the capacity of the emperor as &quot;Augustus&quot; to ensure blessed conditions.

Like Salus (&quot;Salvation, Security&quot;), Ops (&quot;Abundance, Prosperity&quot;), and Victoria (&quot;Victory&quot;), Spes was a power that had to come from the gods, in contrast to divine powers that resided within the individual such as Mens (&quot;Intelligence&quot;), Virtus (&quot;Virtue&quot;), and Fides (&quot;Faith, Fidelity, Trustworthiness&quot;).

==Greek Elpis==
The Greek counterpart of Spes was Elpis, who by contrast had no formal cult in Greece. The primary myth in which Elpis plays a role is the story of Pandora. The Greeks had ambivalent or even negative feelings about &quot;hope&quot;, with Euripides describing it in his &quot;Suppliants&quot; as &quot;delusive&quot; and stating &quot;it has embroiled many a State&quot;, and the concept was unimportant in the philosophical systems of the Stoics and Epicureans.

==See also==
* Hope, the concept
* Piety (), Luck (), Faithfulness () as Roman goddesses

==References==
===Citations===

===Bibliography===
* 
==Further reading==

* Clark, Mark Edward. &quot;Spes in the Early Imperial Cult: &#x27;The Hope of Augustus&#x27;.&quot; &quot;Numen&quot; 30.1 (1983) 80–105.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1482478" start="0" end="4" title="Spes" label="Spes"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6" end="11" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812977" start="22" end="26" title="Hope (virtue)" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="54" end="61" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="65" end="78" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="79" end="87" title="ancient Roman religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="129" end="141" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="242" end="250" title="Roman Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751318" start="335" end="351" title="Porta Praenestina" label="Praenestine Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241176" start="519" end="533" title="Temple of Spes (Carmental)" label="Temple of Spes"/>
<link wikidata="Q714798" start="547" end="570" title="Aulus Atilius Calatinus" label="Aulus Atilius Calatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605139" start="582" end="587" title="Fides (goddess)" label="Fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="649" end="664" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544611" start="725" end="739" title="Carmental Gate" label="Carmental Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="823" end="828" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q605139" start="881" end="886" title="Fides (goddess)" label="Fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="892" end="899" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="971" end="984" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="Imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="1059" end="1066" title="Roman emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="1076" end="1084" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282628" start="1127" end="1132" title="Salus" label="Salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859392" start="1168" end="1171" title="Ops" label="Ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="1213" end="1221" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133048" start="1366" end="1370" title="Mens" label="Mens"/>
<link wikidata="Q582177" start="1399" end="1405" title="Virtus (deity)" label="Virtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605139" start="1432" end="1437" title="Fides (goddess)" label="Fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="1507" end="1524" title="interpretatio graeca" label="Greek counterpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633131" start="1537" end="1542" title="Elpis (mythology)" label="Elpis"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="1574" end="1588" title="Religion in ancient Greece" label="cult in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1602" end="1606" title="Greek mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131346" start="1651" end="1658" title="Pandora" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="1741" end="1750" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="1942" end="1948" title="Stoicism" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="1953" end="1963" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812977" start="1981" end="1985" title="Hope (virtue)" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643299" start="2001" end="2006" title="Pietas (goddess)" label="Piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="2011" end="2015" title="Fortuna (goddess)" label="Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q605139" start="2020" end="2032" title="Fides (deity)" label="Faithfulness"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85638" wikidata="Q15241449" url="?curid=85638" title="Lancaster County Prison">
<text>The Lancaster County Prison is a county prison located in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, in the United States. It is located on East King Street in Lancaster City.

==History==
The prison was originally built in 1851 and renovated in 1972. The present medieval-style building replaced the earlier prisons in 1851, with Fulton Hall, of the Fulton Opera House being built on the site of the earlier prison. The prison is still in active use.

It was used for public hangings until 1912. 

==Present day==
With over 5,000 admissions each year (and a similar number of discharges), Lancaster County Prison currently has beds for over 950 inmates, but has the capacity to accommodate more if needed.

The majority of those currently detained are imprisoned pending trial, the remaining 40% having already been sentenced. Prior to 2013, sentenced inmates were charged $10 per day for their incarceration, under the Lancaster County Prison &quot;prisoner cost recovery program&quot;, in operation since 1995. Since that time there has been a flat fee of thirty dollars collected at intake or billed to the inmate if they haven&#x27;t any cash on hand.

==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15241449" start="4" end="27" title="Lancaster County Prison" label="Lancaster County Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="40" end="46" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="58" end="67" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="69" end="81" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="90" end="103" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="175" end="181" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508452" start="333" end="351" title="Fulton Opera House" label="Fulton Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="458" end="465" title="hanging" label="hanging"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85639" wikidata="Q15270377" url="?curid=85639" title="Spiniensis">
<text>In Roman mythology, Spiniensis was the god of thorns. People prayed to him when they removed thorny plants from their fields as he presided over the digging out of thorn bushes and guarded the field against thorns. His name comes from &quot;spina&quot; (&quot;spine/thorn&quot;).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15270377" start="20" end="30" title="Spiniensis" label="Spiniensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="46" end="52" title="Thorns, spines, and prickles" label="thorns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85640" wikidata="Q7602975" url="?curid=85640" title="Stata Mater">
<text>In ancient Roman religion, Stata Mater (&quot;Mother who stops or stabilizes&quot;) was a compital goddess who protected against fires. She had an image &quot;(simulacrum)&quot; in the Forum, and her &quot;cultus&quot;, as Festus notes, spread from there throughout the neighborhoods &quot;(vici)&quot; of the city.

The original statue was set up by an Aurelius Cotta who had supervised the installation of new pavement in the Forum at the end of the 80s BC. The goddess&#x27;s purpose was to safeguard the stonework from fire damage. Only the Lares Augusti outnumber her as recipients of surviving dedications from compital shrines.

==In the neighborhoods==

The cult of Stata Mater was centered on compital shrines of the &quot;vici&quot;, and numerous inscriptions to her were made by the heads of neighborhood associations &quot;(vicomagistri)&quot;. Her popularity attests to the everpresent threat and danger of fire in metropolitan Rome. She is sometimes given the additional title &quot;Augusta&quot;, perhaps in reference to the reorganization of the regions of Rome under Augustus in 7 BC. One of the outcomes of this redistricting was to create local boards or neighborhood watches &quot;(vigiles)&quot; tasked with fire control, as a response to recent arson in the Forum. The dedications mark the success of local fire brigades in putting out fires. One pairs Stata Mater Augusta with Volcanus Quietus Augustus, &quot;the &#x27;Quieted&#x27; Vulcan Augustus.&quot; Stata Mater is perhaps to be identified with the Fortuna Augusta Stata named in an inscription. Her cultivation is an example of localized Imperial cult under Augustus.

A &quot;Vicus Statae Matris&quot; (&quot;Stata Mater&#x27;s Neighborhood&quot;) was located on the Caelian Hill, and a &quot;Vicus Statae Siccianae&quot; in the Transtiberim.

W.H. Roscher places &quot;Stata mater&quot; among the &quot;indigitamenta&quot;, the list of deities maintained by Roman priests to assure that the correct divinity was invoked for rituals.

==See also==
* Vulcanalia
* Vesta
* Cacus
* Great Fire of Rome

==References==
==External links==
* A pedestal for Stata Mater from Roman Spain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="3" end="25" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7602975" start="27" end="38" title="Stata Mater" label="Stata Mater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46" end="52" title="List of Roman deities#Mater and Pater" label="Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q671192" start="90" end="98" title="Compitalia" label="compital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="99" end="106" title="List of Roman deities" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="185" end="190" title="Forum Romanum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="206" end="212" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#cultus" label="cultus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302723" start="223" end="229" title="Sextus Pompeius Festus" label="Festus"/>
<link wikidata="Q763590" start="291" end="295" title="vicus" label="vici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="354" end="368" title="Aurelia (gens)#Aurelii Cottae" label="Aurelius Cotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q504377" start="545" end="558" title="Lares" label="Lares Augusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282711" start="997" end="1004" title="Augusta (honorific)" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243603" start="1062" end="1092" title="14 regions of Augustan Rome" label="regions of Rome under Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640" start="1457" end="1463" title="Vulcan (mythology)" label="Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="1464" end="1472" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="1619" end="1632" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="Imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1639" end="1647" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216104" start="1749" end="1761" title="Caelian Hill" label="Caelian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q914255" start="1811" end="1823" title="Transtiberim" label="Transtiberim"/>
<link wikidata="Q63567" start="1826" end="1838" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Roscher" label="W.H. Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150463" start="1886" end="1899" title="indigitamenta" label="indigitamenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640" start="2032" end="2042" title="Vulcanalia" label="Vulcanalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="2045" end="2050" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q754686" start="2053" end="2058" title="Cacus" label="Cacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="2061" end="2079" title="Great Fire of Rome" label="Great Fire of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="2149" end="2160" title="Roman Spain" label="Roman Spain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85643" wikidata="Q5508452" url="?curid=85643" title="Fulton Opera House">
<text>The Fulton Opera House, also known as the Fulton Theatre or simply The Fulton, is a League of Regional Theatres class B regional theater located in historic downtown Lancaster, Pennsylvania. It is reportedly the oldest working theatre in the United States. It was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1964.

== History ==
The current structure was built in 1852 on the foundation of Lancaster&#x27;s former jail, which dated to 1739. In 1763, the twenty surviving members of the Conestoga were placed in protective custody at the jail after fourteen Conestoga were murdered by a settler mob known as the Paxton Boys. On December 27, 1763, thirteen days after the first massacre, the Paxton Boys broke past the sheriff and others defending the jail and murdered all of the remaining Conestoga. None of the attackers were arrested. This became the subject matter for the first plays ever written on American soil: &quot;A Dialogue Between Andrew Trueman and Thomas Zealot About the Killing the Indians at Cannestogoe and Lancaster&quot; and &quot;The Paxton Boys, a Farce&quot;. 

The building was designated as a site of significance to the Underground Railroad by the National Park Service in 2008. This connection stemmed from an event in 1835 where two fugitive slave women were clandestinely freed from the jail by the sheriff in defiance of the Fugitive Slave Act, allowing them to escape to Philadelphia where they were later captured.

The current building was erected in 1852. The building, then called Fulton Hall, was named after Lancaster native Robert Fulton. Fulton Hall operated as a town hall and stage for traveling theatrical groups, hosting noted orators including William Jennings Bryan and Lancaster abolitionist Thaddeus Stevens along with famed actors including Edwin Booth and John Wilkes Booth. During the American Civil War, Fulton Hall served as an armory and hospital. 

In 1856, Fulton Hall was sold to hotelkeeper Hilaire Zaepfel and showman Blasius Yecker. Zaepfel sold his share of the hall to Yecker in 1869, and Yecker commissioned theatre architect Edwin Forrest Durang to renovate it into a Victorian opera house. Its grand opening took place on October 2, 1873 with a performance of &quot;Othello&quot; benefitting Civil War widows and orphans.
A projection booth was installed in 1930, allowing the theatre to screen movies. Over time, stage productions ceased entirely, and the theatre languished, primarily screening second- and third-run films. Facing demolition, a campaign was launched in the 1950s to restore the theatre. A grand reopening ceremony occurred in 1952, on the 100th anniversary of the theatre&#x27;s creation, but business remained weak. The 1959 production of &quot;Our Town&quot;, starring Jeanne Clemson, marked the first time that a live theater production had been performed at the Fulton Opera House in thirty years. In 1962, the Fulton Opera House Foundation was formed, and funds were raised to purchase the building as a nonprofit in the hopes of raising money so that it could be restored. In 1995, the renovation of the theatre was completed; the Fulton would reopen that October with a staging of Steven Sondheim&#x27;s &quot;Company&quot;.

==Building==
The current building was commissioned by Christopher Hager, a Lancaster merchant and civic leader, and designed by renowned Philadelphia architect Samuel Sloan, who later designed the Lancaster County Courthouse. The original foundation stones from the jail remain at the rear entrance to the Fulton Theatre, along with a plaque commemorating the Conestoga Massacre. On the front façade stands a statue of the Theatre&#x27;s namesake, Robert Fulton. This statue is a replica of the original wooden statue, which is displayed inside the interior lobby. 

The Fulton Theatre was renovated in the early 1870s by noted theatrical architect Edwin Forrest Durang. By 1996, the theatre had been renovated again, with a new 560-seat main stage, practice rooms, and recital stage.

It is one of only two theatres recognized as National Historic Landmarks (the other is the Walnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia).

== Operation ==
A founding member of the League of Historic American Theatres (LHAT), the Fulton is operated by the Fulton Theatre Company, a non-profit organization.

As the Fulton is run on a non-profit basis, it depends on a variety of grants, corporate sponsorship, and private donations to accomplish its mission. The Fulton is an Equity House, operating under agreement with the Actor&#x27;s Equity Association and the Union for Professional Actors and Stage Managers (which essentially means that its actors and production team are paid per collective bargaining agreements, as opposed to non-equity actors who are not paid per collective bargaining agreements or volunteers) and employs members of the Stage Directors and Choreographers Society and the United Scenic Artists. The Fulton is also a member of ASSITEJ, the International Association of Theatre for Children and Young People.

The Fulton Theatre is home to six mainstage productions per year including previous productions of Disney&#x27;s &quot;Newsies&quot;, &quot;In The Heights&quot;, Agatha Christie&#x27;s &quot;The Mousetrap&quot;, some of which are world premier originals (critically acclaimed &quot;Lightning Rod&quot;, 2005); four family series productions, including the Fulton&#x27;s own&quot; &#x27;Twas the Night Before Christmas,&quot; &quot;Aladdin&quot;, &quot;Jack and the Beanstalk, the Musical&quot;, and other theatre for young audiences productions; and four studio series productions, including the Pulitzer Prize-winning drama &quot;Disgraced&quot;, along with other riveting productions like &quot;Venus in Fur&quot;, &quot;Veronica&#x27;s Room&quot; and &quot;Other Desert Cities&quot;. Although most casting takes place in New York City, regional auditions are also held. While many of The Fulton&#x27;s regulars are Lancaster County natives who are delighted at the chance to return home to perform, nearly all quickly fall in love with the &quot;Grand Old Lady&quot; and her charm.

In addition to providing a place of employment for professional actors, the Fulton Theatre Company is a complete production facility which employs full-time carpenters, electricians, scenic artists, painters, composers, lighting and sound technicians. Most set pieces and costumes are created in-house or at an adjacent workshop, and makeup, hair, and wigs are created by a full-time designer. The Fulton also maintains a costume shop which provides access to professional quality costumes and props to schools, community theatre companies, and other organizations throughout the region. Its marketing department maintains a website that allows users to browse theatre history, check audition times, and purchase tickets. All posters and print materials, including production programs, are cataloged and archived by the Lancaster Historical Society.

Many famous actors have appeared at the Fulton. In December 1930 Basil Rathbone appeared as Christian St. Obin in &quot;A Kiss of Importance&quot;. Peter Weir&#x27;s film, &quot;Witness,&quot; starring Harrison Ford and Kelly McGillis, much of which represents the lifestyle of the Amish, premiered here in February, 1985.

==See also==
*List of National Historic Landmarks in Pennsylvania
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania

==References==
* &quot;Who&#x27;s Who in the Theatre&quot;, edited by John Parker, tenth edition, revised, London, 1947, p. 1184.
==External links==
*Building history
*Listing and photographs at Philadelphia Architects and Buildings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5508452" start="0" end="22" title="Fulton Opera House" label="The Fulton Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508452" start="42" end="56" title="Fulton Opera House" label="Fulton Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508452" start="67" end="77" title="Fulton Opera House" label="The Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="166" end="189" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="277" end="303" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279673" start="485" end="494" title="Susquehannock" label="Conestoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373236" start="610" end="621" title="Paxton Boys" label="Paxton Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="1146" end="1166" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1174" end="1195" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q535519" start="1355" end="1373" title="Fugitive Slave Act of 1850" label="Fugitive Slave Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1402" end="1414" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="1545" end="1554" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="1562" end="1575" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="1688" end="1710" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353767" start="1738" end="1754" title="Thaddeus Stevens" label="Thaddeus Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q798506" start="1789" end="1800" title="Edwin Booth" label="Edwin Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q180914" start="1805" end="1822" title="John Wilkes Booth" label="John Wilkes Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1835" end="1853" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346422" start="2088" end="2108" title="Edwin Forrest Durang" label="Edwin Forrest Durang"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="2131" end="2140" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="2141" end="2152" title="opera house" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="2230" end="2237" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755219" start="2729" end="2737" title="Our Town" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6172042" start="2754" end="2768" title="Jeanne Clemson" label="Jeanne Clemson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="3171" end="3193" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Steven Sondheim&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915810" start="3194" end="3213" title="Company (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Company&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412651" start="3376" end="3388" title="Samuel Sloan (architect)" label="Samuel Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="3664" end="3677" title="Robert Fulton" label="Robert Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346422" start="3865" end="3885" title="Edwin Forrest Durang" label="Edwin Forrest Durang"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="4047" end="4073" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963680" start="4093" end="4114" title="Walnut Street Theatre" label="Walnut Street Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4118" end="4130" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677733" start="4470" end="4476" title="Actors&amp;#x27; Equity Association" label="Equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596783" start="4844" end="4886" title="Stage Directors and Choreographers Society" label="Stage Directors and Choreographers Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q298006" start="4949" end="4956" title="ASSITEJ" label="ASSITEJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="5949" end="5965" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County"/>
<link wikidata="Q105507" start="6469" end="6473" title="Wig (hair)" label="wigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q336865" start="7033" end="7047" title="Basil Rathbone" label="Basil Rathbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81328" start="7170" end="7183" title="Harrison Ford" label="Harrison Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q229147" start="7188" end="7202" title="Kelly McGillis" label="Kelly McGillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104444" start="7250" end="7255" title="Amish" label="Amish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061286" start="7306" end="7357" title="List of National Historic Landmarks in Pennsylvania" label="List of National Historic Landmarks in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976564" start="7359" end="7438" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85645" wikidata="Q1989704" url="?curid=85645" title="Strenua">
<text>In ancient Roman religion, Strenua or Strenia was a goddess of the new year, purification, and wellbeing. She had a shrine &quot;(sacellum)&quot; and grove &quot;(lucus)&quot; at the top of the Via Sacra. Varro said she was a Sabine goddess. W.H. Roscher includes her among the &quot;indigitamenta&quot;, the lists of Roman deities maintained by priests to assure that the correct divinity was invoked in public rituals. The procession of the Argei began at her shrine.

On January 1, twigs from Strenua&#x27;s grove were carried in a procession to the citadel &quot;(arx)&quot;. The rite is first noted as occurring on New Year&#x27;s Day in 153 BC, the year when consuls first began assuming their office at the beginning of the year. It is unclear whether it had always been held on that date or had been transferred that year from another place on the calendar, perhaps the original New Year&#x27;s Day on March 1.

The name &quot;Strenia&quot; was said to be the origin of the word &quot;strenae&quot; (preserved in French &quot;étrennes&quot; and Italian &quot;strenne&quot;), the new-year gifts Romans exchanged as good omens in an extension of the public rite:

From almost the beginning of Mars&#x27; city the custom of New Year&#x27;s gifts &quot;(strenae)&quot; prevailed on account of the precedent of king Tatius who was the first to reckon the holy branches &quot;(verbenae)&quot; of a fertile tree &quot;(arbor felix)&quot; in Strenia&#x27;s grove as the auspicious signs of the new year.&quot;

During the Principate, these &quot;strenae&quot; often took the form of money.

Johannes Lydus says that &quot;strenae&quot; was a Sabine word for wellbeing or welfare &quot;(hygieia,&quot; Latin &quot;salus&quot;). The supposed Sabine etymology may or may not be factual, but expresses the Sabine ethnicity of Tatius. St. Augustine says that Strenia was the goddess who made a person &quot;strenuus,&quot; &quot;vigorous, strong.&quot;

According to some scholars the Befana tradition is derived by the Strenua cult. In the book &quot;Vestiges of Ancient Manners and Customs, Discoverable in Modern Italy and Sicily&quot; by Rev. John J. Blunt (John Murray, 1823), the author says:

&quot;This Befana appears to be heir at law of a certain heathen goddess called Strenia, who presided over the new-year&#x27;s gifts, &#x27;Strenae,&#x27; from which, indeed, she derived her name. Her presents were of the same description as those of the Befana—figs, dates, and honey. Moreover her solemnities were vigorously opposed by the early Christians on account of their noisy, riotous, and licentious character&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="3" end="25" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989704" start="27" end="34" title="Strenua" label="Strenua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989704" start="38" end="45" title="Strenua" label="Strenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="67" end="75" title="new year" label="new year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210292" start="130" end="138" title="sacellum" label="sacellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q556542" start="163" end="168" title="lucus" label="lucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655172" start="194" end="203" title="Via Sacra" label="Via Sacra"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="226" end="232" title="Sabines" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q63567" start="242" end="254" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Roscher" label="W.H. Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150463" start="284" end="297" title="indigitamenta" label="indigitamenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="309" end="331" title="List of Roman deities" label="lists of Roman deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054558" start="443" end="448" title="Argei" label="Argei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802565" start="553" end="578" title="arx (Roman)" label="citadel &amp;quot;(arx)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="665" end="672" title="Roman consul" label="consuls"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="856" end="864" title="Roman calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1021" end="1027" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1034" end="1042" title=":fr:étrennes" label="étrennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975992" start="1067" end="1074" title="Strenna" label="strenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="1199" end="1203" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q960039" start="1314" end="1325" title="Titus Tatius" label="king Tatius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1420" end="1431" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#arbor felix" label="arbor felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q779777" start="1470" end="1486" title="auspice" label="auspicious signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="1522" end="1532" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389145" start="1591" end="1605" title="Johannes Lydus" label="Johannes Lydus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="1642" end="1653" title="Sabine language" label="Sabine word"/>
<link wikidata="Q202257" start="1686" end="1693" title="hygieia" label="hygieia"/>
<link wikidata="Q282628" start="1713" end="1718" title="salus" label="salus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1830" end="1843" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St. Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q814168" start="1980" end="1986" title="Befana" label="Befana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85647" wikidata="Q1459682" url="?curid=85647" title="Suadela">
<text>In Roman mythology, Suada (also called by the diminutive Suadela) was the goddess of persuasion, particularly in the realms of romance, seduction and love. She was strongly associated with Venus. Her Greek name was Peitho, and she was worshipped as a divinity in Sicyon, where she was honoured with a temple in the agora. Sometimes she is associated with or counted as one of the Graces, being part of Venus’s retinue. Plutarch observed in his &quot;Quaestiones Romanae&quot; (part of the &quot;Moralia&quot;) that the married couple needed five gods: Nuptial Jupiter, Nuptial Juno, Venus, Suada, and above all Diana, whom women call upon in childbirth.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459682" start="20" end="25" title="Suadela" label="Suada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459682" start="57" end="64" title="Suadela" label="Suadela"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="74" end="81" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="127" end="134" title="romantic love" label="romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527023" start="136" end="145" title="seduction" label="seduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q316" start="150" end="154" title="love" label="love"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="189" end="194" title="Venus (deity)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="200" end="205" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q611171" start="215" end="221" title="Peitho" label="Peitho"/>
<link wikidata="Q368628" start="263" end="269" title="Sicyon" label="Sicyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="315" end="320" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q184353" start="380" end="386" title="Graces" label="Graces"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="419" end="427" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q651941" start="495" end="502" title="Moralia" label="Moralia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85650" wikidata="Q942906" url="?curid=85650" title="Summanus">
<text>Summanus () was the god of nocturnal thunder in ancient Roman religion, as counterposed to Jupiter, the god of diurnal (daylight) thunder. His precise nature was unclear even to Ovid.

Pliny thought that he was of Etruscan origin, and one of the nine gods of thunder. Varro lists Summanus among gods to whom Sabine king Titus Tatius dedicated altars &quot;(arae)&quot; in consequence of a votum. Paulus Diaconus considers him a god of lightning.

The name &quot;Summanus&quot; is thought to be from &quot;Summus Manium&quot; &quot;the greatest of the Manes&quot;, or &quot;sub-&quot;, &quot;under&quot; + &quot;manus&quot;, &quot;hand&quot;.

According to Martianus Capella, Summanus is another name for Pluto as the &quot;highest&quot; &quot;(summus)&quot; of the Manes. This identification is taken up by later writers such as Camões (&quot;If in Summanus&#x27; gloomy realm / Severest punishment you now endure ...&quot;) and Milton, in a simile to describe Satan visiting Rome: &quot;Just so Summanus, wrapped in a smoking whirlwind of blue flame, falls upon people and cities&quot;.

Georges Dumézil has argued that Summanus would represent the uncanny, violent and awe-inspiring element of the gods of the first function, connected to heavenly sovereignty. The double aspect of heavenly sovereign power would be reflected in the dichotomy Varuna-Mitra in Vedic religion and in Rome in the dichotomy Summanus-Dius Fidius. The first gods of these pairs would incarnate the violent, nocturnal, mysterious aspect of sovereignty while the second ones would reflect its reassuring, daylight and legalistic aspect.

==Temple and cult==
The temple of Summanus was dedicated during the Pyrrhic War c. 278 BCE on June 20. It stood at the west of the Circus Maximus, perhaps on the slope of the Aventine. It seems the temple had been dedicated because the statue of the god which stood on the roof of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus had been struck by a lightning bolt.
Every June 20, the day before the summer solstice, round cakes called &quot;summanalia&quot;, made of flour, milk, and honey and shaped as wheels, were offered to him as a token of propitiation: the wheel might be a solar symbol. Summanus also received a sacrifice of two black oxen or wethers. Dark animals were typically offered to chthonic deities.

Saint Augustine records that in earlier times Summanus had been more exalted than Jupiter, but with the construction of a temple that was more magnificent than that of Summanus, Jupiter became more honored.

Cicero recounts that the clay statue of the god which stood on the roof of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus was struck by a lightning bolt: its head was nowhere to be seen. The haruspices announced that it had been hurled into the Tiber River, where indeed it was found on the very spot indicated by them.

The temple of Summanus itself was struck by lightning in 197 BCE.

==Summanus and Mount Summano==

Mount Summano (elevation 1291 m), located in the Alps near Vicenza (Veneto, Italy), is traditionally considered a site of the cults of Pluto, Jupiter Summanus, and the Manes.

The area was one of the last strongholds of ancient Roman religion in Italy, as shown by the fact that Vicenza had no bishop until 590 CE.

Archeological excavations have found a sanctuary space that dates to the first Iron Age (9th century BCE) and was continuously active until late antiquity (at least the 4th century CE). The local flora is very peculiar, because it was customary in ancient times for pilgrims to bring offerings of flowers from their own native lands.

The mountaintop is frequently struck by lightning. The mountain itself has a deep grotto named Bocca Lorenza, in which, according to local legend, a young shepherdess became lost and disappeared. The story might be an adaptation of the myth of Proserpina, who was abducted by Pluto.

==Notes and references==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q942906" start="0" end="8" title="Summanus" label="Summanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83301" start="37" end="44" title="thunder" label="thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="48" end="70" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="91" end="98" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="178" end="182" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="185" end="190" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="214" end="229" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan origin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="246" end="266" title="Novensiles#Council on lightning" label="nine gods of thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="268" end="273" title="Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q960039" start="320" end="332" title="Titus Tatius" label="Titus Tatius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="357" end="361" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#ara" label="arae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925738" start="389" end="394" title="votum" label="votum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160424" start="396" end="411" title="Paulus Diaconus" label="Paulus Diaconus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164009" start="551" end="556" title="Manes" label="Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="656" end="673" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q152262" start="704" end="709" title="Pluto (mythology)" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164009" start="765" end="770" title="Manes" label="Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q590" start="829" end="835" title="Camões" label="Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="929" end="935" title="John Milton" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q199714" start="942" end="948" title="simile" label="simile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="961" end="966" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="976" end="980" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q310590" start="1089" end="1104" title="Georges Dumézil" label="Georges Dumézil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398895" start="1212" end="1226" title="Trifunctional hypothesis" label="first function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001037" start="1345" end="1351" title="Varuna" label="Varuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497135" start="1352" end="1357" title="Mitra" label="Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="1361" end="1375" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Vedic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283763" start="1414" end="1425" title="Dius Fidius" label="Dius Fidius"/>
<link wikidata="Q596373" start="1683" end="1694" title="Pyrrhic War" label="Pyrrhic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="1746" end="1760" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194103" start="1790" end="1798" title="Aventine Hill" label="Aventine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="2001" end="2016" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2267" end="2274" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#victima" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="2301" end="2309" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="2320" end="2335" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="2607" end="2640" title="Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus" label="Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="2710" end="2719" title="haruspice" label="haruspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="2764" end="2775" title="Tiber River" label="Tiber River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537" start="2998" end="3005" title="Vicenza" label="Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164009" start="3107" end="3112" title="Manes" label="Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q877847" start="3233" end="3239" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Vicenza" label="bishop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85651" wikidata="Q1061246" url="?curid=85651" title="Growing Pains">
<text>Growing Pains is an American television sitcom created by Neal Marlens that aired on ABC from September 24, 1985, to April 25, 1992. The series follows the misadventures of the Seaver family, including psychiatrist and father Jason, journalist and mother Maggie, and their children Mike, Carol, Ben, and Chrissy. The show ran for 7 seasons, airing 166 episodes. 

==Premise==
The show centers on the Seaver family of Huntington, a town on Long Island, New York. Dr. Jason Seaver (Alan Thicke), a psychiatrist, works from home because his wife, Maggie (Joanna Kerns), has gone back to work as a reporter. 

Jason has to take care of the children: Ladies&#x27; man and rebellious troublemaker Mike (Kirk Cameron); his sister, bookish honors student Carol (Tracey Gold); and rambunctious Ben (Jeremy Miller), who follows Mike as his role model and becomes a troublemaker too. A fourth child, Chrissy Seaver (twins Kelsey and Kirsten Dohring; Ashley Johnson), was added in Season 4 and, in Season 7, Luke Brower (Leonardo DiCaprio), a homeless teen, was adopted into the Seaver family.

Often mentioned but rarely seen are the Seavers&#x27;s next door neighbors, the Koosmans, a reference to the 1969 Miracle Mets (and players Tom Seaver and Jerry Koosman).

== Cast and characters ==

=== Main ===
* Alan Thicke as Dr. Jason Roland Seaver. Dr Seaver is a graduate of Boston College and holds a Doctorate in Psychology. He initially practiced at Long Island General Hospital before working from home and volunteering at his local community&#x27;s free clinic.
* Joanna Kerns as Margaret Katherine &quot;Maggie&quot; (née Malone) Seaver. Maggie is also a graduate of Boston College where she met her future husband and majored in Child Psychology before switching to Journalism. Prior to her marriage, she worked as a researcher for &quot;Newsweek&quot; magazine. She is a reporter for the &quot;Long Island Daily Herald&quot; (as Maggie Malone) and for the TV new programme &quot;Action News&quot; on Channel 19. She is also a columnist for the &quot;Long Island Sentinel&quot;.
* Kirk Cameron as Michael Aaron &quot;Mike&quot; Seaver. Mike, the oldest child, attended Wendell Wilkie Elementary School before moving to Dewey High School. He accumulates multiple menial jobs. Waiter at The World of Burgers, Salesman at The Stereo Village, Car wash attendant, night man at the Stop and Shop convenience store, singing waiter at Sullivan&#x27;s Tavern. Of average ability, he aspires nonetheless to become an actor. He enrolls at Alf Landon Junior College and, later, at Boyton State College. At Alf Landon, Mike was a member of the Drama Club where he meets his girlfriend Kate McDonald in the play &quot;The Passion&quot;. He eventually becomes a teacher of remedial studies at a Community Health Centre.
* Tracey Gold as Caroline Anne &quot;Carol&quot; Seaver. Carol is the second born child. She attended Dewey High School where she was the 1988 Homecoming Queen and President of the Future Nuclear Physicists Club. She later attends Columbia University (to the disappointment of her parents who would have preferred her to enroll at their alma-mater) but drops out to work as a computer page breaker at GSM Publishing. She returns to Columbia to study law and works with her father at the free clinic. 
* Jeremy Miller as Benjamin Hubert Horatio Humphrey &quot;Ben&quot; Seaver. Ben attends the same elementary and high school as his siblings. Heavily influenced by his older brother, Ben holds a number of menial jobs including newspaper delivery boy and attempts to make money by managing a rap group.

=== Later additions ===
* A fourth child, Christine Ellen &quot;Chrissy&quot; Seaver (twins Kelsey and Kirsten Dohring; Ashley Johnson), is born at the beginning of season 4, a day after Ben&#x27;s 12th birthday. She was played in her newborn/infant stage by 2 uncredited sets of twin sisters, who remained in the role until season 4 (1988–1989) ended. By season 5 (1989–1990), she was played in her toddler stage by alternating twins Kirsten and Kelsey Dohring. In seasons 6 and 7 (1990–1992), Chrissy&#x27;s age was advanced to 5 years old.
* A new cast member was added for the seventh and final season (1991–1992) when homeless teen Luke Brower (Leonardo DiCaprio) is brought into the Seaver family to live with them until the end of season 7.

=== Recurring ===
* Andrew Koenig as Richard Milhous &quot;Boner&quot; Stabone (seasons 1–4), Mike&#x27;s friend; left to join the United States Marine Corps.
* Chelsea Noble as Kate MacDonald (seasons 5–7), Mike&#x27;s girlfriend. They both meet at Alf Landon Junior College. She later becomes a model and appears in the 1992 swimsuit edition of The Sporting Man magazine.
* Jamie Abbott as Stinky Sullivan (seasons 2–6), Ben&#x27;s friend.
* K. C. Martel as Eddie Ziff (seasons 1–7), Mike&#x27;s friend.
* Sam Anderson as Principal Willis DeWitt (seasons 1–7), Mike&#x27;s history teacher in season one and principal from season 2 onward.
* Betty McGuire as Kate Malone (seasons 1–7); Maggie&#x27;s mother.
* Lisa Capps as Debbie (seasons 2–4), Carol&#x27;s friend.
* Rachel Jacobs as Shelley (seasons 2–4), Carol&#x27;s friend.
* Gordon Jump as Ed Malone (seasons 1–7), Maggie&#x27;s father.
* Julie McCullough as Julie Costello (seasons 4–5), Mike&#x27;s former girlfriend who was originally hired by Jason to be Chrissy&#x27;s nanny. Julie is a sophomore at Columbia University majoring in Child Psychology. When she and Mike break up, she quits school and becomes a waitress at Le Village Restaurant.
* Bill Kirchenbauer as Coach Graham Lubbock (seasons 2–3; starred in spin off &quot;Just the Ten of Us&quot;), a gym teacher.
* Jane Powell as Irma Seaver (seasons 4–6), Jason&#x27;s mother.
* Jodi Peterson as Laura Lynn (seasons 4–6), Ben&#x27;s girlfriend/love interest.
* Kevin Wixted as Bobby Wynette (seasons 2–3), Carol&#x27;s former boyfriend.
* Christopher Burgard as Dwight Halliburton (season 7), Carol&#x27;s love interest.
* Evan Arnold as Richie Flanscopper (seasons 1–3), Carol&#x27;s school classmate who has a crush on her.
* Fred Applegate as Mr. Fred Tedesco (season 7), the principal of the learning annex where Mike teaches.
* Matthew Perry as Sandy (season 4), Carol&#x27;s love interest of 3 episodes. He died several hours after a DUI accident following &#x27;a few beers&#x27;.

==Episodes==

== Production ==

=== Casting ===
Soon after the cancelation of &quot;The Four Seasons&quot;, Joanna Kerns auditioned for a new series in late 1984, called &quot;Growing Pains&quot;, which was being developed by screenwriter Neal Marlens, alongside executive producer Mike Sullivan. She auditioned with Alan Thicke, who was coming off the failure of his syndicated late-night talk show &quot;Thicke of the Night&quot;. Kerns joked in many interviews that she and Alan had immediate chemistry, especially when she kissed him on his nose by accident during their audition together. Kerns and Thicke&#x27;s chemistry won them both the parts of lead characters Maggie and Jason Seaver, and the two became great friends off the show; both of them had many things in common, including being newly divorced single parents. Tracey Gold auditioned for the role of Carol Seaver, but was passed over in favor of Elizabeth Ward, who had starred alongside Gold in the 1983 &quot;ABC Afterschool Special&quot; &quot;The Hand-Me-Down Kid&quot;. However, test audiences did not find Ward to be suited for the role of Carol, and Gold promptly replaced her; scenes featuring Ward in the original pilot were subsequently reshot with Gold for the broadcast version. 

Marlens and most of the original writing and producing staff (including wife Carol Black, who had quickly ascended from story editor to co-executive producer during the first half of the season) were let go from the series midway through its first season; replacing Marlens and joining Sullivan as showrunners were Steve Marshall and Dan Guntzelman (who met and formed their writing partnership while working on &quot;WKRP in Cincinnati&quot;).

In 1991, Leonardo DiCaprio joined the main cast in the role of Luke Brower, a homeless teenager who is taken in by the Seaver family at the behest of Mike (who, by then, was a substitute teacher at the high school where Luke had masqueraded as a student). Co-star Joanna Kerns recalled DiCaprio being &quot;especially intelligent and disarming for his age,&quot; but also mischievous on set. Then-15-year-old DiCaprio was cast in a bid to appeal to teenage female viewers (similar to how Cameron gained heartthrob status with that demographic during the show’s earlier seasons), but was written out towards the end of Season 7, in order to allow DiCaprio to begin work on the 1993 biographical drama film &quot;This Boy&#x27;s Life&quot;. Still, the addition of DiCaprio—who would earn a Young Artist Award nomination for Best Young Actor Co-starring in a Television Series for his work as Luke—did not improve the show&#x27;s ratings.

=== Opening and closing credits ===
The opening credits varied from traditional sitcoms by having sight gags involving specifically shot scenes with the cast on locations. This was similar to the ottoman gag on The Dick Van Dyke Show however there were far more variations. The opening theme song, &quot;As Long As We&#x27;ve Got Each Other&quot;, was written by Steve Dorff with lyrics by John Bettis. The end theme was an jazzy instrumental version of the song. 

In the first season, the song was performed by B.J. Thomas, with Jennifer Warnes added for season 2. In seasons 3 and 4, Thomas and singer Dusty Springfield performed the theme song. In season 5, the theme returned to a slightly altered Thomas/Warnes performance. Season 6 introduced an a cappella version of the tune, before again returning to the Thomas/Warnes version. The last few episodes of season seven brought back the a cappella version of the song. 

In addition to the changes in the theme song, the imagery depicted on screen varied. In season 1, vintage photos of families played, with a sepia toned photo (that morphed into color) of the cast at the end. Season 2 initiated the familiar show title over a live-action shot of the cast standing in front of the set of the house, before mixed imagery of clips from the show and photos of the cast when they were younger. At the end of the intro, the cast left their standing position to walk towards the house and a rotating member of the cast would lag behind. 

For the third season opening two-part Hawaiian episodes, the family was depicted standing in front of the Maui Prince Hotel, with the clips interspersed with the vintage cast photos from the episode itself. The closing credits music (over scenes from the episode) was an instrumental version of the song &quot;Swept Away&quot;, written for the episode by Dorff, Bettis and Christopher Cross (who also performed the full version of the song in the episode). The remainder of season 3 was similar to season 2, with updated show clips and old photos of the cast. 

With the introduction of the pregnancy storyline, the first episode of season 4 depicted a pregnant Joanna Kerns with the rest of the cast standing before the house set. For the second episode of the season, as the family begins to move towards the house, the theme music fades and Kern&#x27;s character announces that she is giving birth, with the family ushering her back to the house while the theme music finishes. 

The remainder of season 4 again had the family standing in front of the house set, now with the youngest member (infant Chrissy) depicted. The remainder were again vintage photos of the cast. 

== Cast issues ==

=== Cameron&#x27;s religion ===
Kirk Cameron, who was an atheist in his early teens, became a born again Protestant Christian when he was 17, during the height of his career on the show. After converting to Christianity, he began to insist that the show’s plotlines be altered to remove anything he thought was too inappropriate, objecting to even mild innuendo in show scripts (one such example involved a segment from the teaser scene of the Season 6 episode &quot;Midnight Cowboy&quot;, which cut to his character, Mike, and a girl talking in bed, only to reveal they were rehearsing a scene for a stage play; Cameron, however, did the scene as written). Julie McCullough was cast as Julie Costello, a recurring character hired by Jason to work as a nanny for newborn Chrissy Seaver, during the fourth season in 1989, appearing in eight episodes until she was fired at the start of the fifth season. Though the show&#x27;s producers have claimed that her character was never intended to be permanent—citing the idea of Mike being in a committed relationship went against his characterization as an “immature imp […] ill-equipped to deal with a grownup world on all levels”—and Cameron stated in his 2008 memoir &quot;Still Growing&quot; that he did not call for her firing, it is alleged McCullough&#x27;s termination from the show was a result of Cameron&#x27;s objections to her having posed nude in &quot;Playboy&quot;, prompting Cameron to claim to the producers (and, allegedly, in a phone call with then-ABC Entertainment President Bob Iger) they were promoting pornography by hiring McCullough. Cameron reportedly did not reconcile with McCullough, who claims that Cameron refused to speak to her during a later encounter. She remains critical of him, stating that the public criticism she endured during the controversy damaged her career.

Cameron&#x27;s conversion (specifically his subsequent behavior after becoming a Protestant) is said to have alienated him from his fellow cast members, as he did not invite any of them to his 1991 wedding to Chelsea Noble (who recurred as Mike&#x27;s on-off love interest-turned-girlfriend, Kate McDonnell, during the show&#x27;s last three seasons). The creative clashes between Cameron and executive producers Marshall, Guntzelman and Sullivan also are said to have prompted the three showrunners (along with co-executive producer/writer David Kendall and director John Tracy) to quit the series following the sixth season. (Dan Wilcox replaced Marshall, Sullivan and Guntzelman for what would be the show’s final season.) Cameron did not maintain contact with his former co-stars and did not speak to Gold for eight years after the series ended. Cameron has stated that this was not due to any animosity on his part toward any of his former cast members, but an outgrowth of his desire to start a new life away from the entertainment industry. In 2000, Cameron revealed he apologized to his TV family for some of his prior behavior, saying, &quot;If I could go back, I think I could make decisions that were less inadvertently hurtful to the cast--like talking and explaining to them why I just wanted to have my family at my wedding.&quot;

=== Gold&#x27;s health issues ===
In 1988 at age 19, Gold gained some weight over the production hiatus between the show&#x27;s third and fourth seasons. For Season 4, scripts called for Carol to be the brunt of fat jokes from her brothers, Mike and Ben, for many episodes in a row. By October of that year, Gold lost a total of 23 lbs. (dropping from a weight of 133 lbs to about 110 lbs) after going on a medically supervised diet, though scripts continued to include occasionally fat jokes made at Carol&#x27;s expense. In her 2003 memoir &quot;Room to Grow: an Appetite for Life&quot;, Gold revealed that she became increasingly obsessed with food and her physical appearance between 1989 and 1991, and continued to slowly and steadily lose weight.

In 1990, Gold began group therapy in an eating disorder program but only learned more ways to lose weight. Gold&#x27;s body image issues were touched upon slightly in the Season 6 episode &quot;Carol&#x27;s Carnival&quot;, which features a scene in which Carol looks at herself in a carnival mirror and describes to another character the distorted image in her head. By 1991, her disorder had devolved into bulimia nervosa, having lost a massive amount of weight through both self-starvation and vomiting, causing her to be admitted to a hospital for treatment in early 1992. Gold—who was estimated to have been near 80 lbs. at her lowest weight—was suspended from the show following production of the Season 7 episode &quot;Menage a Luke&quot;, due to her skeletal appearance that was fairly obvious in some scenes. Gold&#x27;s absence is addressed several episodes later in &quot;Don&#x27;t Go Changin, which features a subplot in which Ben films a video letter for Carol, who in-canon is studying abroad in London. Photos of Gold&#x27;s emaciated body were plastered all over tabloid magazines, and she was one of the first celebrities ever to be formally outed for anorexia. She returned for the show&#x27;s final episodes (&quot;The Wrath of Con-Ed&quot;, and the two-part finale &quot;The Last Picture Show&quot;) in the late spring of 1992. Gold eventually recovered from her years-long struggle and starred in the 1994 made-for-TV movie &quot;For the Love of Nancy&quot;, drawing on her own experiences with anorexia nervosa to portray the title character.

=== Stalking ===
At about age 14, starting during the show&#x27;s sixth season, Jeremy Miller received numerous letters from an older male stalker, who was later arrested and convicted on stalking charges. 

=== Finale ===
ABC had moved &quot;Growing Pains&quot; from its longtime Wednesday slot to Saturday nights at the start of the 1991–92 season (joined by fellow ABC comedy veterans &quot;Who&#x27;s the Boss?&quot; and, by midseason, &quot;Perfect Strangers&quot;, all of which became the centerpieces of the short-lived &quot;TGIF&quot; spinoff block &quot;I Love Saturday Night&quot;), which saw the show—which had seen a steady erosion in viewers over the past few seasons, while still remaining in the Nielsen Top 30 through Season 6—experience a dramatic decline in viewership from #27 to #75, resulting in ABC and the show’s producers agreeing to end the series at the conclusion of its seventh season. The hour-long series finale (&quot;The Last Picture Show&quot;, which incorporated clips from the show&#x27;s seven-year run) aired on April 25, 1992, a night that also saw fellow veteran ABC series &quot;Who&#x27;s the Boss?&quot; (also as a special one-hour episode) and &quot;MacGyver&quot; end their runs. 

==Spin-off and connections==

=== &quot;Just the Ten of Us&quot; ===
&quot;Growing Pains&quot; spawned the spin-off series, &quot;Just the Ten of Us&quot;, which featured Coach Graham Lubbock, Mike and Carol&#x27;s gym teacher, moving to California with his large family to teach at an all-boys Catholic school after he was fired from Thomas Dewey High School.

=== &quot;Hanging with Mr. Cooper&quot; ===
Alan Thicke later made a cameo appearance as himself in the pilot episode of fellow ABC sitcom &quot;Hangin&#x27; with Mr. Cooper&quot; in September 1992. The pre-credits teaser scene in which Thicke appeared alongside series star Mark Curry humorously referenced the pilot episode being filmed on the same set that had previously been used as the Seavers&#x27; home on &quot;Growing Pains&quot;.

==Reunion movies==
In 2000, the cast reunited for &quot;The Growing Pains Movie&quot;, followed by &quot;Growing Pains: Return of the Seavers&quot; in 2004. Before the premiere of &quot;The Growing Pains Movie&quot;, Kirk Cameron described his regrets over how his relationship with his cast mates changed after his religious conversion during the production of the series, admitting, &quot;I definitely kind of made an about-face, going toward another aspect of my life,&quot; and &quot;I shifted my focus from 100% on the show, to 100% on [my new life], and left 0% on the show—and even the friendships that were a part of that show.&quot;

==Awards and nominations==
==Home media==
Warner Home Video released the first two seasons on DVD in Region 1. Seasons 3-7 were released via the Warner Archive Collection as manufactured-on-demand titles, available exclusively through Warner&#x27;s online store and Amazon.com.

On February 28, 2023, Warner Bros. released &quot;Growing Pains: The Complete Series&quot; on DVD in Region 1.

==Syndication==

===United States===
ABC aired reruns of the show on its daytime schedule from July 1988 to August 1989. The show originally aired at 11:00 AM (ET) until January 1989, when &quot;Ryan&#x27;s Hope&quot; was canceled and &quot;Home&quot; was expanded to an hour from 11:00 AM–noon. The reruns moved to noon.

In the fall of 1989, the show was sold to local syndication, which continued until 1997. The show also aired on TBS for several years premiering in October 1993 at 6:35 PM. The show continued to air on TBS until September 1996.

Reruns aired on the Disney Channel from September 1997 to September 2001. The cable rights for the show moved to sister network ABC Family, where it ran from 2001 to 2004. It has also aired on ION Television during the fall of 2006 into the spring of 2007.

Nick at Nite began airing &quot;Growing Pains&quot; on February 12, 2007, launching with a marathon from 9:00 PM–1:00 AM. It was pulled from the line-up shortly after, and reruns later moved to sister network Noggin (as part of its teen block, The N). TeenNick re-aired the series on Monday, September 13, 2010, in a 5:00 AM hour block, and aired its final showings on December 27, 2010.

&quot;Growing Pains&quot; aired on Up TV from January 2015 to July 2017. Antenna TV began airing the series in December 2017.

It is currently available on the Roku channel (streaming app) as of November 2019.

===Asia===
;Mainland China
* The show was dubbed by Shanghai Television in the late 1980s &quot;Chéngzhǎng de Fánnǎo&quot; (成长的烦恼; literally &quot;Growing vexation&quot;)
;Taiwan
* The show was dubbed by Chinese Television System in the 1980s–1990s &quot;Huānlè Jiātíng&quot; (歡樂家庭; Happy Family)
;Japan
* &quot;Growing Pains&quot; was dubbed in Japanese, and broadcast by the NHK of Japan in the title of &quot;&quot;Yukai na Shiba Ke&quot; (愉快なシーバー家)&quot; (Happy Seaver family) from 1997 to 2000
;Indonesia
* &quot;Growing Pains&quot; was broadcast by RCTI from September 1989 to August 1991 and re-run by SCTV from 1991 to around 1994.
; Philippines
* &quot;Growing Pains&quot; was aired by PTV-4 with Simulcast on GMA-7 in 1986–1991; it moved to ABC-5 in 1993–2000 with English Dubbed in 1993–1994 &amp; Tagalized in 1994–2000

===Europe===
;France
The show aired with the title &quot;Quoi de neuf docteur?&quot; (What&#x27;s New Doctor?) on Antenne 2 from 1987 then as part of a block called &quot;Giga&quot; from February 19, 1990, on the same network.

Two books were published in French exclusively about &quot;Growing Pains&quot;: Cyrille Rollet, Ph.D. (EHESS, Paris),
* &quot;Physiologie d&#x27;un sitcom américain (voyage au cœur de Growing Pains)&quot;, (volume 1) – &quot;Physiology of an American Sitcom (Journey to the Heart of Growing Pains)&quot;
* &quot;Circulation culturelle d&#x27;un sitcom américain (volume 2) – The Cultural Circulation of an American Sitcom&quot;

;Germany
The show aired with the title &quot;Unser lautes Heim&quot; (Our noisy home) on ProSieben from 1993.

;Italy
The show aired in 1987 with the title &quot;Genitori in blue jeans&quot; (Parents in blue jeans) where the first two seasons original aired on Canale 5 then it moved to Italia 1 for the later four seasons. This was also the name of an Italian comedy film from the 60s.

;Netherlands
The show aired in 1986 with Dutch broadcast organization AVRO as &quot;Growing Pains&quot; in English with subtitles in Dutch.

;Spain

In Spain the series aired with the title &quot;Los problemas crecen&quot; (Growing problems) and was dubbed to Spanish. Originally aired in La 1 (Spanish TV channel) from the end of the 80s to the beginning of the 90s, and subsequently in La 2 (Spanish TV channel), Antena 3 (Spanish TV channel) y Factoría de Ficción

===Australasia===
;Australia
* Digital free-to-air channel 7TWO began airing reruns of &quot;Growing Pains&quot; in October 2010, and reached the final episode in June 2011, replacing it with &quot;Night Court&quot;. The Nine Network first aired the show back in the 1980s and 1990s.

;New Zealand
* The show aired on TVNZ&#x27;s TV2 on Saturday afternoons in the late 1980s-early 1990s.

===Turkey===
The show aired at the beginning of the 1990s on Turkey&#x27;s first private TV channel, Star TV.

===Latin America===
The show was previously aired on Nickelodeon&#x27;s block, Nick at Nite from 2006 to 2009.

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Bibliography ===

== External links ==
* &quot;Growing Pains&quot; French website 
* Growing Pains () at UP TV Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3337575" start="58" end="70" title="Neal Marlens" label="Neal Marlens"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="85" end="88" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q999123" start="417" end="427" title="Huntington, New York" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="439" end="460" title="Long Island, New York" label="Long Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q277895" start="480" end="491" title="Alan Thicke" label="Alan Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q63689" start="552" end="564" title="Joanna Kerns" label="Joanna Kerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q471858" start="697" end="709" title="Kirk Cameron" label="Kirk Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q262498" start="754" end="765" title="Tracey Gold" label="Tracey Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q139997" start="790" end="803" title="Jeremy Miller" label="Jeremy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q267359" start="939" end="953" title="Ashley Johnson" label="Ashley Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="1009" end="1026" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573619" start="1192" end="1209" title="1969 New York Mets season" label="1969 Miracle Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="1223" end="1233" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299104" start="1238" end="1251" title="Jerry Koosman" label="Jerry Koosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q277895" start="1297" end="1308" title="Alan Thicke" label="Alan Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="1364" end="1378" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1442" end="1453" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q63689" start="1558" end="1570" title="Joanna Kerns" label="Joanna Kerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="1662" end="1676" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="1725" end="1741" title="Child Psychology" label="Child Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="1762" end="1772" title="Journalism" label="Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="1834" end="1842" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q471858" start="2077" end="2089" title="Kirk Cameron" label="Kirk Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157195" start="2271" end="2277" title="Waiting staff" label="Waiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="2303" end="2311" title="Salesman" label="Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139861" start="2335" end="2343" title="Car wash" label="Car wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="2386" end="2403" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q569500" start="2776" end="2799" title="Community health center" label="Community Health Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q262498" start="2803" end="2814" title="Tracey Gold" label="Tracey Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q750053" start="2944" end="2960" title="Homecoming Queen" label="Homecoming Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="3032" end="3051" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="3138" end="3148" title="Alma mater" label="alma-mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q139997" start="3304" end="3317" title="Jeremy Miller" label="Jeremy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q267359" start="3724" end="3738" title="Ashley Johnson" label="Ashley Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="4254" end="4271" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q505743" start="4373" end="4386" title="Andrew Koenig" label="Andrew Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4484" end="4510" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q448899" start="4514" end="4527" title="Chelsea Noble" label="Chelsea Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="4680" end="4688" title="swimsuit" label="swimsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061246" start="4797" end="4809" title="K. C. Martel" label="K. C. Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q374447" start="4861" end="4873" title="Sam Anderson" label="Sam Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921858" start="5123" end="5136" title="Rachel Jacobs" label="Rachel Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q163235" start="5186" end="5197" title="Gordon Jump" label="Gordon Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q453222" start="5250" end="5266" title="Julie McCullough" label="Julie McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="5416" end="5435" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909746" start="5562" end="5579" title="Bill Kirchenbauer" label="Bill Kirchenbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470068" start="5644" end="5662" title="Just the Ten of Us" label="Just the Ten of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q260099" start="5688" end="5699" title="Jane Powell" label="Jane Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675897" start="5997" end="6008" title="Evan Arnold" label="Evan Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494468" start="6102" end="6116" title="Fred Applegate (actor)" label="Fred Applegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171758" start="6207" end="6220" title="Matthew Perry" label="Matthew Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q63689" start="6471" end="6483" title="Joanna Kerns" label="Joanna Kerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834693" start="6645" end="6658" title="Michael Sullivan (filmmaker)" label="Mike Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q277895" start="6680" end="6691" title="Alan Thicke" label="Alan Thicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783941" start="6769" end="6788" title="Thicke of the Night" label="Thicke of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q262498" start="7193" end="7204" title="Tracey Gold" label="Tracey Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q448579" start="7278" end="7292" title="Elizabeth Gracen" label="Elizabeth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600481" start="7343" end="7366" title="ABC Afterschool Special" label="ABC Afterschool Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044259" start="7702" end="7713" title="Carol Black (writer)" label="Carol Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056641" start="8043" end="8061" title="WKRP in Cincinnati" label="WKRP in Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="8080" end="8097" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q956250" start="8782" end="8802" title="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life" label="This Boy&amp;#x27;s Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="8859" end="8877" title="Young Artist Award" label="Young Artist Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q530706" start="9223" end="9241" title="The Dick Van Dyke Show" label="Dick Van Dyke Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498907" start="9371" end="9382" title="Steve Dorff" label="Steve Dorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131204" start="9398" end="9409" title="John Bettis" label="John Bettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q706518" start="9521" end="9532" title="B. J. Thomas" label="B.J. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q238410" start="9539" end="9554" title="Jennifer Warnes" label="Jennifer Warnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="9613" end="9630" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="9761" end="9771" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q445438" start="10872" end="10889" title="Christopher Cross" label="Christopher Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="11752" end="11759" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q613015" start="11789" end="11799" title="born again" label="born again"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="11800" end="11820" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422553" start="12119" end="12125" title="cold open" label="teaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q453222" start="12353" end="12369" title="Julie McCullough" label="Julie McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="13106" end="13113" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q532423" start="13236" end="13244" title="Bob Iger" label="Bob Iger"/>
<link wikidata="Q448899" start="13756" end="13769" title="Chelsea Noble" label="Chelsea Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235924" start="14088" end="14101" title="David Kendall (director)" label="David Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261116" start="14115" end="14125" title="John Tracy (director)" label="John Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111088061" start="14175" end="14185" title="Dan Wilcox" label="Dan Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="16054" end="16069" title="bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729833" start="17098" end="17119" title="For the Love of Nancy" label="For the Love of Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="17163" end="17179" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q139997" start="17293" end="17306" title="Jeremy Miller" label="Jeremy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623411" start="17607" end="17627" title="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?" label="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304597" start="17659" end="17676" title="Perfect Strangers (TV series)" label="Perfect Strangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819011" start="17746" end="17750" title="TGIF (TV programming block)" label="TGIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="17925" end="17932" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257934" start="18211" end="18216" title="clip show" label="clips"/>
<link wikidata="Q210257" start="18407" end="18415" title="MacGyver (1985 TV series)" label="MacGyver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470068" start="18570" end="18588" title="Just the Ten of Us" label="Just the Ten of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q999386" start="18947" end="18975" title="Hangin&amp;#x27; with Mr. Cooper" label="Hangin&amp;#x27; with Mr. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294040" start="19077" end="19087" title="Mark Curry (actor)" label="Mark Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738400" start="19300" end="19323" title="The Growing Pains Movie" label="The Growing Pains Movie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19349" end="19385" title="Growing Pains: Return of the Seavers" label="Growing Pains: Return of the Seavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="19929" end="19946" title="Warner Bros. Home Entertainment" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969697" start="20032" end="20057" title="Warner Archive Collection" label="Warner Archive Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819000" start="20351" end="20358" title="ABC Daytime" label="daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970206" start="20473" end="20489" title="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="Ryan&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888109" start="20519" end="20523" title="Home (1988 TV series)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="20713" end="20716" title="TBS (TV network)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="20850" end="20864" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q287149" start="20958" end="20968" title="Freeform (TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="21023" end="21037" title="ION Television" label="ION Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q541051" start="21088" end="21100" title="Nick at Nite" label="Nick at Nite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047483" start="21297" end="21303" title="Noggin (brand)" label="Noggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826869" start="21332" end="21337" title="The N" label="The N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563697" start="21340" end="21348" title="TeenNick" label="TeenNick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513743" start="21512" end="21517" title="Up TV" label="Up TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852675" start="21550" end="21560" title="Antenna TV" label="Antenna TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488516" start="21740" end="21759" title="Shanghai Television" label="Shanghai Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q707546" start="21892" end="21917" title="Chinese Television System" label="Chinese Television System"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="22065" end="22068" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257835" start="22243" end="22247" title="RCTI" label="RCTI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257843" start="22297" end="22301" title="SCTV (Indonesia)" label="SCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550660" start="22383" end="22388" title="People&amp;#x27;s Television Network" label="PTV-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q399643" start="22407" end="22412" title="GMA Network" label="GMA-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015057" start="22439" end="22444" title="TV5 (Philippine TV network)" label="ABC-5"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22578" end="22599" title=":fr:Quoi de neuf docteur ? (série télévisée)" label="Quoi de neuf docteur?"/>
<link wikidata="Q525894" start="22635" end="22644" title="Antenne 2" label="Antenne 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22692" end="22696" title=":fr:Giga (émission de télévision)" label="Giga"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22777" end="22783" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23223" end="23240" title=":de:Unser lautes Heim" label="Unser lautes Heim"/>
<link wikidata="Q168717" start="23267" end="23276" title="ProSieben" label="ProSieben"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23340" end="23362" title=":it:Genitori in blue jeans" label="Genitori in blue jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q617643" start="23439" end="23447" title="Canale 5" label="Canale 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q536346" start="23465" end="23473" title="Italia 1" label="Italia 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q204028" start="23686" end="23695" title="subtitles" label="subtitles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="23699" end="23704" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23762" end="23782" title=":es:Growing Pains" label="Los problemas crecen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="23826" end="23833" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058461" start="23855" end="23880" title="La 1 (Spanish TV channel)" label="La 1 (Spanish TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q510452" start="23954" end="23979" title="La 2 (Spanish TV channel)" label="La 2 (Spanish TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q571833" start="23981" end="24010" title="Antena 3 (Spanish TV channel)" label="Antena 3 (Spanish TV channel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126555" start="24013" end="24032" title="Factoría de Ficción" label="Factoría de Ficción"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="24093" end="24097" title="7TWO" label="7TWO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248182" start="24232" end="24243" title="Night Court" label="Night Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="24255" end="24267" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186424" start="24352" end="24356" title="TVNZ" label="TVNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120983" start="24364" end="24367" title="TVNZ 2" label="TV2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067812" start="24524" end="24531" title="Star TV (Turkey)" label="Star TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625212" start="24587" end="24598" title="Nickelodeon (Latin America)" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24613" end="24625" title="Nick at Nite international versions#Latin America" label="Nick at Nite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85654" wikidata="Q7941260" url="?curid=85654" title="Volver a empezar">
<text>Volver a empezar may refer to:

*&quot;Volver a Empezar&quot; (song), a 1981 Spanish-language version, by Julio Iglesias, of &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;, written by Cole Porter
*&quot;Volver a empezar&quot; (film), or &quot;Begin the Beguine&quot;, a 1982 Spanish film
*&quot;Volver a Empezar&quot; (TV series), a 1994–1995 Mexican telenovela</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q814327" start="33" end="68" title="Volver a Empezar (song)" label="&amp;quot;Volver a Empezar&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352930" start="180" end="215" title="Volver a empezar (film)" label="&amp;quot;Volver a empezar&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q630206" start="272" end="312" title="Volver a Empezar (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Volver a Empezar&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85655" wikidata="Q1056637" url="?curid=85655" title="The Hershey Company">
<text>The Hershey Company, often called just Hershey or Hershey&#x27;s, is an American multinational confectionery company headquartered in Hershey, Pennsylvania, which is also home to Hersheypark and Hershey&#x27;s Chocolate World. The Hershey Company is one of the largest chocolate manufacturers in the world; it also manufactures baked products, such as cookies and cakes, and sells beverages like milkshakes, as well as other products (through mergers and acquisitions). The Hershey Company was founded by Milton S. Hershey in 1894 as the Hershey Chocolate Company, originally established as a subsidiary of his Lancaster Caramel Company. The Hershey Trust Company owns a minority stake but retains a majority of the voting power within the company.

Hershey&#x27;s chocolate is available in 60 countries. It has three large distribution centers with modern labor management systems. In addition, Hershey is a member of the World Cocoa Foundation. It is also associated with the Hersheypark Stadium and the Giant Center.

The Hershey Company has no affiliation to Hershey Creamery Company, though both companies were founded in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, in the same year. The companies have had a tumultuous relationship marked by multiple legal battles over trademark issues. In the mid-1990s, the companies settled their most recent legal battles out of court, with Hershey Creamery Company agreeing to add a disclaimer to its ice cream products to note that it is not affiliated with the Hershey Company.

==History==
===19th century===
After an apprenticeship to a Lancaster confectioner in 1873, Milton S. Hershey opened a candy shop in Philadelphia. The venture failed, and so did a subsequent one in Chicago. After a third failed business attempt in New York City, Hershey returned to Pennsylvania, where he founded the Lancaster Caramel Company in 1883. The Hershey Chocolate Company was founded in 1894 as a subsidiary of Lancaster Caramel Company.

In 1896, Hershey built a milk-processing plant so he could create and refine a recipe for his milk chocolate candies. In 1899, he developed the Hershey process, which is less sensitive to milk quality than traditional methods. In 1900, he began manufacturing the Hershey&#x27;s Milk Chocolate bar.

===20th century===
The use of fresh milk in caramels proved successful, and in 1900, after seeing chocolate-making machines for the first time at the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition in Chicago, Hershey sold his caramel company for $1,000,000 (equal to $ today), and concentrated on chocolate. To people who questioned him, he said, &quot;Caramels are just a fad, but chocolate is a permanent thing.&quot;

In 1903, Hershey began construction of a chocolate plant in his hometown of Derry Church, Pennsylvania, later known as Hershey, Pennsylvania. The town was an inexpensive place for the workers and their families to live, though the factory was built without windows, so that employees would not be distracted. To increase employee morale, Hershey provided leisure activities and created what would later become Hersheypark. The milk chocolate bars from this plant proved popular, and the company grew rapidly.

In 1907, he introduced a new candy: bite-sized, flat-bottomed, conical pieces of chocolate that he named Hershey&#x27;s Kiss. At first, each was wrapped by hand in a square of aluminum foil. The introduction of machine wrapping in 1921 sped up the process and added a small paper ribbon to the top of the package, indicating that it was a genuine Hershey product. Today, over 70 million candies are produced daily.

Other products introduced included Mr. Goodbar (peanuts in milk chocolate) in 1925, Hershey&#x27;s Syrup in 1926, semi-sweet chocolate chips (a mixture of milk and dark chocolate) in 1928, and the Krackel bar with crisped rice in 1938.

====Reese&#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups====

Harry Burnett Reese invented Reese&#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups after founding the H. B. Reese Candy Company in 1923. Reese died on May 16, 1956, in West Palm Beach, Florida, leaving the company to his six sons. On July 2, 1963, the H. B. Reese Candy Company merged with the Hershey Chocolate Corporation in a tax-free stock-for-stock merger. In 1969, only six years after the Reese/Hershey merger, Reese&#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups became the Hershey Company&#x27;s top seller. As of September 20, 2012, Reese&#x27;s was the best-selling candy brand in the United States, with sales of $2.603 billion, and the fourth-best-selling brand globally, with sales of $2.679 billion. 
In 2024, after 61 years of stock splits, the original 666,316 shares of Hershey common stock received by the Reese family represent 16 million Hershey shares valued at more than $4.4 billion, paying annual cash dividends of $87.6 million.

====Unionization====

In the late 1930s, Hershey confronted labor unrest as a Congress of Industrial Organizations-backed union attempted to organize the factory workers. A failed sit-down strike in 1937 ended in violence; loyalist workers and local dairy farmers beat many of the strikers as they attempted to leave the plant. By 1940, an affiliate of the American Federation of Labor successfully organized Hershey&#x27;s workers under the leadership of John Shearer, who became the first president of Local Chapter Number 464 of the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&#x27; International Union. Local 464 now represents the Hershey workforce.

==== Atlantic City soap venture ====
From around 1938 to 1952, Milton Hershey tried to make toilet soap, which saw a big boom after the Great Depression as well as other hygiene-related items such as shampoo, toothpaste and perfume. Hershey took this opportunity to try to open a store on the Atlantic City Boardwalk, which sold cocoa butter scented toilet soap. The shop was a success for several decades, and the soap&#x27;s production was sourced from Hershey Estates. Other soaps such as keystone soap, tar soap and shaving soap were also sold at the shop. Product distribution extended from New York City to Baltimore by 1953, when the shop closed down.

====M&amp;M&#x27;s====
Shortly before World War II, Bruce Murrie, son of long-time Hershey&#x27;s president William F.R. Murrie, struck a deal with Forrest Mars to create hard sugar-coated chocolate that would be called M&amp;M&#x27;s (for Mars and Murrie). Murrie had a 20% interest in the product, which used Hershey chocolate during World War II rationing. In 1948, Mars bought out Murrie and became one of Hershey&#x27;s main competitors.

====Kit Kat and Rolo====

In 1969, Hershey received a license from UK-based Rowntree&#x27;s to manufacture and market Kit Kat and Rolo in the United States. After Hershey&#x27;s competitor Nestlé acquired Rowntree&#x27;s in 1988, it was still required to honor the agreement, and so Hershey continues to make and market the products in the U.S. The license would revert to Nestlé if Hershey were sold. This became a sticking point in Hershey&#x27;s failed attempt to attract a serious buyer in 2002, and even Nestlé rejected Hershey&#x27;s asking price, feeling that the economics would not work.

====Cadbury====

In 1988, Hershey&#x27;s acquired the rights to manufacture and distribute many Cadbury-branded products in the United States (except gum and mints, which are part of Mondelēz International). In 2015, they sued a British importer to halt imports of British Cadbury chocolate, which reportedly angered consumers. A merger between Mondelēz and Hershey&#x27;s was considered but abandoned in 2016 after Hershey&#x27;s turned down a $23 billion cash-and-stock bid.

===20th century sales and acquisitions===

In 1977, Hershey acquired Y&amp;S Candies (based in nearby Lancaster), makers of Twizzlers licorice candies, founded in 1845.

In 1986, Hershey&#x27;s made a brief foray into cough drops when it acquired the Luden&#x27;s cough drops brand. In 2001, the brand was sold to Pharmacia, now part of Pfizer, and Luden&#x27;s later was acquired by Prestige Brands. Hershey&#x27;s kept Luden&#x27;s 5th Avenue bar.

In 1996, Hershey purchased the American operations of the Leaf Candy Company from Huhtamäki. In 1999, the Hershey Pasta Group was divested to several equity partners to form the New World Pasta company, which is now part of Ebro Foods.

===21st century===

On July 25, 2002, Hershey Trust Company announced that it sought to sell its controlling interest in the Hershey Foods Corporation. The value of Hershey stock rose 25% in a single day, with over 19 million shares traded. Over the following 55 days, criticism of the intended sale from media, the Pennsylvania Attorney General, the Hershey, and Dauphin County Orphans&#x27; Court senior judge, led the company to abandon its attempt to sell the company. Seven Hershey trustees who voted to sell Hershey Foods on September 17, 2002, for US$12.5 billion to the Wrigley Company, which is now part of Mars, Incorporated, were removed by Pennsylvania&#x27;s Attorney and the Dauphin County Orphans&#x27; Court judge. Ten of the 17 trustees were forced to resign and four new members who lived locally were appointed. Former Pennsylvania Attorney General LeRoy S. Zimmerman became the new chairman of the reconstituted Milton Hershey School Trustees. Zimmerman publicly committed to having the Milton Hershey School Trust always maintain its ownership of the Hershey Company.

In December 2004, Hershey acquired the Mauna Loa Macadamia Nut Corp. from The Shansby Group.

In 2005, Krave Jerky was founded by Jon Sebastiani after he trained for a marathon and looked for a healthy source of energy. Alliance Consumer Growth, a private equity group, invested in Krave Jerky in 2012. Hershey&#x27;s purchased the company in 2015 for $240 million. Hershey would later in 2020 sell Krave Jerky to Sonoma Brands, the food industry incubator founded by Sebastiani in 2016.

In July 2005, Hershey acquired the Berkeley, California-based boutique chocolate-maker Scharffen Berger Chocolate Maker. In November 2005, Hershey acquired Joseph Schmidt Confections, the San Francisco-based chocolatier, and in November 2006, Hershey acquired Dagoba Organic Chocolate, a boutique chocolate maker based in Ashland, Oregon.

In June 2006, Philadelphia city councilman Juan Ramos called for Hershey&#x27;s to stop marketing &quot;Ice Breakers Pacs&quot;, a kind of mint, due to the resemblance of its packaging to a kind that was used for illegal street drugs.

In September 2006, ABC News reported that several Hershey chocolate products were reformulated to replace cocoa butter with vegetable oil as an emulsifier. According to the company, this change was made to reduce the costs of producing the products instead of raising their prices or decreasing the sizes. Some consumers complained that the taste was different, but the company stated that in the company-sponsored blind taste tests, about half of consumers preferred the new versions. As the new versions no longer met the Food and Drug Administration&#x27;s official definition of &quot;milk chocolate&quot;, the changed items were relabeled from stating they were &quot;milk chocolate&quot; and &quot;made with chocolate&quot; to &quot;chocolate candy&quot; and &quot;chocolatey.&quot;

In November 2006, the Smiths Falls production plant in Ontario temporarily shut down and several products were voluntarily recalled after concerns over &quot;Salmonella&quot; contamination possibly found in soy lecithin within their production line. It was believed that most of the products involved in the recall never made it to the retail level.

In December 2011, Hershey reached an agreement to acquire Brookside Foods Ltd., a privately held confectionery company based in Abbotsford, British Columbia.

In 2016, Hershey acquired barkTHINS, a New York-based chocolate snack foods company for $290 million.

An August 2016 attempt to sell Hershey to Mondelez International was abandoned following objections by the Hershey Trust.
In 2017, Hershey acquired Amplify Snack Brands, the Austin, Texas-based manufacturer of SkinnyPop in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately $1.6 billion. In September 2018, Hershey announced the purchase of Pirate Brands from B&amp;G Foods for $420 million in an all-cash deal. These acquisitions marked Hershey&#x27;s expansion into non-confectionery products.

In August 2019, Hershey announced it would purchase protein bar maker One Brands LLC for $397 million. In October 2019, Hershey announced a collaboration with Yuengling to produce a limited release collaboration beer titled Yuengling Hershey&#x27;s Chocolate Porter, becoming Hershey&#x27;s first licensed beer partnership. In June 2021, Hershey acquired Lily&#x27;s for $425 million. In November 2021, Hershey announced plans to acquire Dot’s Homestyle Pretzels, and their co-packer, Pretzel INC for $1.2B.

In 2019, Hershey announced that they could not guarantee that their chocolate products were free from child slave labor, as they could trace only about 50% of their purchasing back to the farm level. According to &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, the commitment made in 2001 to eradicate such practices within four years had not been kept, neither at the due deadline of 2005, nor within the revised deadlines of 2008 and 2010, and that the result was not likely to be achieved for 2020.

In 2021, Hershey was named in a class action lawsuit filed by eight former child slaves from Mali who alleged that the company aided and abetted their enslavement on cocoa plantations in Ivory Coast. The suit accused Hershey, Nestlé, Cargill, Mars, Incorporated, Olam International, Barry Callebaut, and Mondelez International of knowingly engaging in forced labor, and the plaintiffs sought damages for unjust enrichment, negligent supervision, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. The case was dismissed by U.S. District Judge Dabney Friedrich in 2022.

In December 2022, Hershey was subjected to a lawsuit over the amount of lead and cadmium in the company&#x27;s products, especially the Special Dark bar, the 70% Lily Bar, and the 85% Lily Bar. The lawsuit alleged that the company failed to warn consumers about the amount of metal in the bars and was based on findings published by the &quot;Consumer Reports&quot; magazine in the United States.

In 2023, the company entered the field of plant-based chocolate concocted with dairy alternatives. The snacks are marketed as Plant Based Extra Creamy and Plant Based Reese&#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups.

== Brands ==

Hershey brands are mostly chocolate or candy-based, and the Hershey Company also manufactures gum. Its main markets are the U.S. and Canada.

==Milton Hershey School (MHS)==

Unable to have children of his own, Milton S. Hershey, founder of the Hershey Company, founded the Hershey Industrial School in 1909 for white orphaned boys. In 1918, three years after the death of his wife, Milton Hershey donated around $90 million to the boarding school in trust, as well as 40% of the Hershey Company&#x27;s common stock. The school&#x27;s initial purpose was to train young men in trades but eventually shifted to focus on preparation for college. The Hershey Trust Company has exercised voting rights for the school and has been a trustee since its founding.

Many of its designs resemble Hershey chocolate products, such as the Hershey Kisses street lights. Milton Hershey was involved in the school&#x27;s operations until his death in 1945. The Hershey Industrial School was renamed the Milton Hershey School in 1951.

==Manufacturing plants==
The first plant outside Hershey opened on June 15, 1963, in Smiths Falls, Ontario, and the third opened on May 22, 1965, in Oakdale, California. In February and April 2007, Hershey&#x27;s announced that the Smiths Falls and Oakdale plants would close in 2008, being replaced in part by a new facility in Monterrey, Mexico. The Oakdale factory closed on February 1, 2008. Hershey chocolate factory in São Roque, Brazil, was opened in August 2002. Hershey&#x27;s Asia operations were largely supplied by their plant in Mandideep, India.

Hershey also has plants in Stuarts Draft, Virginia, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, Hazleton, Pennsylvania, Memphis, Tennessee, Robinson, Illinois, and Guadalajara, Mexico.

Visitors to Hershey can experience Hershey&#x27;s Chocolate World visitors center and its simulated tour ride. Public tours were once operated in the Pennsylvania and California factories, which ended in Pennsylvania in 1973 as soon as Hershey&#x27;s Chocolate World opened, and later in California following the September 11, 2001, attacks, due to security concerns.

On September 18, 2012, Hershey opened a new and expanded West Hershey plant. The plant was completed at a budget of $300 million.

On March 9, 2018, Hershey broke ground to expand its Kit Kat manufacturing facility in Hazle Township, Pennsylvania. The expansion project has a $60 million budget and is expected to create an additional 111 jobs at the facility.

On August 17, 2023, it was announced that Hershey repurchased their plant in Smiths Falls, Ontario for $53 million. The plant was previously owned by cannabis company Canopy Growth.

==Perception outside the U.S.==
The presence of butyric acid in Hershey&#x27;s chocolate, due to the use of controlled lipolysis in the production process, results in a flavor unfamiliar to those accustomed to chocolate from other parts of the world. In the UK, this has often been compared to the smell and taste of vomit.

==Gallery==
== Additional sources ==
**Our History | HERSHEY&#x27;S 
*History | The Hotel Hershey 
*Official Hershey&#x27;s chocolate and candy site

==See also==

*List of products manufactured by The Hershey Company
*List of food companies
*Pennsylvania chocolate workers&#x27; strike, 1937

== References ==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="0" end="19" title="The Hershey Company" label="The Hershey Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="39" end="46" title="The Hershey Company" label="Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="50" end="64" title="The Hershey Company" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="81" end="94" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q868666" start="134" end="155" title="Hershey, Pennsylvania" label="Hershey, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107826" start="179" end="190" title="Hersheypark" label="Hersheypark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410253" start="195" end="225" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="269" end="278" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37159" start="396" end="405" title="milkshake" label="milkshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="443" end="467" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="505" end="522" title="Milton S. Hershey" label="Milton S. Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="538" end="563" title="The Hershey Company" label="Hershey Chocolate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483125" start="611" end="636" title="Lancaster Caramel Company" label="Lancaster Caramel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744551" start="642" end="663" title="Hershey Trust Company" label="Hershey Trust Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229659" start="824" end="843" title="distribution center" label="distribution center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239672" start="923" end="945" title="World Cocoa Foundation" label="World Cocoa Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283783" start="978" end="997" title="Hersheypark Stadium" label="Hersheypark Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522716" start="1006" end="1018" title="Giant Center" label="Giant Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744519" start="1063" end="1087" title="Hershey Creamery Company" label="Hershey Creamery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="1554" end="1568" title="apprenticeship" label="apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="1574" end="1583" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="1606" end="1623" title="Milton S. Hershey" label="Milton S. Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1647" end="1659" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1712" end="1719" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1762" end="1775" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1797" end="1809" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483125" start="1832" end="1857" title="Lancaster Caramel Company" label="Lancaster Caramel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793617" start="2227" end="2256" title="Hershey bar" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Milk Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="2418" end="2451" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q868666" start="2795" end="2816" title="Hershey, Pennsylvania" label="Hershey, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107826" start="3086" end="3097" title="Hersheypark" label="Hersheypark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893738" start="3291" end="3310" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kiss" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928712" start="3637" end="3648" title="Mr. Goodbar" label="Mr. Goodbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329680" start="3727" end="3741" title="chocolate chip" label="chocolate chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q277628" start="3766" end="3780" title="dark chocolate" label="dark chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435784" start="3799" end="3806" title="Krackel" label="Krackel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154092" start="3816" end="3828" title="crisped rice" label="crisped rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628080" start="3880" end="3899" title="H.B. Reese" label="Harry Burnett Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="3909" end="3940" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q163749" start="4026" end="4050" title="West Palm Beach, Florida" label="West Palm Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023739" start="4871" end="4907" title="Congress of Industrial Organizations" label="Congress of Industrial Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="5150" end="5178" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849327" start="5329" end="5411" title="Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&amp;#x27; International Union" label="Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers&amp;#x27; International Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5598" end="5614" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6160" end="6172" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="6174" end="6186" title="Bruce Murrie" label="Bruce Murrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578399" start="6270" end="6282" title="Forrest Mars, Sr." label="Forrest Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q739550" start="6342" end="6356" title="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s" label="M&amp;amp;M&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="6471" end="6480" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q695070" start="6642" end="6657" title="Rowntree&amp;#x27;s" label="Rowntree&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="6684" end="6691" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900223" start="6696" end="6700" title="Rolo" label="Rolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="6755" end="6761" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="7260" end="7267" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857502" start="7347" end="7369" title="Mondelez International" label="Mondelēz International"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="7494" end="7500" title="merger" label="merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q776034" start="7766" end="7775" title="Twizzlers" label="Twizzlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="7776" end="7784" title="licorice" label="licorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788872" start="7860" end="7871" title="Throat lozenge" label="cough drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698726" start="7893" end="7905" title="Luden&amp;#x27;s" label="Luden&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q206921" start="7979" end="7985" title="Pfizer" label="Pfizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241774" start="8026" end="8041" title="Prestige Brands" label="Prestige Brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11849588" start="8076" end="8086" title="5th Avenue (candy)" label="5th Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510610" start="8151" end="8169" title="Leaf Candy Company" label="Leaf Candy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433279" start="8175" end="8184" title="Huhtamäki" label="Huhtamäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183831" start="8271" end="8286" title="New World Pasta" label="New World Pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280101" start="8317" end="8327" title="Ebro Foods" label="Ebro Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163643" start="8646" end="8675" title="Pennsylvania Attorney General" label="Pennsylvania Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q868666" start="8681" end="8688" title="Hershey, Pennsylvania" label="Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q819241" start="8908" end="8923" title="Wrigley Company" label="Wrigley Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="8946" end="8964" title="Mars, Incorporated" label="Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792515" start="9459" end="9488" title="Mauna Loa Macadamia Nut Corp." label="Mauna Loa Macadamia Nut Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q7671586" start="9494" end="9511" title="The Shansby Group" label="The Shansby Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q476115" start="9668" end="9682" title="private equity" label="private equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="9944" end="9964" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430969" start="9996" end="10028" title="Scharffen Berger Chocolate Maker" label="Scharffen Berger Chocolate Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286888" start="10065" end="10091" title="Joseph Schmidt Confections" label="Joseph Schmidt Confections"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="10097" end="10110" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q305012" start="10117" end="10128" title="chocolatier" label="chocolatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5208618" start="10169" end="10193" title="Dagoba Organic Chocolate" label="Dagoba Organic Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q450100" start="10231" end="10246" title="Ashland, Oregon" label="Ashland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10263" end="10275" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="10504" end="10512" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q251106" start="10591" end="10603" title="cocoa butter" label="cocoa butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187634" start="10629" end="10639" title="emulsifier" label="emulsifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="11009" end="11037" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="11433" end="11443" title="Salmonella" label="Salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q241595" start="11486" end="11494" title="lecithin" label="lecithin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271730" start="11754" end="11782" title="Abbotsford, British Columbia" label="Abbotsford, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857502" start="11930" end="11952" title="Mondelez International" label="Mondelez International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="12062" end="12075" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746789" start="12098" end="12107" title="SkinnyPop" label="SkinnyPop"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953653" start="12245" end="12258" title="B&amp;amp;G Foods" label="B&amp;amp;G Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q844073" start="12541" end="12550" title="Yuengling" label="Yuengling"/>
<link wikidata="Q124808758" start="12820" end="12844" title="Dot’s Homestyle Pretzels" label="Dot’s Homestyle Pretzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="13110" end="13129" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="13472" end="13476" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="13566" end="13577" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="13605" end="13611" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036056" start="13613" end="13620" title="Cargill" label="Cargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q695087" start="13622" end="13640" title="Mars, Incorporated" label="Mars, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950695" start="13642" end="13660" title="Olam International" label="Olam International"/>
<link wikidata="Q809018" start="13662" end="13677" title="Barry Callebaut" label="Barry Callebaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857502" start="13683" end="13705" title="Mondelez International" label="Mondelez International"/>
<link wikidata="Q29868859" start="13921" end="13937" title="Dabney L. Friedrich" label="Dabney Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="14772" end="14789" title="Milton S. Hershey" label="Milton S. Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938153" start="15665" end="15686" title="Smiths Falls, Ontario" label="Smiths Falls, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q984607" start="15729" end="15748" title="Oakdale, California" label="Oakdale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q81033" start="15909" end="15926" title="Monterrey" label="Monterrey, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446436" start="16122" end="16131" title="Mandideep" label="Mandideep"/>
<link wikidata="Q742014" start="16168" end="16191" title="Stuarts Draft, Virginia" label="Stuarts Draft, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="16193" end="16216" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186937" start="16218" end="16240" title="Hazleton, Pennsylvania" label="Hazleton, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="16242" end="16260" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q371281" start="16262" end="16280" title="Robinson, Illinois" label="Robinson, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="16286" end="16305" title="Guadalajara, Jalisco" label="Guadalajara, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410253" start="16343" end="16373" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="16861" end="16868" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999265" start="16895" end="16923" title="Hazle Township, Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Hazle Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394878" start="17206" end="17219" title="Canopy Growth" label="Canopy Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="17270" end="17282" title="butyric acid" label="butyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898489" start="17341" end="17350" title="lipolysis" label="lipolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634998" start="17712" end="17764" title="List of products manufactured by The Hershey Company" label="List of products manufactured by The Hershey Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242941" start="17766" end="17788" title="List of food companies" label="List of food companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242879" start="17790" end="17839" title="Pennsylvania chocolate workers&amp;#x27; strike, 1937" label="Pennsylvania chocolate workers&amp;#x27; strike, 1937"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85656" wikidata="Q7698375" url="?curid=85656" title="Tempestas">
<text>In ancient Roman religion, Tempestas (Latin &quot;&quot;: &quot;season, weather; bad weather; storm, tempest&quot;) is a goddess of storms or sudden weather. As with certain other nature and weather deities, the plural form Tempestates is common. Cicero, in discussing whether natural phenomena such as rainbows and clouds should be regarded as divine, notes that the Tempestates had been consecrated as deities by the Roman people.

A temple (&quot;aedes&quot; or &quot;delubrum&quot;) was dedicated to the Tempestates (given in the singular by Ovid) by L. Cornelius Scipio in 259 BC, as recorded by his epitaph. Scipio had been caught in a storm with his fleet off Corsica, and the building of the temple was in fulfillment of a vow made in asking for deliverance. Ovid gives the dedication day as June 1, but it appears as December 23 in the &quot;Fasti Antiates Maiores&quot;; this latter date may mark a renovation, or there may have been more than one temple to the Tempestates. The temple vowed in 259 was located in Regio I, perhaps near the Tomb of the Scipios, and was connected with the temples of Mars and Minerva there. William Warde Fowler saw a pattern of temple dedications during this period that acknowledged water as a divine force, including the Temple of Juturna vowed in 241 by Lutatius Catulus, and the Temple of Fons during the Corsican war of 231. Black sheep were sacrificed at her temple.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="3" end="25" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698375" start="27" end="36" title="Tempestas" label="Tempestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698375" start="224" end="235" title="Tempestas" label="Tempestates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="247" end="253" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="436" end="442" title="Roman temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="450" end="455" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#aedes" label="aedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373229" start="471" end="479" title="delubrum" label="delubrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="546" end="550" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q708483" start="555" end="574" title="Lucius Cornelius Scipio (consul 259 BC)" label="L. Cornelius Scipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="605" end="612" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="667" end="674" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925738" start="731" end="734" title="votum" label="vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605836" start="851" end="873" title="Fasti Antiates" label="Fasti Antiates Maiores"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1024" end="1031" title="14 regions of Augustan Rome#I: Porta Capena" label="Regio I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540716" start="1050" end="1069" title="Tomb of the Scipios" label="Tomb of the Scipios"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="1109" end="1113" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="1118" end="1125" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372959" start="1133" end="1153" title="William Warde Fowler" label="William Warde Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q453899" start="1300" end="1316" title="Gaius Lutatius Catulus" label="Lutatius Catulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q582918" start="1336" end="1340" title="Fontus" label="Fons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85657" wikidata="Q346096" url="?curid=85657" title="Terminus">
<text>Terminus may refer to:
==Ancient Rome==
*Terminus (god), a Roman deity who protected boundary markers

== Transport ==
*Terminal train station or terminus, a railway station serving as an end destination
*Bus terminus, a bus station serving as an end destination
*Lagos Terminus railway station, the main railway station of Lagos, Nigeria

==Art, entertainment, and media==
===Literature===
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (play), a 2007 play by Marl O&#x27;Rowe
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (poem), written in 1866 by Ralph Waldo Emerson
*Terminus (comics), a fictional character in the Marvel Universe
*Terminus (fictional planet), the home of the Foundation in Isaac Asimov&#x27;s &quot;Foundation&quot; novels (1942–1993)
*Terminus, a robot in the eponymous short story from &quot;Tales of Pirx the Pilot&quot; by Polish science fiction writer Stanisław Lem

=== Film and TV===
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (1961 film), a film directed by John Schlesinger
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (1987 film), a film directed by Pierre-William Glenn
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (2007 film), a short film directed by Trevor Cawood
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (2015 film), a film directed by Marc Furmie
*Terminus (&quot;Doctor Who&quot;), a 1983 serial in the long-running science fiction TV series &quot;Doctor Who&quot;
* Terminus, fictional city location in &quot;The Signal&quot; (2007 film)
*Terminus, a fictional sanctuary located in a train station, depicted in season 4 of the TV series &quot;The Walking Dead&quot;
*Terminus Series, a type of mecha in the anime series &quot;Eureka Seven&quot;
*Terminus Systems, part of the world of the &quot;Mass Effect&quot; media franchise

===Games===
* Terminus, the music that plays while on the Void floor of The Binding of Isaac: Repentance.
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (1986 video game), a space prison escape game by Mastertronic
*&quot;Terminus&quot; (2000 video game), a 2000 space-flight role-playing/action game by Vicarious Vision
*Terminus, a location in &quot;Halo 4&quot;; also an achievement when the player finds it
* Terminus is the name of the world in RPG/TBS video game Ash of Gods: Redemption
* Terminus, Aeon of Finality in 

===Music===
* &quot;Terminus&quot; (album)

== Other uses ==
* River terminus, the end of a river
* Glacier terminus, the end, or &quot;snout,&quot; of a glacier&#x27;s ice
* &quot;terminus post quem&quot;, &quot;terminus ante quem&quot;, &quot;terminus ad quem&quot;, and &quot;terminus a quo&quot;, terms used to describe the limits of a timeframe during which a historical event may have happened in archaeology
* &quot;Terminus&quot; (weevil), a beetle genus in the tribe Pentarthrini
*Terminus, the unofficial original name of Atlanta, Georgia, United States
**Terminus (office complex), an office complex in Atlanta
* Leonard Rose (hacker), a.k.a. &quot;Terminus&quot;, convicted hacker
* &quot;Terminus&quot;, a finishing move of professional wrestler Damien Sandow

== See also ==
*Terminal (disambiguation)
*Terminator (disambiguation)
*Termini (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q346096" start="0" end="8" title="Terminus" label="Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q580723" start="41" end="55" title="Terminus (god)" label="Terminus (god)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="120" end="142" title="Terminal train station" label="Terminal train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q494829" start="205" end="217" title="Bus terminus" label="Bus terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984849" start="264" end="294" title="Lagos Terminus railway station" label="Lagos Terminus railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702859" start="392" end="419" title="Terminus (play)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27940659" start="454" end="481" title="Terminus (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (poem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589367" start="523" end="540" title="Terminus (comics)" label="Terminus (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="588" end="615" title="Terminus (fictional planet)" label="Terminus (fictional planet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125398766" start="710" end="718" title="Terminus (short story)" label="Terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702857" start="866" end="898" title="Terminus (1961 film)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (1961 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518467" start="937" end="969" title="Terminus (1987 film)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (1987 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115857503" start="1012" end="1044" title="Terminus (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023578" start="1086" end="1118" title="Terminus (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6292115" start="1152" end="1185" title="Terminus (Doctor Who)" label="Terminus (&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391425" start="1309" end="1343" title="The Signal (2007 American film)" label="&amp;quot;The Signal&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13538807" start="1417" end="1471" title="The Walking Dead (season 4)" label="season 4 of the TV series &amp;quot;The Walking Dead&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q962161" start="1532" end="1544" title="Eureka Seven" label="Eureka Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q953242" start="1601" end="1612" title="Mass Effect" label="Mass Effect"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1708" end="1740" title="The Binding of Isaac: Rebirth" label="The Binding of Isaac: Repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702855" start="1743" end="1781" title="Terminus (1986 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (1986 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702860" start="1827" end="1865" title="Terminus (2000 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (2000 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028" start="1963" end="1969" title="Halo 4" label="Halo 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2080" end="2103" title="Ash of Gods: Redemption" label="Ash of Gods: Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943987" start="2152" end="2180" title="Terminus (album)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="2201" end="2215" title="River terminus" label="River terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q556920" start="2238" end="2254" title="Glacier terminus" label="Glacier terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102542" start="2319" end="2337" title="terminus post quem" label="terminus post quem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2555" end="2584" title="Terminus (weevil)" label="&amp;quot;Terminus&amp;quot; (weevil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387519" start="2614" end="2626" title="Pentarthrini" label="Pentarthrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="2670" end="2677" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702856" start="2704" end="2729" title="Terminus (office complex)" label="Terminus (office complex)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525681" start="2762" end="2783" title="Leonard Rose (hacker)" label="Leonard Rose (hacker)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2857" end="2910" title="Neckbreaker#Arm trap neckbreaker" label="finishing move of professional wrestler Damien Sandow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210481" start="2928" end="2953" title="Terminal (disambiguation)" label="Terminal (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q483196" start="2955" end="2982" title="Terminator (disambiguation)" label="Terminator (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518456" start="2984" end="3008" title="Termini (disambiguation)" label="Termini (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85661" wikidata="Q6483125" url="?curid=85661" title="Lancaster Caramel Company">
<text>The Lancaster Caramel Company was an American candy company based in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. It was founded by Milton S. Hershey in 1886, and was his first successful candy company which helped him build a reputation.

==History==

The business was first located in a warehouse on the west side of South Duke Street near Vine Street. However, the facilities lacked a boiler to cook the caramels and Hershey soon moved to an old factory building on Church Street that had once housed the Edison Electric Plant. The early months were a struggle, but a British candy importer placed a large order and the cashier at the Lancaster County National Bank backed a loan, enabling Hershey to purchase supplies. As the business began to grow, Hershey expanded into other parts of the factory building. By 1894 the Lancaster Caramel Company employed approximately 1300 workers.

In 1891 Hershey acquired three lots and a small factory in Mount Joy, Pennsylvania and the new factory soon began caramel production. In 1892, Lancaster Caramel Company expanded, opening a western branch in Chicago, which later moved to Bloomington, Illinois. The Bloomington factory operated until 1900 when it was sold to the Paul F. Beich Company. Shortly after establishing the Western Branch, Hershey set up a third caramel factory in Reading, Pennsylvania.

The Lancaster Caramel Company was incorporated on February 8, 1894 and the Hershey Chocolate Company was formally organized as a subsidiary. In the Spring of 1900, believing caramels were a fad, Milton Hershey sold the assets of the caramel business including the factory, the machinery, the confectionery formulas, stock on hand and the Crystal A trademark for $1 million in cash to the American Caramel Company. Hershey kept the Hershey Chocolate Company subsidiary plus the chocolate making equipment because he felt that there was a large market for chocolate confections.

==The American Caramel Company==
===P.C. Wiest Co.===
The American Caramel Company grew out of an industry established by Peter C. Wiest in 1867. He was a pioneer in the manufacture of caramels and soon developed a successful business. In 1878, Daniel F. Lafean became a partner and the firm of P. C. Wiest &amp; Company was organized. The original proprietor retired from the business and in 1895 The P. C. Wiest Company was incorporated with Daniel F. Lafean as president. Lafean was instrumental in establishing the American Caramel Company; which was created March 28, 1898 when the Breisch-Hine Company in Philadelphia merged with The P. C. Wiest &amp; Company in York, Pennsylvania. The home office of the American Caramel Company was located in York.

The American Caramel Company was created on March 28, 1889, when the Breisch-Hine Co. of Philadelphia and the P. C. Wiest Co. of York, Pennsylvania, merged. After acquiring the Lancaster Caramel Company in 1900, the American Caramel Company became famous by including baseball and other cards in with its candies. With the addition of the Lancaster Caramel Company, the American Caramel Company grew to control 90% of the caramel in the country. The American Caramel Company was one of the early businesses to issue of Baseball Cards with their product. In December 1928, The American Caramel Company shut down the York Plant, moving the candy making machinery to a more modern facility.

==References==
==External links==
* Hershey&#x27;s Website
* Hershey Community Archives Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6483125" start="4" end="29" title="Lancaster Caramel Company" label="Lancaster Caramel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="69" end="92" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q737720" start="112" end="129" title="Milton S. Hershey" label="Milton S. Hershey"/>
<link wikidata="Q303604" start="928" end="951" title="Mount Joy, Pennsylvania" label="Mount Joy, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1076" end="1083" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q577802" start="1106" end="1127" title="Bloomington, Illinois" label="Bloomington, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="1309" end="1330" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="1408" end="1433" title="Hershey Chocolate Company" label="Hershey Chocolate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="1764" end="1789" title="Hershey Chocolate Company" label="Hershey Chocolate Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="1887" end="1896" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217099" start="2156" end="2172" title="Daniel F. Lafean" label="Daniel F. Lafean"/>
<link wikidata="Q821105" start="2580" end="2598" title="York, Pennsylvania" label="York, Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85664" wikidata="Q1887850" url="?curid=85664" title="Vacuna">
<text>Vacuna was an ancient Sabine goddess, identified by ancient Roman sources and later scholars with numerous other goddesses, including Ceres, Diana, Nike, Minerva, Bellona, Venus and Victoria. She was mainly worshipped at a sanctuary near Horace&#x27;s villa (now in the commune of Licenza), in sacred woods at Reate, and at Rome.

The protection she was asked to provide remains obscure. Pomponius Porphyrion calls her &quot;incerta specie&quot; (of an uncertain kind) in his commentaries on Horace. Renaissance authors and Leonhard Schmitz state that she was a divinity to whom the country people offered sacrifices when the labours of the field were over, that is, when they were at leisure, &quot;vacui&quot;.

The etymology of her name is linked to lack and privation, and Horace appears to call upon her in favour of a friend to whom one of his epistles is addressed. From this, it has been conjectured that she was prayed to in favour of absent people, family members or friends.

Ovid mentions rites linked to sacramental fires with attendants either standing or sitting, that he compares to olden ceremonies observed on behalf of Vesta, without any suggestion of field work nor absent dear ones.

==References==
==Sources==
===Ancient sources===
* Horace, &quot;Epistles&quot;, l. 1, ep. 10, v. 49-50 (commented by Pomponius Porphyrion, Helenius Acron and the scholiast of Cruquius);
* Ovid, &quot;Fasti&quot;, 6, v. 305 to 308;
* Pliny the Elder, &quot;Natural History&quot;, l. 3 (ch. 12), par. 109;
* Auson, Epistle 4, v. 101.

Epigraphical sources:
* &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum&quot;, IX, 4636, 4751, 4752.

===Modern sources===
* Edmond Courbaud, &quot;Horace : sa vie et sa pensée à l’époque des Épîtres&quot;, Paris, 1914, ch. 2, § 7, note 16. Online on espace-horace
* A. W. van Buren, « Vacuna », The Journal of Roman Studies, Vol. 6, 1916 (1916), pp. 202–204.
* Elizabeth Cornelia Evans, « Horace&#x27;s Sabine Goddess Vacuna », Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association, Vol. 65, 1934 (1934).

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1887850" start="0" end="6" title="Vacuna" label="Vacuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="22" end="36" title="Sabine goddess" label="Sabine goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="134" end="139" title="Ceres (Roman mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="141" end="146" title="Diana (goddess)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q165023" start="148" end="152" title="Nike (mythology)" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="154" end="161" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q207234" start="163" end="170" title="Bellona (goddess)" label="Bellona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="172" end="177" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="182" end="190" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012755" start="238" end="257" title="Horace&amp;#x27;s villa" label="Horace&amp;#x27;s villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q242844" start="281" end="288" title="Licenza, Italy" label="Licenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13396" start="310" end="315" title="Reate" label="Reate"/>
<link wikidata="Q934244" start="388" end="408" title="Pomponius Porphyrion" label="Pomponius Porphyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="492" end="498" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526304" start="524" end="540" title="Leonhard Schmitz" label="Leonhard Schmitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246269" start="762" end="771" title="privation" label="privation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="1256" end="1262" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q934244" start="1323" end="1343" title="Pomponius Porphyrion" label="Pomponius Porphyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244718" start="1345" end="1359" title="Helenius Acron" label="Helenius Acron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1381" end="1389" title="Jacobus Cruquius Messines" label="Cruquius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="1394" end="1398" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1439" end="1454" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="1512" end="1517" title="Ausonius" label="Auson"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="1569" end="1599" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85667" wikidata="Q151305" url="?curid=85667" title="Christian IX of Denmark">
<text>Christian IX (8 April 181829 January 1906) was King of Denmark from 15 November 1863 until his death in 1906. From 1863 to 1864, he was concurrently Duke of Schleswig, Holstein and Lauenburg.

A younger son of Frederick William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, Christian grew up in the Duchy of Schleswig as a prince of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg, a junior branch of the House of Oldenburg which had ruled Denmark since 1448. Although having close family ties to the Danish royal family, he was originally not in the immediate line of succession to the Danish throne. Following the early death of his father in 1831, Christian grew up in Denmark and was educated at the Military Academy of Copenhagen. After unsuccessfully seeking the hand of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom in marriage, he married his double second cousin, Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel, in 1842.

In 1852, Christian was chosen as heir presumptive to the Danish throne in light of the expected extinction of the senior line of the House of Oldenburg. Upon the death of King Frederick VII in 1863, Christian (who was Frederick&#x27;s second cousin and husband of Frederick&#x27;s paternal first cousin, Louise of Hesse-Kassel) acceded to the throne as the first Danish monarch of the House of Glücksburg.

The beginning of his reign was marked by the Danish defeat in the Second Schleswig War and the subsequent loss of the duchies of Schleswig, Holstein and Lauenburg which made the king immensely unpopular. The following years of his reign were dominated by political disputes, for Denmark had only become a constitutional monarchy in 1849 and the balance of power between the sovereign and parliament was still in dispute. In spite of his initial unpopularity and the many years of political strife, in which the king was in conflict with large parts of the population, his popularity recovered towards the end of his reign, and he became a national icon due to the length of his reign and the high standards of personal morality with which he was identified.

Christian&#x27;s six children with Louise married into other European royal families, earning him the sobriquet &quot;the father-in-law of Europe&quot;. Among his descendants are King Frederik X, King Philippe of Belgium, King Harald V of Norway, Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg, King Charles III of the United Kingdom, and King Felipe VI of Spain.

==Early life==

===Birth and family===
Christian IX was born between 10 and 11 a.m. on 8 April 1818 at the residence of his maternal grandparents, Gottorf Castle, near the town of Schleswig in the Duchy of Schleswig, at the time a fief under the Crown of Denmark. Born as a prince of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck, he was the fourth son of Friedrich Wilhelm, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck, and Princess Louise Caroline of Hesse-Kassel. He was named after his mother&#x27;s cousin Prince Christian Frederick of Denmark, the later King Christian VIII, who was also his godfather. Together with his wife, Caroline Amalie of Augustenborg, he had traveled from Augustenborg to Gottorp so that he could hold his godson at the christening, which was held at the end of May in the chapel of Gottorp Castle.
Prince Christian&#x27;s father was the head of the ducal house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck, a junior male branch of the House of Oldenburg. The family descended from King Christian III of Denmark&#x27;s younger son, John the Younger, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg, whose grandson Duke August Philipp severed his ties with Denmark and emigrated to Germany where he acquired the manor of Haus Beck in Westphalia, after which the lineage was named Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck. His sons and their descendants went into Prussian, Polish and Russian service, until his great-great-grandson, Prince Christian&#x27;s father, again went into Danish military service, where he was stationed in Holstein. It was there that he had met and married Prince Christian&#x27;s mother, who was a daughter of Landgrave Charles of Hesse, an originally German prince, who, however, had grown up at the Danish court and had married King Frederick V&#x27;s youngest daughter, Princess Louise of Denmark. Prince Charles had made a career in Denmark, where he was a Danish field marshal and Royal Governor of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein.

Through his father, Prince Christian was thus a direct male-line descendant of King Christian III of Denmark and an (albeit junior) agnatic descendant of Hedvig of Holstein (countess of Oldenburg), mother of King Christian I of Denmark, who was the &quot;Semi-Salic&quot; heiress of her brother Adolf of Schauenburg, last Schauenburg duke of Schleswig and count of Holstein. As such, Prince Christian was eligible to succeed in the twin duchies of Schleswig-Holstein, but not first in line. Through his mother, he was thus a great-grandson of Frederick V, great-great-grandson of George II of Great Britain and a descendant of several other monarchs, but had no direct claim to any European throne.

===Childhood===

Initially, the young prince grew up with his parents and many brothers and sisters at his maternal grandparents&#x27; residence at Gottorf Castle, the habitual seat of the royal governors of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. However, in 1824, the dowager duchess of Glücksburg, widow of Frederick Henry William, the last duke of the elder line of the house Schleswig-Holstein-Sønderborg-Glücksburg, who had himself died in 1779, died. Glücksburg Castle, located a little south of Flensburg Fjord, not far from city of Flensburg, was now empty, and on 6 June 1825, Duke Friedrich Wilhelm was appointed Duke of Glücksburg by his brother-in-law, King Frederick VI of Denmark. Duke Friedrich Wilhelm subsequently changed his title to Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg and thus founded the younger Glücksburg line.

Subsequently, the family moved to Glücksburg Castle, where Prince Christian was raised with his siblings under their father&#x27;s supervision. The Duke wrote to a friend: However, Duke Friedrich Wilhelm died of a cold that had developed into pneumonia at the age of just 46 on 17 February 1831 and, at the Duke&#x27;s own discretion, scarlet fever, which had previously affected two of his children. His death left the duchess widowed with ten children and no money. Prince Christian was twelve years old when his father died.

===Education===

Following the early death of his father, King Frederick VI, together with Prince William of Hesse-Philippstal-Barchfeld, a close friend of the Duke, became legal guardians of Prince Christian and his nine siblings. That same year, Prince Christian wanted to be educated as a naval officer, but during King Frederick VI&#x27;s visit to Gottorp in 1831, shortly after Duke Wilhelm&#x27;s funeral, the king agreed with his mother that Prince Christian would be sent to Copenhagen to receive an army officer training. Subsequently, in 1832, the year after his father&#x27;s death, the 14-year-old Prince Christian moved to Copenhagen to be educated at the Land Cadet Academy, where he stayed at the house of Colonel Linde, the head of the Land Cadet Academy. He received private lessons at the academy and was rarely with the other cadets. On the other hand, the sonless royal couple took good care of the boy, as Queen Marie was his mother&#x27;s sister and King Frederick VI his mother&#x27;s cousin. Also, in 1838, Prince Christian&#x27;s eldest brother, Duke Karl of Glücksborg, married the king and queen&#x27;s youngest daughter, Princess Vilhelmine Marie, which further strengthened the bonds between them.
In 1835, Prince Christian was confirmed in the Garrison Church in Copenhagen. The following year, after completing his military education, he was appointed rittmeister at the Royal Horse Guards and was then housed in the Royal Horse Guards Barracks by Frederiksholms Kanal in central Copenhagen. There he lived under simple conditions until King Frederick VI in 1839 granted him a home in the Yellow Palace, an 18th century town house at 18 Amaliegade, immediately adjacent to the Amalienborg Palace complex, the principal residence of the Danish royal family in the district of Frederiksstaden in central Copenhagen, where he came to live until 1865.

From 1839 to 1841, Prince Christian studied constitutional law and history with his half-cousin Prince Frederick William of Hesse-Kassel at the University of Bonn in Germany. It was there that in December 1839 he received the news of the death of his benefactor King Frederick VI and the accession of his mother&#x27;s cousin, King Christian VIII. During the holidays he went on various excursions in Germany and also traveled to Venice. In 1841 he returned to Copenhagen. On the way home, he paid a visit to the court in Berlin, where he rejected an otherwise flattering offer from King Frederick William IV of Prussia to join the Prussian Army.

==Becoming the heir presumptive==
===Marriage===

As a young man, in 1838, Prince Christian, representing Frederick VI, attended the coronation of Queen Victoria at Westminster Abbey. During his stay in London, he unsuccessfully sought the hand of the young British queen in marriage. Even though she chose to follow her family&#x27;s wishes and preferred to marry her cousin, Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, the young queen had a good impression of her third cousin Prince Christian, who 25 years later would become father-in-law to her eldest son, the Prince of Wales.
Instead, Prince Christian entered into a marriage that was to have great significance for his future. In 1841, he was engaged to his second cousin Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel. She was the daughter of Prince William of Hesse-Kassel, who was a Danish general and the governor of Copenhagen. Prince William was married to Christian VIII of Denmark&#x27;s sister Princess Charlotte of Denmark, and Louise was thus the new king&#x27;s niece and was closely related to the royal family. Like Prince Christian himself, she was a great-granddaughter of both Frederick V of Denmark and Landgrave Frederick II of Hesse-Kassel, and thus his double second cousin. Their wedding was celebrated on 26 May 1842 in her parents&#x27; residence in Frederick VIII&#x27;s Palace at Amalienborg. The bride and groom took their bridal tour to Kiel in the Duchy of Holstein, where they visited Prince Christian&#x27;s older brother, Duke Karl of Glücksburg, and his wife, Frederick VI&#x27;s daughter Duchess Vilhelmine, who had not been able to attend the wedding.

Louise was a wise and energetic woman who exercised a strong influence over her husband. After the wedding, the couple moved into the Yellow Palace, where their first five children were born between 1843 and 1853: Prince Frederick in 1843, Princess Alexandra in 1844, Prince William in 1845, Princess Dagmar in 1847 and Princess Thyra in 1853. The family was still quite unknown and lived a relatively modest life by royal standards.

===The Danish succession crisis===
In the 1840s, it became increasingly clear that the Danish monarchy was facing a succession crisis. When King Christian VIII succeeded his first cousin King Frederick VI in 1839, the elder male line of the House of Oldenburg was obviously on the point of extinction, as the king&#x27;s only son and heir apparent Crown Prince Frederick seemed incapable of fathering children and the king&#x27;s only brother Prince Ferdinand&#x27;s marriage to King Frederick VI&#x27;s daughter was childless. King Frederick VII&#x27;s childlessness presented a thorny dilemma and the question of succession to the Danish throne proved complex, as the rules of succession in the different parts of the Danish monarchy united under the king&#x27;s rule, the Kingdom of Denmark proper and the three duchies of Schleswig, Holstein and Saxe-Lauenburg, not being the same, the possibility of a separation of the crown of Denmark from its duchies became probable.
The succession in the Kingdom of Denmark was regulated by the &quot;Lex Regia&quot; (; &quot;Law of The King&quot;), the absolutist constitution of Denmark and Norway promulgated by Frederick III in 1665. With the Lex Regia, Denmark had adopted the Salic law, but restricted the succession to the agnatic descendants of Frederick III, who was the first hereditary monarch of Denmark (before him, the kingdom was officially elective). Agnatic descent from Frederick III would end with the death of the childless Frederick VII and his equally childless uncle, Prince Ferdinand. At that point, the Lex Regia provided for a Semi-Salic succession, which stipulated that after the extinction of all-male descendance, including all collateral male lines, a female agnate (such as a daughter) of the last male holder of the property would inherit, and after her, her own male heirs according to the Salic order. There were, however, several ways to interpret to whom the crown could pass, since the provision was not entirely clear as to whether a claimant to the throne could be the closest female relative or not. In the duchy of Holstein, where the king reigned as duke, the rules of succession also followed the Salic law, but did not limit the succession to the agnatic descendants of Frederick III. As there were several junior male lines of the House of Oldenburg, who were however not descendants of Frederick III, there were thus numerous agnatic descendants with succession rights in the Duchy of Holstein, who were however not eligible to succeed to the Danish throne. In addition, the two duchies of Schleswig and Holstein were permanently joined to each other by the Treaty of Ribe of 1460, which proclaimed that the two duchies should be &quot;Forever Undivided&quot;.
The already complicated dynastic question of the succession was made even more complex as it took place against a background of equally complicated political issues. The movements of nationalism and liberalism had been on the rise in Europe since the Napoleonic era. Whereas the concepts of nation and homeland increasingly replaced dynastic questions for the nationalists, aristocratic privileges and the concept of an absolute ruler of divine right were poorly accepted by the liberals. Denmark and the Duchies were no exception, and the political movement of national liberalism had been on the rise since the 1830s. While the Danish and German national liberals were united in their liberal political aspirations and in their opposition to the absolutist rule of the House of Oldenburg, the two political movements were heavily opposed in the national question. It mainly concerned the question of the affiliation of the Duchy of Schleswig. Constitutionally, the Duchy of Schleswig was a Danish fief, which had become increasingly independent from Denmark during the High Middle Ages. Linguistically, however, Danish, German and North Frisian existed as vernaculars in different parts of the Duchy, and German functioned as the language of law and the ruling class.

The Danish national liberals insisted that Schleswig as a fief had belonged to Denmark for centuries and aimed to restore the southern frontier of Denmark on the Eider river, the historic border between Schleswig and Holstein. The Danish nationalists thus aspired to incorporate the Duchy of Schleswig into the Danish kingdom, in the process separating it from the duchy of Holstein, which should be allowed to pursue its own destiny as a member of the German Confederation or possibly a new united Germany. With the claim of the total integration of Schleswig into the Danish kingdom, the Danish national liberals opposed the German national liberals, whose goal was the union of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, their joint independence from Denmark and their membership in the German Confederation as an autonomous German state. The German nationalists thus sought to confirm Schleswig&#x27;s association with Holstein, in the process detaching Schleswig from Denmark and bringing it into the German Confederation.

There was burgeoning nationalism within both Denmark and the German-speaking parts of Schleswig-Holstein. This meant that a resolution to keep the two Duchies together and as a part of the Danish kingdom could not satisfy the conflicting interests of both Danish and German nationalists, and hindered all hopes of a peaceful solution.
As the nations of Europe looked on, the numerous descendants of Hedvig of Holstein began to vie for the Danish throne. Frederick VII belonged to the senior branch of Hedvig&#x27;s descendants. In the event of extinction of the senior branch, the house of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg would become the most senior branch of the House of Oldenburg, but it did not descend from King Frederick III. However, in the duchies, Christian August II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg, claimed the position of heir to the throne of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, being head of the house of Augustenburg, and thus became a symbol of the nationalist German independence movement in Schleswig-Holstein.

The closest female relatives of Frederick VII were his paternal aunt, Princess Louise Charlotte of Denmark, who had married a scion of the cadet branch of the House of Hesse, and her children. However, they were not agnatic descendants of the royal family, so were not eligible to succeed in Schleswig-Holstein.

The dynastic female heir reckoned most eligible according to the original law of primogeniture of Frederick III was Caroline of Denmark (1793–1881), the childless eldest daughter of the late king Frederick VI. Along with another childless daughter, Vilhelmine Marie of Denmark (1808–1891), Duchess of Glücksburg; the next heir was Louise, sister of Frederick VI, who had married the Duke of Augustenburg. The chief heir to that line was the selfsame Frederick of Augustenburg, but his turn would have come only after the death of two childless princesses who were very much alive in 1863.

The House of Glücksburg also held a significant interest in the succession to the throne. A more junior branch of the royal family, they were also descendants of Frederick III through the daughter of King Frederick V of Denmark. Lastly, there was yet a more junior agnatic branch that was eligible to succeed in Schleswig-Holstein. There was Christian himself and his three older brothers, the eldest of whom, Karl, was childless, but the others had produced children, and male children at that.

Prince Christian had been a foster &quot;grandson&quot; of the grandchildless royal couple Frederick VI and his Queen consort Marie (Marie Sophie Friederike of Hesse). Familiar with the royal court and the traditions of the recent monarchs, their young ward Prince Christian was a nephew of Queen Marie and a first cousin once removed of Frederick VI. He had been brought up as a Dane, having lived in Danish-speaking lands of the royal dynasty and not having become a German nationalist, which made him a relatively good candidate from the Danish point of view. As junior agnatic descendant, he was eligible to inherit Schleswig-Holstein, but was not the first in line. As a descendant of Frederick III, he was eligible to succeed in Denmark, although here too, he was not first in line.

 – Kings of Denmark&lt;br&gt;
 – Dukes of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg&lt;br&gt;
 – Dukes of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg&lt;br&gt;
 – Dukes of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck







 


===Appointment as an heir presumptive===
In 1851, the Russian emperor recommended that Prince Christian advance in the Danish succession. And in 1852, the thorny question of Denmark&#x27;s succession was finally resolved by the London Protocol of 8 May 1852, signed by the United Kingdom, France, Russia, Prussia and Austria, and ratified by Denmark and Sweden. Christian was chosen as heir presumptive to the throne after Frederick VII&#x27;s uncle, and thus would become king after the extinction of the most senior line to the Danish throne. A justification for this choice was his marriage to Louise of Hesse-Kassel, who as daughter of the closest female relative of Frederick VII was closely related to the royal family. Louise&#x27;s mother and brother, and elder sister too, renounced their rights in favor of Louise and her husband. Prince Christian&#x27;s wife was thereafter the closest female heiress of Frederick VII.

The decision was implemented by the Danish Law of Succession of 31 July 1853—more precisely, the &quot;Royal Ordinance settling the Succession to the Crown on Prince Christian of Glücksburg&quot; which designated him as second-in-line to the Danish throne following King Frederick VII&#x27;s uncle. Consequently, Prince Christian and his family were granted the titles of Prince and Princess of Denmark and the style of &quot;Highness&quot;.
As second in line, Prince Christian continued to live in the Yellow Palace with his family. However, as a consequence of their new status, the family were also granted the right to use Bernstorff Palace north of Copenhagen as their summer residence. It became Princess Louise&#x27;s favorite residence, and the family often stayed there. It was also at Bernstorff that their youngest son, Prince Valdemar, was born in 1858. At the occasion of Prince Valdemar&#x27;s baptism, Prince Christian and his family were granted the style of &quot;Royal Highness&quot;. Although their economy had improved, the financial situation of the family was still relatively strained.

However, Prince Christian&#x27;s appointment as successor to the throne was not met with undivided enthusiasm. His relationship with the king was cool, partly because the colorful King Frederick VII did not like the straightforward, military prince, and had preferred to see Christian&#x27;s eldest son, the young Prince Frederick, take his place, partly because Prince Christian and Princess Louise openly showed their disapproval of the king&#x27;s morganatic third wife, the actress Louise Rasmussen, who received the title Countess Danner. Politically, Prince Christian also had little influence during his tenure as second-in-line. This was partly due to the distrust of the Countess Danner, partly due to Christian&#x27;s perceived conservatism, which earned him the distrust of the powerful National Liberal Party. It was not before 1856 that the politician Carl Christoffer Georg Andræ, to whom Prince Christian always felt close, secured him a seat in the Council of State.

The year 1863 became rich in significant events for Prince Christian and his family. On 10 March, his eldest daughter, Princess Alexandra married the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII of the United Kingdom). On 20 March, his second son, Prince William was elected King of the Hellenes and ascended the Greek throne taking the name of King George I. And in June 1863, Prince Christian himself became &quot;heir-presumptive&quot; upon the death of the elderly Prince Ferdinand before eventually becoming King Christian IX on 15 November that year.

== Early reign ==
===Accession===

During the last years of the reign of King Frederick VII, his health was increasingly poor, and in the autumn of 1863, during a visit to the Dannevirke fortification, he contracted a severe cold, which after his return to Glücksburg Castle turned into erysipelas. Shortly after, on 15 November, King Frederick VII died unexpectedly at the age of 55 after a sixteen-year reign, thus ending the 415-year reign of the main line of the House of Oldenburg on the Danish throne. Upon the death of Frederick VII, Christian succeeded to the throne at the age of 45. He was proclaimed king from the balcony of Christiansborg Palace by the Council President Carl Christian Hall on 16 November 1863 as Christian IX.
Christian and Denmark was immediately plunged into a crisis over the possession and status of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. Already in November 1863, Prince Frederick of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg (1829–1880) (the future father-in-law of Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany) claimed the twin-duchies in succession after King Frederick VII and proclaimed himself Frederick VIII, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein. Frederick of Augustenburg (as he was commonly known) had become the symbol of the nationalist German independence movement in Schleswig-Holstein after his father (in exchange for money) renounced his claims as heir to the throne of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. In view of the London protocol of 8 May 1852, which concluded the First War of Schleswig, and his father&#x27;s concurrent renunciation to claims to the throne, Frederick&#x27;s claim was not recognized by the parties to the protocol.

===Second Schleswig War===
Under pressure, Christian signed the November Constitution, a treaty that made Schleswig part of Denmark. This resulted in the Second Schleswig War between Denmark and a Prussian/Austrian alliance in 1864. The Peace Conference broke up without having arrived at any conclusion; the outcome of the war was unfavorable to Denmark and led to the incorporation of Schleswig into Prussia in 1865. Holstein was likewise incorporated into Austria in 1865, then Prussia in 1866, following further conflict between Austria and Prussia.

Following the loss, Christian IX went behind the backs of the Danish government to contact the Prussians, offering that the whole of Denmark could join the German Confederation, if Denmark could stay united with Schleswig and Holstein. This proposal was rejected by Bismarck, who feared that the ethnic strife in Schleswig between Danes and Germans would then stay unresolved. Christian IX&#x27;s negotiations were not publicly known until published in the 2010 book &quot;Dommedag Als&quot; by Tom Buk-Swienty, who had been given access to the royal archives by Queen Margrethe II.

==Later reign==
===Constitutional struggle===

The defeat of 1864 cast a shadow over Christian IX&#x27;s rule for many years and his attitude to the Danish case—probably without reason—was claimed to be half-hearted. This unpopularity was worsened as he sought unsuccessfully to prevent the spread of democracy throughout Denmark by supporting the authoritarian and conservative prime minister Estrup, whose rule 1875–94 was by many seen as a semi-dictatorship. However, he signed a treaty in 1874 that allowed Iceland, then a Danish possession, to have its own constitution, albeit one under Danish rule. In 1901, he reluctantly asked Johan Henrik Deuntzer to form a government and this resulted in the formation of the Cabinet of Deuntzer. The cabinet consisted of members of the Venstre Reform Party and was the first Danish government not to include the conservative party Højre, even though Højre never had a majority of the seats in the Folketing. This was the beginning of the Danish tradition of parliamentarism and clearly bettered his reputation for his last years.

Another reform occurred in 1866, when the Danish constitution was revised so that Denmark&#x27;s upper chamber would have more power than the lower. Social security also took a few steps forward during his reign. Old age pensions were introduced in 1891 and unemployment and family benefits were introduced in 1892.
===Last years===
In spite of the King&#x27;s initial unpopularity and the many years of political strife, where the king was in conflict with large parts of the population, his popularity recovered towards the end of his reign, and he became a national icon due to the length of his reign and the high standards of personal morality with which he was identified. The celebration of the golden wedding anniversary of King Christian and Queen Louise in 1892 thus became a great and authentic tribute from the people to the king and queen which contrasted profoundly with the sober marking of their silver wedding anniversary in 1867.

In 1904, the King became aware of the efforts of Einar Holbøll, a postal clerk in Denmark, who conceived the idea of selling Christmas seals at post offices across Denmark to raise badly needed funding to help those afflicted with tuberculosis, which was occurring in alarming proportions in Denmark. The King approved of Holbøll&#x27;s idea and subsequently the Danish post office produced the world&#x27;s first Christmas seal, which generated more than $40,000 in funding. The Christmas seal portrayed an image of his wife, Queen Louise.

===Death and succession===

Queen Louise died at age 81 on 29 September 1898 at Bernstorff Palace near Copenhagen. King Christian IX survived his wife by 7 years, and died peacefully of old age, at age 87, on 29 January 1906 at his residence, Christian IX&#x27;s Palace at Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen, after a reign of 42 years and 75 days. After lying in state at the chapel at Christiansborg Palace in Copenhagen, he was interred on 16 February 1906 beside Queen Louise in &quot;Christian IX&#x27;s Chapel&quot; in Roskilde Cathedral on the island of Zealand, the traditional burial site for Danish monarchs since the 15th century.

After his death, a competition was announced for a double sarcophagus for him and Queen Louise to be placed in &quot;Frederick V&#x27;s Chapel&quot;. The competition was won by the artist Jens Ferdinand Willumsen, but his proposal was deemed too controversial and was not accepted. Instead, two completely different artists were assigned the task, the Dano-Icelandic sculptor Edvard Eriksen and the Danish architect Hack Kampmann. They created a large sarcophagus in white marble flanked by three graceful sculptures symbolizing &quot;Remembrance&quot;, &quot;Love&quot; and &quot;Grief&quot;.

Upon King Christian IX&#x27;s death, Crown Prince Frederick ascended the throne at the age of 62 as King Frederick VIII.

==Legacy==

===&quot;Father-in-Law of Europe&quot;===
Christian&#x27;s family links with Europe&#x27;s royal families earned him the sobriquet &quot;the father-in-law of Europe&quot;. Four of Christian&#x27;s children sat on the thrones (either as monarchs or as consorts) of Denmark, Greece, the United Kingdom and Russia. His youngest son, Valdemar, was on 10 November 1886 elected as new Prince of Bulgaria by The 3rd Grand National Assembly of Bulgaria, but Christian IX refused to allow Prince Valdemar to receive the election.
The great dynastic success of the six children was to a great extent not attributable to Christian himself but the result of the ambitions of his wife Louise of Hesse-Kassel. An additional factor was that Denmark was not one of the Great Powers, so the other powers did not fear that the balance of power in Europe would be upset by a marriage of one of its royalty to another royal house.

Christian&#x27;s grandsons included Nicholas II of Russia, Constantine I of Greece, George V of the United Kingdom, Christian X of Denmark and Haakon VII of Norway.

Today, members of most of Europe&#x27;s reigning and ex-reigning royal families are direct descendants of Christian IX. Namely, six of the ten current hereditary European monarchs are descended from Christian: King Frederik X of Denmark, King Charles III of the United Kingdom, King Philippe of Belgium, King Harald V of Norway, King Felipe VI of Spain and Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg.

== Titles, styles, honours, and arms ==
=== Titles and styles ===
During his reign, the King&#x27;s full style was: &quot;His Majesty Christian IX, By the Grace of God, King of Denmark, of the Wends and of the Goths, Duke of Schleswig, Holstein, Stormarn, Dithmarschen, Lauenburg and Oldenburg.&quot;

===Honours===
King Christian IX Land in Greenland is named after him.

National orders and decorations
* Grand Cross of the Dannebrog, &quot;28 June 1840&quot;; Grand Commander in Diamonds, &quot;15 November 1863&quot;
* Knight of the Elephant, &quot;22 June 1843&quot;
* Cross of Honour of the Order of the Dannebrog

Foreign orders and decorations
Honorary military appointments
* Honorary General of the Swedish Army, &quot;1872&quot; (Sweden-Norway)

=== Arms ===

As Sovereign, Christian IX used the greater (royal) coat of arms of Denmark. The arms were changed in 1903, as Iceland from then was represented by a falcon rather than its traditional stockfish arms.
==Family==

===Issue===

===Ancestry===
== Notes ==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* The Danish Monarchy&#x27;s official site
* Christian IX at the website of the Royal Danish Collection at Amalienborg Palace




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="0" end="12" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="Christian IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="47" end="62" title="List of Danish monarchs" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q617703" start="149" end="166" title="List of dukes of Schleswig" label="Duke of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972785" start="168" end="176" title="List of dukes of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q313175" start="181" end="190" title="Saxe-Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q240302" start="210" end="277" title="Frederick William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Frederick William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="304" end="322" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="338" end="378" title="House of Glücksburg" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="403" end="421" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="499" end="518" title="Danish royal family" label="Danish royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142246" start="567" end="598" title="succession to the Danish throne" label="succession to the Danish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="722" end="732" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="775" end="811" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="862" end="893" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="962" end="975" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Danish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="1038" end="1056" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="1076" end="1094" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="King Frederick VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="1268" end="1282" title="List of Danish monarchs" label="Danish monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="1290" end="1309" title="House of Glücksburg" label="House of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="1378" end="1398" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1617" end="1640" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="2173" end="2182" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893057" start="2193" end="2216" title="father-in-law of Europe" label="father-in-law of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004037" start="2255" end="2265" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik X"/>
<link wikidata="Q155004" start="2272" end="2291" title="Philippe of Belgium" label="Philippe of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="2298" end="2316" title="Harald V" label="Harald V of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004" start="2329" end="2348" title="Henri, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Henri of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2355" end="2366" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="2399" end="2417" title="Felipe VI" label="Felipe VI of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q647987" start="2567" end="2581" title="Gottorf Castle" label="Gottorf Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q501661" start="2600" end="2609" title="Schleswig, Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="2617" end="2635" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="2651" end="2655" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q324802" start="2704" end="2738" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q240302" start="2765" end="2826" title="Friedrich Wilhelm, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Friedrich Wilhelm, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876689" start="2832" end="2872" title="Princess Louise Caroline of Hesse-Kassel" label="Princess Louise Caroline of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157781" start="2918" end="2955" title="Christian VIII of Denmark" label="Prince Christian Frederick of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="3005" end="3014" title="Godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q57845" start="3040" end="3071" title="Caroline Amalie of Augustenborg" label="Caroline Amalie of Augustenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q645631" start="3094" end="3106" title="Augustenborg, Denmark" label="Augustenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q324802" start="3303" end="3337" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="3367" end="3385" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154998" start="3418" end="3442" title="Christian III of Denmark" label="Christian III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q708265" start="3463" end="3518" title="John the Younger, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg" label="John the Younger, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63756" start="3535" end="3554" title="August Philipp, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Beck" label="Duke August Philipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="3632" end="3637" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3641" end="3650" title="Haus Beck" label="Haus Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="3654" end="3664" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3777" end="3785" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="3787" end="3793" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3798" end="3805" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213628" start="4051" end="4077" title="Prince Charles of Hesse-Kassel" label="Landgrave Charles of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q156187" start="4171" end="4187" title="Frederick V of Denmark" label="King Frederick V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805444" start="4214" end="4240" title="Princess Louise of Denmark (1750–1831)" label="Princess Louise of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="4309" end="4322" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="4327" end="4341" title="Governor" label="Royal Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="4360" end="4369" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="4374" end="4382" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154998" start="4469" end="4493" title="Christian III of Denmark" label="Christian III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="4517" end="4524" title="agnatic" label="agnatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q456669" start="4539" end="4557" title="Hedvig of Holstein" label="Hedvig of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q153940" start="4598" end="4620" title="Christian I of Denmark" label="Christian I of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q364431" start="4680" end="4700" title="Adolf of Schauenburg" label="Adolf of Schauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="4833" end="4851" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="4965" end="4991" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q647987" start="5233" end="5247" title="Gottorf Castle" label="Gottorf Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="5308" end="5317" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="5322" end="5330" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5354" end="5383" title="Anna Karoline af Nassau-Saarbrücken" label="dowager duchess of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5394" end="5417" title="Frederick Henry William, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Frederick Henry William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394834" start="5440" end="5504" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg (elder line)" label="elder line of the house Schleswig-Holstein-Sønderborg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q829299" start="5542" end="5559" title="Glücksburg Castle" label="Glücksburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q645678" start="5587" end="5602" title="Flensburg Fjord" label="Flensburg Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798" start="5625" end="5634" title="Flensburg" label="Flensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q494617" start="5716" end="5726" title="Glücksburg" label="Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155002" start="5750" end="5778" title="Frederick VI of Denmark" label="King Frederick VI of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="5845" end="5885" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="5903" end="5925" title="House of Glücksburg" label="the younger Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q829299" start="5967" end="5984" title="Glücksburg Castle" label="Glücksburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217379" start="6013" end="6019" title="child raising" label="raised"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6553" end="6598" title="William of Hesse-Philippsthal-Barchfeld (1786-1834)" label="Prince William of Hesse-Philippstal-Barchfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q157509" start="6635" end="6649" title="legal guardian" label="legal guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="6754" end="6767" title="naval officer" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="6945" end="6955" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="6970" end="6982" title="army officer" label="army officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="7307" end="7313" title="cadets" label="cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q57635" start="7389" end="7400" title="Marie of Hesse-Kassel" label="Queen Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195350" start="7533" end="7556" title="Karl, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Duke Karl of Glücksborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q265249" start="7611" end="7636" title="Princess Vilhelmine Marie of Denmark" label="Princess Vilhelmine Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q214802" start="7719" end="7728" title="confirmation (Lutheran Church)" label="confirmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428195" start="7736" end="7751" title="Garrison Church, Copenhagen" label="Garrison Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q640375" start="7845" end="7856" title="rittmeister" label="rittmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374294" start="7864" end="7882" title="Royal Horse Guards (Denmark)" label="Royal Horse Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374295" start="7910" end="7937" title="Royal Horse Guards Barracks (Copenhagen)" label="Royal Horse Guards Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432326" start="7941" end="7961" title="Frederiksholms Kanal" label="Frederiksholms Kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504988" start="8082" end="8095" title="Yellow Palace, Copenhagen" label="Yellow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="8113" end="8123" title="town house" label="town house"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432062" start="8130" end="8140" title="Amaliegade" label="Amaliegade"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="8170" end="8181" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q723890" start="8229" end="8248" title="Danish royal family" label="Danish royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045356" start="8268" end="8283" title="Frederiksstaden" label="Frederiksstaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="8295" end="8305" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206" start="8386" end="8404" title="constitutional law" label="constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744" start="8438" end="8478" title="Prince Frederick William of Hesse-Kassel" label="Prince Frederick William of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="8486" end="8504" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q157781" start="8669" end="8688" title="Christian VIII of Denmark" label="King Christian VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="8772" end="8778" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="8930" end="8961" title="Frederick William IV of Prussia" label="Frederick William IV of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="8974" end="8987" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637808" start="9123" end="9151" title="coronation of Queen Victoria" label="coronation of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="9155" end="9172" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="9367" end="9405" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="9552" end="9567" title="Edward VII" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="9725" end="9747" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60709" start="9773" end="9803" title="Prince William of Hesse-Kassel" label="Prince William of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157781" start="9892" end="9917" title="Christian VIII of Denmark" label="Christian VIII of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q232202" start="9932" end="9961" title="Princess Charlotte of Denmark" label="Princess Charlotte of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q156187" start="10123" end="10145" title="Frederick V of Denmark" label="Frederick V of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q454473" start="10160" end="10188" title="Frederick II of Hesse-Kassel" label="Frederick II of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="10303" end="10331" title="Frederick VIII&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Frederick VIII&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="10335" end="10346" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q220161" start="10379" end="10390" title="honeymoon" label="bridal tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="10394" end="10398" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="10406" end="10423" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Duchy of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195350" start="10483" end="10506" title="Karl, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Duke Karl of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q265249" start="10551" end="10569" title="Princess Vilhelmine Marie of Denmark" label="Duchess Vilhelmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504988" start="10751" end="10764" title="Yellow Palace, Copenhagen" label="Yellow Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q152756" start="10831" end="10847" title="Frederick VIII of Denmark" label="Prince Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="10857" end="10875" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Princess Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142" start="10885" end="10899" title="George I of Greece" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="10909" end="10924" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Princess Dagmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217504" start="10937" end="10951" title="Princess Thyra of Denmark" label="Princess Thyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632608" start="11168" end="11185" title="succession crisis" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="11293" end="11311" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="11400" end="11422" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="Crown Prince Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607558" start="11495" end="11511" title="Ferdinand, Hereditary Prince of Denmark" label="Prince Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="11878" end="11887" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="11889" end="11897" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q313175" start="11902" end="11916" title="Duchy of Saxe-Lauenburg" label="Saxe-Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700739" start="12096" end="12105" title="King&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Lex Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="12149" end="12159" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="12176" end="12194" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q157812" start="12210" end="12223" title="Frederick III of Denmark" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="12277" end="12286" title="Salic law" label="Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q223375" start="12325" end="12344" title="agnatic descent" label="agnatic descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="12381" end="12399" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="12451" end="12459" title="elective monarchy" label="elective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607558" start="12586" end="12602" title="Ferdinand, Hereditary Prince of Denmark" label="Prince Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="12648" end="12658" title="Semi-Salic" label="Semi-Salic"/>
<link wikidata="Q478059" start="13700" end="13714" title="Treaty of Ribe" label="Treaty of Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="13986" end="13997" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="14054" end="14068" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="14105" end="14113" title="homeland" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="14223" end="14237" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q660018" start="14365" end="14384" title="national liberalism" label="national liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="14728" end="14746" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="14802" end="14806" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="14874" end="14890" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="14892" end="14906" title="Linguistically" label="Linguistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224" start="14936" end="14949" title="North Frisian language" label="North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="14961" end="14971" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314" start="15236" end="15247" title="Eider (river)" label="Eider river"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="15527" end="15547" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="16185" end="16203" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q456669" start="16498" end="16516" title="Hedvig of Holstein" label="Hedvig of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q690037" start="16689" end="16731" title="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg" label="Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61097" start="16868" end="16939" title="Christian August II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg" label="Christian August II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="16965" end="16969" title="Order of succession" label="heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="17002" end="17011" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="17016" end="17024" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q232202" start="17234" end="17270" title="Princess Louise Charlotte of Denmark" label="Princess Louise Charlotte of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057658" start="17303" end="17315" title="cadet branch" label="cadet branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q689115" start="17323" end="17337" title="House of Hesse" label="House of Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010331" start="17593" end="17612" title="Caroline of Denmark" label="Caroline of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q155002" start="17673" end="17685" title="Frederick VI of Denmark" label="Frederick VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q265249" start="17726" end="17753" title="Vilhelmine Marie of Denmark" label="Vilhelmine Marie of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q700644" start="17927" end="17952" title="Frederick VIII of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Frederick of Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155616" start="18071" end="18090" title="House of Glücksburg" label="House of Glücksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156187" start="18272" end="18294" title="Frederick V of Denmark" label="Frederick V of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136035" start="19787" end="19802" title="London Protocol (1852)" label="London Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="19864" end="19871" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="19945" end="19961" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="20156" end="20178" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="20732" end="20745" title="Danish throne" label="Danish throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519447" start="20901" end="20906" title="Royal and noble styles" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623587" start="20916" end="20924" title="Highness" label="Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443597" start="21117" end="21134" title="Bernstorff Palace" label="Bernstorff Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q310533" start="21321" end="21336" title="Prince Valdemar of Denmark" label="Prince Valdemar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="21398" end="21405" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252328" start="21471" end="21485" title="Royal Highness" label="Royal Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="22051" end="22061" title="morganatic" label="morganatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q268413" start="22127" end="22142" title="Countess Danner" label="Countess Danner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180187" start="22398" end="22420" title="National Liberal Party (Denmark)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q947789" start="22465" end="22493" title="Carl Christoffer Georg Andræ" label="Carl Christoffer Georg Andræ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359613" start="22565" end="22581" title="Council of State (Denmark)" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="22703" end="22721" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Princess Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="22767" end="22777" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198995" start="22858" end="22878" title="King of the Hellenes" label="King of the Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840097" start="22896" end="22908" title="Monarchy of Greece" label="Greek throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q921465" start="23317" end="23327" title="Dannevirke" label="Dannevirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q829299" start="23398" end="23415" title="Glücksburg Castle" label="Glücksburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207092" start="23428" end="23438" title="erysipelas" label="erysipelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q155594" start="23608" end="23626" title="House of Oldenburg" label="House of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="23777" end="23798" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q795477" start="23806" end="23823" title="Council President (Denmark)" label="Council President"/>
<link wikidata="Q725118" start="23824" end="23843" title="Carl Christian Hall" label="Carl Christian Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q545482" start="23950" end="24012" title="Schleswig-Holstein Question" label="possession and status of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q700644" start="24040" end="24102" title="Frederick VIII of Schleswig and Holstein" label="Prince Frederick of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q138340" start="24144" end="24150" title="Kaiser" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="24151" end="24172" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="24202" end="24212" title="Order of succession" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q94941" start="24224" end="24237" title="Frederick VII of Denmark" label="Frederick VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q700644" start="24261" end="24303" title="Frederick VIII of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Frederick VIII, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="24431" end="24449" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="24515" end="24519" title="Line of Succession" label="heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="24552" end="24561" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="24566" end="24574" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q685683" start="24642" end="24664" title="First War of Schleswig" label="First War of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q154981" start="24966" end="24986" title="Second Schleswig War" label="Second Schleswig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13177385" start="25049" end="25065" title="London Conference of 1864" label="Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="25357" end="25364" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="25523" end="25543" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="25633" end="25641" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25840" end="25852" title="Dommedag Als" label="Dommedag Als"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439557" start="25862" end="25877" title="Tom Buk-Swienty" label="Tom Buk-Swienty"/>
<link wikidata="Q102139" start="25936" end="25948" title="Margrethe II" label="Margrethe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343877" start="26345" end="26351" title="Estrup" label="Estrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q572189" start="26587" end="26608" title="Johan Henrik Deuntzer" label="Johan Henrik Deuntzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430325" start="26672" end="26691" title="Cabinet of Deuntzer" label="Cabinet of Deuntzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217321" start="26733" end="26753" title="Venstre Reform Party" label="Venstre Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252927" start="26828" end="26833" title="Højre" label="Højre"/>
<link wikidata="Q209151" start="26894" end="26903" title="Folketing" label="Folketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="26955" end="26970" title="parliamentarism" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136848" start="27730" end="27756" title="golden wedding anniversary" label="golden wedding anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136848" start="27940" end="27966" title="silver wedding anniversary" label="silver wedding anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049449" start="28026" end="28039" title="Einar Holbøll" label="Einar Holbøll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138174" start="28102" end="28117" title="Christmas seals" label="Christmas seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="28208" end="28220" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="28504" end="28516" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Queen Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443597" start="28599" end="28616" title="Bernstorff Palace" label="Bernstorff Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="28622" end="28632" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="28762" end="28788" title="Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="28792" end="28810" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157233" start="28871" end="28885" title="lying in state" label="lying in state"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="28893" end="28899" title="Christiansborg Palace Chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="28903" end="28924" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29005" end="29031" title="Roskilde Cathedral#Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="Christian IX&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209705" start="29041" end="29059" title="Roskilde Cathedral" label="Roskilde Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25535" start="29077" end="29084" title="Zealand" label="Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48198" start="29118" end="29133" title="List of Danish monarchs" label="Danish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="29217" end="29228" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29276" end="29301" title="Roskilde Cathedral#Frederick V&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="Frederick V&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q924459" start="29347" end="29371" title="Jens Ferdinand Willumsen" label="Jens Ferdinand Willumsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q525819" start="29535" end="29549" title="Edvard Eriksen" label="Edvard Eriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316607" start="29575" end="29588" title="Hack Kampmann" label="Hack Kampmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="29632" end="29638" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q152756" start="29859" end="29873" title="Frederick VIII of Denmark" label="Frederick VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q59577332" start="30009" end="30018" title="sobriquet" label="sobriquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893057" start="30029" end="30052" title="father-in-law of Europe" label="father-in-law of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="30161" end="30167" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="30173" end="30187" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="30192" end="30198" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30289" end="30332" title="National Assembly (Bulgaria)#Grand National Assembly" label="The 3rd Grand National Assembly of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="30560" end="30582" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Louise of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="30641" end="30653" title="Great Powers" label="Great Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="30697" end="30713" title="Balance of power (international relations)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="30836" end="30857" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="30859" end="30882" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="Constantine I of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="30884" end="30892" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="30916" end="30938" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="30943" end="30963" title="Haakon VII" label="Haakon VII of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024285" start="31057" end="31084" title="Royal descendants of Queen Victoria and of King Christian IX" label="descendants of Christian IX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31117" end="31145" title="Monarchies in Europe#Table of monarchies in Europe" label="hereditary European monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004037" start="31181" end="31202" title="Frederik X" label="Frederik X of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="31209" end="31220" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q155004" start="31249" end="31268" title="Philippe of Belgium" label="Philippe of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q57287" start="31275" end="31293" title="Harald V" label="Harald V of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q191045" start="31300" end="31318" title="Felipe VI" label="Felipe VI of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004" start="31334" end="31353" title="Henri, Grand Duke of Luxembourg" label="Henri of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="31440" end="31466" title="Style of the Danish sovereign" label="the King&amp;#x27;s full style"/>
<link wikidata="Q669458" start="31478" end="31489" title="Majesty" label="His Majesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111770" start="31504" end="31523" title="By the Grace of God" label="By the Grace of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="31525" end="31540" title="King of Denmark" label="King of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607898" start="31545" end="31554" title="King of the Wends" label="the Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930902" start="31562" end="31571" title="King of the Goths" label="the Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q617703" start="31573" end="31590" title="Duke of Schleswig" label="Duke of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="31592" end="31600" title="Duke of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q695919" start="31602" end="31610" title="Duke of Stormarn" label="Stormarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947" start="31612" end="31624" title="Duke of Dithmarschen" label="Dithmarschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313049" start="31626" end="31635" title="Duke of Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q694989" start="31640" end="31649" title="Duke of Oldenburg" label="Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515152" start="31672" end="31694" title="King Christian IX Land" label="King Christian IX Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="31763" end="31791" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Grand Cross of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="31879" end="31901" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Knight of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564349" start="31930" end="31975" title="Cross of Honour of the Order of the Dannebrog" label="Cross of Honour of the Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="32065" end="32077" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="32097" end="32110" title="Sweden-Norway" label="Sweden-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179611" start="32179" end="32202" title="coat of arms of Denmark" label="coat of arms of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="32574" end="32592" title="Amalienborg Palace" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85668" wikidata="Q3556290" url="?curid=85668" title="Vervactor">
<text>In Roman mythology, Vervactor was the deity of ploughing fallow land. He was one of the 12 helper gods of Ceres. His name was invoked during the Cerealia, along with the other 11 helper gods of Ceres.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556290" start="20" end="29" title="Vervactor" label="Vervactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158426" start="38" end="43" title="God (male deity)" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161157" start="57" end="63" title="fallow" label="fallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="106" end="111" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85669" wikidata="Q7921647" url="?curid=85669" title="Verminus">
<text>In Roman mythology, Verminus was the Roman god who protected cattle from disease. The god may have been inherited from the Indigetes, whom the Romans conquered in 218 BC during the Roman conquest of Hispania. An altar dedicated by consul (or duovir) Aulus Postumius Albinus in 151 BC to Verminus was discovered in 1876, and was housed in the museum of the Antiquarium Comunale in Rome.

A 2nd century inscription dedicated to the god has been considered to be a reaction to increased worm infections among humans. However, Spanish veterinary scientist M. Cordero del Campillo has concluded that it was due to an epidemic infectious disease affecting both humans and animals.

An altar to Verminus was discovered on Viminal Hill in Rome.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921647" start="20" end="28" title="Verminus" label="Verminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404442" start="123" end="132" title="Indigetes" label="Indigetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422375" start="181" end="207" title="Roman conquest of Hispania" label="Roman conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q443983" start="250" end="273" title="Aulus Postumius Albinus (consul 151 BC)" label="Aulus Postumius Albinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216085" start="715" end="727" title="Viminal Hill" label="Viminal Hill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85670" wikidata="Q1093874" url="?curid=85670" title="Vica Pota">
<text>In ancient Roman religion, Vica Pota was a goddess whose shrine &quot;(aedes)&quot; was located at the foot of the Velian Hill, on the site of the &quot;domus&quot; of Publius Valerius Publicola. This location would place the temple on the same side of the Velia as the Forum and perhaps not far from the Regia. Cicero explains her name as deriving from &quot;vincendi atque potiundi&quot;, &quot;conquering and gaining mastery.&quot;
In the &quot;Apocolocyntosis&quot;, Vica Pota is the mother of Diespiter; although usually identified with Jupiter, Diespiter is here treated as a separate deity, and in the view of Arthur Bernard Cook should perhaps be regarded as the chthonic Dispater. The festival of Vica Pota was January 5.

Asconius identifies her with Victoria, but she is probably an earlier Roman or Italic form of victory goddess that predated Victoria and the influence of Greek Nike; Vica Pota was thus the older equivalent of Victoria but probably not a personification of victory as such. In a conjecture not widely accepted, Ludwig Preller thought that Vica Pota might be identified with the Etruscan divine figure Lasa Vecu.

==See also==
* Vacuna, sometimes also identified as a goddess of victory

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="3" end="25" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093874" start="27" end="36" title="Vica Pota" label="Vica Pota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71" end="76" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#aedes" label="aedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q967948" start="115" end="126" title="Velian Hill" label="Velian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q782970" start="153" end="158" title="domus" label="domus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318726" start="168" end="194" title="Publius Valerius Publicola" label="Publius Valerius Publicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="270" end="275" title="Roman Forum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q786489" start="305" end="310" title="Regia" label="Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="312" end="318" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q242030" start="448" end="463" title="The Pumpkinification of Claudius" label="Apocolocyntosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="542" end="549" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797985" start="617" end="636" title="Arthur Bernard Cook" label="Arthur Bernard Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="671" end="679" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228338" start="680" end="688" title="Dispater" label="Dispater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367629" start="694" end="702" title="Roman festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q444285" start="732" end="740" title="Asconius" label="Asconius"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="761" end="769" title="Victoria (goddess)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q108810" start="811" end="817" title="Ancient peoples of Italy" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165023" start="892" end="896" title="Nike (mythology)" label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="969" end="984" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q215066" start="1042" end="1056" title="Ludwig Preller" label="Ludwig Preller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="1109" end="1131" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan divine figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887850" start="1159" end="1165" title="Vacuna" label="Vacuna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85673" wikidata="Q582177" url="?curid=85673" title="Virtus (deity)">
<text>In ancient Roman religion, Virtus () was the deity of bravery and military strength, the personification of the Roman virtue of virtus. The Greek equivalent deity was Arete. The deity was often associated with the Roman god Honos (personification of honour) and was often honoured together with him, such as in the Temple of Virtus and Honos at the Porta Capena in Rome. It was after the conquest of Syracuse in 205 that the Virtus portion of the temple was added, and in such a way that one had to enter the temple of Virtus before Honos, symbolizing that honor cannot be obtained without military success.

The deity was represented in a variety of ways, for example, on the coins of Tetricus, they could appear as a matron, an old man, or a young man, with a javelin, battle helmet, or only clothed in a cape. Within the realm of funerary reliefs Virtus is never shown without a male companion. Often their presence within this realm of art is to complement and provide assistance to the protagonist of the relief during a scene of intense masculinity or bravery.

== Hercules ==
Virtus is most commonly known in the story of Hercules. Hercules finds himself at a crossroads, where has to choose between Virtus and Voluptas, essentially vice and virtue. Hercules has to choose between a life of ease and glutton or between a life of valor and strength. Hercules eventually chooses Virtus. 

==Modern era==
In the United States in 1776, Virtus was made the central figure in the Seal of Virginia and the subsequent state flag, which features the seal. The Virginia four-dollar note, a Continental currency, had a similar Virtus pictured on its obverse.

==See also==
*Hercules at the crossroads

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="3" end="25" title="ancient Roman religion" label="ancient Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q582177" start="27" end="33" title="Virtus (deity)" label="Virtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935246" start="128" end="134" title="virtus (virtue)" label="virtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="140" end="145" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="167" end="172" title="Arete (moral virtue)#Personification" label="Arete"/>
<link wikidata="Q290298" start="224" end="229" title="Honos" label="Honos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16612729" start="315" end="341" title="Temple of Virtus and Honos" label="Temple of Virtus and Honos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632777" start="349" end="361" title="Porta Capena" label="Porta Capena"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="365" end="369" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q312672" start="686" end="694" title="Tetricus I" label="Tetricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757641" start="762" end="769" title="javelin" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1416" end="1429" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q84070380" start="1481" end="1497" title="Seal of Virginia" label="Seal of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84070380" start="1517" end="1527" title="Flag of Virginia" label="state flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1558" end="1566" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029329" start="1587" end="1607" title="Continental (currency)" label="Continental currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607766" start="1670" end="1696" title="Hercules at the crossroads" label="Hercules at the crossroads"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85674" wikidata="Q109699896" url="?curid=85674" title="Vitumnus">
<text>Vitumnus is a genus of assassin bugs (family Reduviidae), in the subfamily Harpactorinae.

==Species==
* &quot;Vitumnus leoninus&quot; 
* &quot;Vitumnus oculatus&quot; 
* &quot;Vitumnus scenicus&quot; 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="14" end="19" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q768510" start="23" end="35" title="assassin bug" label="assassin bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q673973" start="75" end="88" title="Harpactorinae" label="Harpactorinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111" end="128" title="Vitumnus leoninus" label="Vitumnus leoninus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144" end="161" title="Vitumnus oculatus" label="Vitumnus oculatus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="177" end="194" title="Vitumnus scenicus" label="Vitumnus scenicus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85676" wikidata="Q3545810" url="?curid=85676" title="Veritas">
<text>In Roman mythology, Veritas (), meaning Truth, is the Goddess of Truth, a daughter of Saturn (called Cronus by the Greeks, the Titan of Time, perhaps first by Plutarch) and the mother of Virtus. She is also sometimes considered the daughter of Jupiter (called Zeus by the Greeks), or a creation of Prometheus. The elusive goddess is said to have hidden in the bottom of a holy well. She is depicted both as a virgin dressed in white and as the &quot;naked truth&quot; (&quot;nuda veritas&quot;) holding a hand mirror. The eqivalent Greek goddess is Aletheia (Ancient Greek: ).

&quot;Veritas&quot; was the Roman virtue of truthfulness, which was considered one of the main virtues any good Roman should possess. The German philosopher Martin Heidegger argues that the truth represented by &quot;aletheia&quot; (which essentially means &quot;unconcealment&quot;) is different from that represented by &quot;veritas&quot;, which is linked to a Roman understanding of rightness and finally to a Nietzschean sense of justice and a will to power.

In Western culture, the word may also serve as a motto.

==Mottos==
This Latin word &quot;veritas&quot; now appears in the mottos of many colleges, universities and other organizations. 
It is typically capitalized in mottoes (as &quot;Veritas&quot;) for being an ideal like Truth, Kindness and Beauty. 

&quot;Veritas&quot; is the motto of:
* Harvard University
* Hutchesons&#x27; Grammar School
* The University of Western Ontario
* Drake University
* Knox College (Illinois)
* Springfield Convent of the Holy Rosary (South Africa)
* Bilkent University
* the University of California - Hastings College of the Law
* the Dominican Order of the Roman Catholic Church
** Providence College and Molloy College, run by the Dominicans
* the Naval Criminal Investigative Service
* Loyola College, Ibadan

Additionally, the word appears in mottoes that are phrases or lists, e.g.:
* &quot;Honor et Veritas&quot;: the Buckley School of the City of New York
* &quot;Veritas, Probitas, Iustitia&quot;: the University of Indonesia
* &quot;Veritas Nobis Lumen&quot;: the University of Cape Coast in Ghana
* &quot;Artes, Scientia, Veritas&quot;: the University of Michigan
* &quot;Veritas vos liberabit&quot; (&quot;The Truth Will Set You Free&quot;): The Johns Hopkins University; and St Thomas&#x27; College (Autonomous), Thrissur, the first Catholic college in Kerala
* &quot;Veritas Liberabit Vos&quot;: Doshisha University in Kyoto, Japan
* &quot;Verbum Tuum Veritas&quot; (&quot;Your Word is Truth&quot;): Monkton Combe School.
* &quot;Lux et Veritas&quot; (&quot;Light and Truth&quot;): Indiana University and Yale University.
* &quot;Vox Veritas Vita&quot; (&quot;Speak the Truth as a way of Life&quot;): California State University
* &quot;Veritas Curat&quot; (&quot;Truth Cures&quot;): the Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, a medical school in Puducherry, India. 
* &quot;Veritas Lux Mea&quot; (&quot;Truth is my light&quot;): in the logo of Seoul National University, Korea
* &quot;Veritas, Unitas, Caritas&quot; (&quot;Truth, Unity, Love&quot;): Villanova University
* &quot;Gratiae veritas naturae&quot;: Uppsala University in Sweden
* &quot;Lux et Veritas Floreant&quot; (&quot;Let Light and Truth Flourish&quot;): The University of Winnipeg

Caldwell College in Caldwell, New Jersey issues a &quot;Veritas Award&quot; each year in honor of the Dominican Sisters who founded and administer the college.

Howard University, in Washington, D.C., goes by the motto &quot;Veritas et Utilitas&quot;, translated to &quot;Truth and Service&quot;, which is also a motto &quot;Truth-Service&quot; of Payap University, Thailand.

The American communications company Verizon has its name derive from the combination of the words &quot;&quot; and horizon - chosen from 8,500 candidates with $300 million spent on marketing the new brand.

==See also==
* In vino veritas
* John 8:32
* John 18:38
* Truth Coming Out of Her Well
* Urim and Thummim
* 490 Veritas
* Project Veritas

==Notes==
==External links==

* History of Truth: The Latin &quot;Veritas&quot;
* Aletheia and Other Terms for Truth in Ancient Greek—Origins and developments of the concept of Truth (From the Greek &quot;Aletheia&quot; to the Latin &quot;Veritas&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545810" start="20" end="27" title="Veritas" label="Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="54" end="61" title="Goddess" label="Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="65" end="70" title="Truth" label="Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134388" start="86" end="92" title="Saturn (mythology)" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="101" end="107" title="Cronus" label="Cronus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45713" start="127" end="132" title="Titan (mythology)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="159" end="167" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q582177" start="187" end="193" title="Virtus (deity)" label="Virtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="244" end="251" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="260" end="264" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="298" end="308" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371047" start="372" end="381" title="holy well" label="holy well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840730" start="549" end="557" title="Aletheia" label="Aletheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="559" end="572" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="606" end="618" title="Roman virtue" label="Roman virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q337349" start="622" end="634" title="Honesty" label="truthfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="735" end="751" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q583998" start="1027" end="1040" title="will to power" label="will to power"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="1046" end="1061" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="1092" end="1097" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1116" end="1121" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="1166" end="1171" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="1181" end="1188" title="college" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="1191" end="1203" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1387" end="1405" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950590" start="1408" end="1439" title="Hutchesons&amp;#x27; Grammar School" label="Hutchesons&amp;#x27; Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="1442" end="1475" title="The University of Western Ontario" label="The University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305629" start="1478" end="1494" title="Drake University" label="Drake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q669442" start="1497" end="1520" title="Knox College (Illinois)" label="Knox College (Illinois)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1523" end="1576" title="Springfield Convent of the Holy Rosary (South Africa)" label="Springfield Convent of the Holy Rosary (South Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q861904" start="1579" end="1597" title="Bilkent University" label="Bilkent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="1665" end="1680" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1688" end="1709" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439629" start="1713" end="1731" title="Providence College" label="Providence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896481" start="1736" end="1750" title="Molloy College" label="Molloy College"/>
<link wikidata="Q765854" start="1780" end="1816" title="Naval Criminal Investigative Service" label="Naval Criminal Investigative Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q30647024" start="1819" end="1841" title="Loyola College, Ibadan" label="Loyola College, Ibadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983369" start="1954" end="1968" title="Buckley School (New York City)" label="Buckley School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1976" end="1992" title="New York City" label="City of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q534515" start="2040" end="2063" title="University of Indonesia" label="University of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746079" start="2103" end="2127" title="University of Cape Coast" label="University of Cape Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2131" end="2136" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="2181" end="2203" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921396" start="2212" end="2233" title="Veritas vos liberabit" label="Veritas vos liberabit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="2287" end="2311" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591939" start="2317" end="2363" title="St. Thomas College, Thrissur" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27; College (Autonomous), Thrissur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921396" start="2410" end="2431" title="Veritas vos liberabit" label="Veritas Liberabit Vos"/>
<link wikidata="Q921088" start="2439" end="2458" title="Doshisha University" label="Doshisha University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2462" end="2467" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2469" end="2474" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901005" start="2543" end="2563" title="Monkton Combe School" label="Monkton Combe School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="2625" end="2643" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2648" end="2663" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q815352" start="2744" end="2771" title="California State University" label="California State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260662" start="2831" end="2898" title="JIPMER" label="Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q639421" start="2920" end="2930" title="Pondicherry" label="Puducherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2932" end="2937" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q39913" start="3018" end="3043" title="Seoul National University" label="Seoul National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="3124" end="3144" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="3184" end="3202" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q472167" start="3295" end="3321" title="The University of Winnipeg" label="The University of Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019140" start="3323" end="3339" title="Caldwell College" label="Caldwell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q717516" start="3343" end="3363" title="Caldwell, New Jersey" label="Caldwell, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="3425" end="3442" title="Dominican Sisters" label="Dominican Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="3484" end="3501" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3506" end="3522" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1309558" start="3671" end="3687" title="Payap University" label="Payap University"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="3689" end="3697" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="3736" end="3743" title="Verizon Communications" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="3815" end="3822" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637711" start="3922" end="3937" title="In vino veritas" label="In vino veritas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3940" end="3949" title="John 8:32" label="John 8:32"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3952" end="3962" title="John 18:38" label="John 18:38"/>
<link wikidata="Q17275221" start="3965" end="3993" title="Truth Coming Out of Her Well" label="Truth Coming Out of Her Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130380" start="3996" end="4012" title="Urim and Thummim" label="Urim and Thummim"/>
<link wikidata="Q154819" start="4015" end="4026" title="490 Veritas" label="490 Veritas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939946" start="4029" end="4044" title="Project Veritas" label="Project Veritas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85679" wikidata="Q1928517" url="?curid=85679" title="Volturnus">
<text>In Roman mythology, Volturnus was a god of the Tiber, and may have been the god of all rivers. He had his own minor flamen, a high priest, the &quot;Flamen Volturnalis&quot;. His festival, &quot;Volturnalia&quot;, was held on August 27.

==Culture==
Although he was originally an Etruscan god, his worship spread to Rome, and appears to have replaced or coincided with the Roman god Tiber.

==History==
Although originally popular enough to receive his own &quot;Flamen&quot;, he vanished into obscurity around the time of the late Roman Republic.

==Appearance==
Volturnus was a man, who had long blonde hair.

==Family==
Volturnus had at least two descendants, a daughter named Juturna, a grandchild named Fons. Fons was born of a love affair between Juturna and Janus, and was the god of spring water.

==Honours==
Volturnus Lake in Antarctica is named after the deity.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="3" end="18" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928517" start="20" end="29" title="Volturnus" label="Volturnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="36" end="39" title="god" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="47" end="52" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q585305" start="116" end="122" title="flamen" label="flamen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="149" end="167" title="Flamen Volturnalis" label="Flamen Volturnalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="179" end="187" title="festival" label="festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758552" start="195" end="206" title="Volturnalia" label="Volturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="280" end="288" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q139448" start="680" end="687" title="Juturna" label="Juturna"/>
<link wikidata="Q582918" start="708" end="712" title="Fontus" label="Fons"/>
<link wikidata="Q167685" start="765" end="770" title="Janus" label="Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95832803" start="818" end="832" title="Volturnus Lake" label="Volturnus Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="836" end="846" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85681" wikidata="Q11884379" url="?curid=85681" title="Etruscan religion">
<text>Etruscan religion comprises a set of stories, beliefs, and religious practices of the Etruscan civilization, heavily influenced by the mythology of ancient Greece, and sharing similarities with concurrent Roman mythology and religion. As the Etruscan civilization was gradually assimilated into the Roman Republic from the 4th century BC, the Etruscan religion and mythology were partially incorporated into ancient Roman culture, following the Roman tendency to absorb some of the local gods and customs of conquered lands. The first attestations of an Etruscan religion can be traced back to the Villanovan culture.

==History==
===Greek influence===
Greek traders brought their religion and hero figures with them to the coastal areas of the central Mediterranean. Odysseus, Menelaus and Diomedes from the Homeric tradition were recast in tales of the distant past that had them roaming the lands West of Greece. In Greek tradition, Heracles wandered these western areas, doing away with monsters and brigands, and bringing civilization to the inhabitants. Legends of his prowess with women became the source of tales about his many offspring conceived with prominent local women, though his role as a wanderer meant that Heracles moved on after securing the locations chosen to be settled by his followers, rather than fulfilling a typical founder role. Over time, Odysseus also assumed a similar role for the Etruscans as the heroic leader who led the Etruscans to settle the lands they inhabited.

Claims that the sons of Odysseus had once ruled over the Etruscan people date to at least the mid-6th century BC. Lycophron and Theopompus link Odysseus to Cortona (where he was called &quot;Nanos&quot;). In Italy during this era it could give non-Greek ethnic groups an advantage over rival ethnic groups to link their origins to a Greek hero figure. These legendary heroic figures became instrumental in establishing the legitimacy of Greek claims to the newly settled lands, depicting the Greek presence there as reaching back into antiquity.

===Roman conquest===
After the Etruscan defeat in the Roman–Etruscan Wars (264 BCE), the remaining Etruscan culture began to be assimilated into the Roman. The Roman Senate adopted key elements of the Etruscan religion, which were perpetuated by haruspices and noble Roman families who claimed Etruscan descent, long after the general population of Etruria had forgotten the language. In the last years of the Roman Republic the religion began to fall out of favor and was satirized by such notable public figures as Marcus Tullius Cicero. The Julio-Claudians, especially Claudius, whose first wife, Plautia Urgulanilla, claimed an Etruscan descent, maintained a knowledge of the language and religion for a short time longer, but this practice soon ceased. A number of canonical works in the Etruscan language survived until the middle of the first millennium AD, but were destroyed by the ravages of time, including occasional catastrophic fires, and by decree of the Roman Senate.

===Sources===
The mythology is evidenced by a number of sources in different media, for example representations on large numbers of pottery items, inscriptions and engraved scenes on the Praenestine &quot;cistae&quot; (ornate boxes; see under Etruscan language) and on &quot;specula&quot; (ornate hand mirrors). Currently some two dozen fascicles of the &quot;Corpus Speculorum Etruscorum&quot; have been published. Specifically Etruscan mythological and cult figures appear in the &quot;Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae&quot;. Etruscan inscriptions have recently been given a more authoritative presentation by Helmut Rix, &quot;Etruskische Texte&quot;.

==Seers and divinations==
The Etruscans believed their religion had been revealed to them by seers, the two main ones being Tages, a childlike figure born from tilled land who was immediately gifted with prescience, and Vegoia, a female figure.

The Etruscans believed in intimate contact with divinity. They did nothing without proper consultation with the gods and signs from them. These practices were taken over in total by the Romans.

===&quot;Etrusca Disciplina&quot;===
The Etruscan scriptures were a corpus of texts termed the &quot;Etrusca Disciplina&quot;. This name appears in Valerius Maximus, and Marcus Tullius Cicero refers to a &quot;disciplina&quot; in his writings on the subject.

Massimo Pallottino summarizes the scriptures known from other sources to have once existed. The revelations of the prophet Tages (, &quot;Tagetic Books&quot;) included the theory and rules of divination from animal entrails (, &quot;Haruspical Books&quot;) and discussion of the Etruscan afterlife and its attendant rituals (, &quot;Acherontic Books&quot;). The revelations of the prophetess Vegoia (, &quot;Vegoic Books&quot;) included the theory and rules of divination from thunder (brontoscopy) and lightning strikes (, &quot;Fulgural Books&quot;) and discussion of religious rituals. Books on rituals () included Tages&#x27;s Acherontic Books as well as other books on omens and prodigies () and books on fate () that detailed the religiously proper ways to found cities, erect shrines, drain fields, formulate laws, and measure space and time.

The Etrusca Disciplina was mainly a set of rules for the conduct of all sorts of divination; Pallottino calls it a religious and political &quot;constitution&quot;: it does not dictate what laws shall be made or how humans are to behave, but rather elaborates rules for asking the gods these questions and receiving answers.

===Priests and officials===

Divinatory inquiries according to discipline were conducted by priests whom the Romans called haruspices or sacerdotes; Tarquinii had a college of 60 of them. The Etruscans, as evidenced by the inscriptions, used several words: &quot;capen&quot; (Sabine &quot;cupencus&quot;), &quot;maru&quot; (Umbrian &quot;maron-&quot;), &quot;eisnev&quot;, &quot;hatrencu&quot; (priestess). They called the art of haruspicy &quot;ziχ neθsrac&quot;.

==Beliefs==
The Etruscan system of belief was an immanent polytheism; all visible phenomena were considered to be manifestations of divine power, and that power was embodied in deities who acted continually on the world but could be dissuaded or persuaded by mortals.

Long after the assimilation of the Etruscans, Seneca the Younger said that the difference between the Romans and the Etruscans was thatWhereas we believe lightning to be released as a result of the collision of clouds, they believe that the clouds collide so as to release lightning: for as they attribute all to deity, they are led to believe not that things have a meaning insofar as they occur, but rather that they occur because they must have a meaning.

===Spirits and deities===
After the 5th century, iconographic depictions show the deceased traveling to the underworld. In several instances of Etruscan art, such as in the François Tomb in Vulci, a spirit of the dead is identified by the term &quot;hinthial&quot;, literally &quot;(one who is) underneath&quot;. The souls of the ancestors, called &quot;man&quot; or &quot;mani&quot; (Latin &quot;Manes&quot;), were believed to be found around the &quot;mun&quot; or &quot;muni&quot;, or tombs,

A god was called an &quot;ais&quot; (later &quot;eis&quot;), which in the plural is &quot;aisar&quot; / &quot;eisar&quot;. The Liber Linteus (column 5, lines 9–10, and elsewhere) seems to distinguish &quot;Gods of Light&quot; &quot;aiser si&quot; from &quot;Gods of Darkness&quot; &quot;aiser seu&quot;: &quot;nunθene eiser śic śeuc /unuχ mlaχ nunθen χiś esviśc faśe&quot;: &quot;Make an offering for both the Gods of Light and of Dark, / for them make an appropriate offering with oil from the Chi and from the Esvi rituals.&quot; The abode of a god was a &quot;fanu&quot; or &quot;luth&quot;, a sacred place, such as a &quot;favi&quot;, a grave or temple. There, one would need to make a &quot;fler&quot; (plural &quot;flerchva&quot;), or &quot;offering&quot;.

Three layers of deities are portrayed in Etruscan art. One appears to be divinities of an indigenous origin: Voltumna or Vertumnus, a primordial, chthonic god; Usil, god(-dess) of the sun; Tivr, god of the moon; Turan, goddess of love; Laran, god of war; Maris, goddess of (child-)birth; Leinth, goddess of death; Selvans, god of the woods; Thalna, goddess (or god) of fertility and childbirth; Turms, god of trade and messenger of the gods; Fufluns, god of wine; the heroic figure Hercle; and a number of underworld deities such as Catha, Lur, Suri, Thanr and Calus (all listed on the Lead Plaque of Magliano and elsewhere.)

Ruling over them were higher deities that seem to reflect the Indo-European system: Tin or Tinia, the sky, Uni his wife (Juno), Nethuns, god of the waters, and Cel, the earth goddess.

As a third layer, the Greek gods and heroes were adopted by the Etruscan system during the Etruscan Orientalizing Period of 750/700–600 BC. Examples are Aritimi (Artemis), Menrva (Minerva, Latin equivalent of Athena), the heroic figure Hercle (Hercules), and Pacha (Bacchus; Latin equivalent of Dionysus), and over time the primary trinity became Tinia, Uni and Menrva. This triad of gods were venerated in Tripartite temples similar to the later Roman Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.

A fourth group, the so-called &quot;dii involuti&quot; or &quot;veiled gods&quot;, are sometimes mentioned as superior to all the other deities, but these were never worshipped, named, or depicted directly.

===Afterlife===
Etruscan beliefs concerning the hereafter appear to be an amalgam of influences. The Etruscans shared general early Mediterranean beliefs, such as the Egyptian belief that survival and prosperity in the hereafter depend on the treatment of the deceased&#x27;s remains. Etruscan tombs imitated domestic structures and were characterized by spacious chambers, wall paintings and grave furniture. In the tomb, especially on the sarcophagus (examples shown below), was a representation of the deceased in his or her prime, often with a spouse. Not everyone had a sarcophagus; sometimes the deceased was laid out on a stone bench. As the Etruscans practiced mixed inhumation and cremation rites (the proportion depending on the period), cremated ashes and bones might be put into an urn in the shapes of a house or a representation of the deceased.

In addition to the world still influenced by terrestrial affairs was a transmigrational world beyond the grave, patterned after the Greek Hades. It was ruled by Aita, and the deceased was guided there by Charun, the equivalent of Death, who was blue and wielded a hammer. The Etruscan Hades was populated by Greek mythological figures and a few such as Tuchulcha, of composite appearance.

== Women in Etruscan religion ==
Women in Ancient Etruria enjoyed more social liberties than their Roman counterparts until the Roman absorption of Etruria and the consequential assimilation into it. For example, the husband and wife often stood alongside each other in representations, and women were portrayed on sarcophagi in the same ceremonial feasts that men were. Etruscan women also participated in an array of religious activities, which can be observed through archaeological evidence of votive offerings, ceremonial textile production, and iconography found in Etruscan burials.

=== Worship ===
Votive evidence for Etruscan worship is rich and provides insight into how women worshipped deities in Etruria. Women&#x27;s votive offerings included terracotta or bronze statuettes, items related to textile production, such as spindle whorls or spools, or anatomical votives. 

An inscribed bronze statue base dating to the Archaic period (525-500 BCE) was excavated at Campo della Fiera in Orvieto, Italy, and provides evidence of an affluent woman&#x27;s offering to a deity. The statue&#x27;s inscription reads that it is a dedication to a deity, or group of deities, named- Tlusχval, from Kanuta, who may be a freedwoman based on the inscription&#x27;s use of the noun &quot;lauteniθa&quot;, although it is hard to say for certain. This inscription confirms that affluent Etruscan women were able to dedicate votives at religious sites freely, showcasing their wealth and testifying to women&#x27;s social freedoms in ancient Etruria. Etruscan sanctuaries also reveal evidence for the dedication of anatomical votives. Models of body parts such as the uterus were often offered to divinities, likely in relation to concerns revolving around childbirth and fertility.

Some scholars suggest there was a link between women&#x27;s production of textiles/ceremonial textiles and ritual at Etruscan sanctuaries. Recent excavations at the Poggio Colla archaeological site near Vicchio, Italy have revealed what may be a link between the location of excavated spindle whorls, spools, and ritual activity due to their location. The artifacts were found on the northern sides of the acropolis, near where defensive walls were later built. Scholars have speculated that this may be due to a form of obliteration in which the artifacts were linked to their deposition in a sacred way.

=== Priestesses ===
In speculation on the existence of an Etruscan priestess, the &quot;hatrencu&quot; is the most widely discussed term in scholarly communities. The term &quot;hatrencu&quot; was found in the inscriptions from a tomb in Vulci, a formerly Etruscan town in central Italy. 

The tomb is especially significant in that it contains a group of women buried together, which deviates from normal Etruscan burial rituals of men and women. The status of the &quot;hatrencu&quot; as an Etruscan priestess is widely debated by scholars. While many scholars assert that due to the abnormal burial conditions and the obscure term usage in the inscription, the &quot;hatrencu&quot; represents a priestess, other scholars disagree with these conclusions. There is also debate on whether the iconography of the tombs points to the women buried being associated with ritual objects, with a cista in the tomb of a woman named Ramtha as an example, however the female depictions could just as easily be divinities associated with funerary culture. 

The role of the &quot;hatrencu&quot; is thought to be similar to that of the Roman college of matrons, which was dedicated to the worship of the goddess Mater Matuta. Such a comparison underscores the possible ritual and social functions that hatrencu may have held in Etruscan society. Whether there were female religious specialists such as Etruscan priestess in Etruria, is mainly speculation and is subject to ongoing academic debate. 

==See also==
*&quot;Interpretatio graeca&quot;
*List of Etruscan mythological figures
*List of Etruscan names for Greek heroes
*Liber Linteus
*Daily life of the Etruscans

==Notes==
==References==
* Translated by Wendy Doniger, Gerald Honigsblum.
* Gaultier, F. and D. Briquel, eds. (F. Gaultier and D. Briquel, eds., Les Étrusques, le plus religieux des hommes. État de la recherche sur la religion étrusque, Paris, 1997; A. Pfiffig, Religio etrusca, Graz, 1975.) &quot;Les Étrusques, le plus religieux des hommes. État de la recherche sur la religion étrusque&quot;, Paris.
* 
* Available in the Gazetteer of Bill Thayer&#x27;s Website at 
* Jannot, J.-R. (2005) &quot;Religion in Ancient Etruria&quot;, trans. J. Whitehead, Madison, WI.
* Johnston, S. I. (ed.) (2004) &quot;Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide&quot;, Cambridge, MA.
* Pfiffig, A. (1975) &quot;Religio etrusca&quot;, Graz.
* 
* &quot;Thesaurus Cultus et Rituum Antiquorum &quot; (8 volumes)(ThesCRA), Los Angeles, 2004-2012.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="0" end="17" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="59" end="68" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="86" end="107" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="148" end="162" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="205" end="220" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="225" end="233" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="299" end="313" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="352" end="360" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="365" end="374" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200427" start="408" end="429" title="ancient Roman culture" label="ancient Roman culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q587309" start="598" end="616" title="Villanovan culture" label="Villanovan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="768" end="776" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171839" start="778" end="786" title="Menelaus" label="Menelaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="791" end="799" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="809" end="816" title="Homeric" label="Homeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="936" end="944" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q25296" start="1602" end="1616" title="6th century BC" label="6th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q432737" start="1618" end="1627" title="Lycophron" label="Lycophron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="1632" end="1642" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52080" start="1660" end="1667" title="Cortona" label="Cortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119190" start="2105" end="2124" title="Roman–Etruscan Wars" label="Roman–Etruscan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="2211" end="2223" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="2297" end="2307" title="haruspices" label="haruspices"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="2400" end="2407" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2461" end="2475" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2568" end="2589" title="Marcus Tullius Cicero" label="Marcus Tullius Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="2595" end="2610" title="Julio-Claudians" label="Julio-Claudians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="2623" end="2631" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q236259" start="2651" end="2670" title="Plautia Urgulanilla" label="Plautia Urgulanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734966" start="2821" end="2836" title="canon (canon law)" label="canonical works"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="3279" end="3296" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135171" start="3396" end="3424" title="Corpus Speculorum Etruscorum" label="Corpus Speculorum Etruscorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q682373" start="3524" end="3568" title="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae" label="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q63543" start="3660" end="3670" title="Helmut Rix" label="Helmut Rix"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="3777" end="3785" title="Revelation" label="revealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q659594" start="3828" end="3833" title="Tages" label="Tages"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="3908" end="3918" title="Prophecy" label="prescience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563978" start="3924" end="3930" title="Vegoia" label="Vegoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120735" start="4071" end="4076" title="Omen" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="4195" end="4205" title="Religious text" label="scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q379991" start="4293" end="4309" title="Valerius Maximus" label="Valerius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="4315" end="4336" title="Marcus Tullius Cicero" label="Marcus Tullius Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q679576" start="4405" end="4423" title="Massimo Pallottino" label="Massimo Pallottino"/>
<link wikidata="Q659594" start="4528" end="4533" title="Tages" label="Tages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="4597" end="4607" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="4620" end="4628" title="entrails" label="entrails"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="4638" end="4648" title="haruspicy" label="Haruspical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191087" start="4738" end="4748" title="River Acheron" label="Acherontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563978" start="4797" end="4803" title="Vegoia" label="Vegoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="4935" end="4943" title="Fulgural" label="Fulgural"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="5705" end="5715" title="haruspices" label="haruspices"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="5731" end="5740" title="Tarquinii" label="Tarquinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="5858" end="5864" title="Sabine" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36957" start="5906" end="5913" title="Umbrian" label="Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q552130" start="6097" end="6105" title="Immanence" label="immanent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="6106" end="6116" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="6180" end="6186" title="divinity" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="6225" end="6232" title="deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="6363" end="6381" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q774929" start="6950" end="6963" title="François Tomb" label="François Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q931172" start="6967" end="6972" title="Vulci" label="Vulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="7400" end="7413" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119919" start="8146" end="8167" title="Voltumna" label="Voltumna or Vertumnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="8183" end="8191" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="8197" end="8201" title="Usil (god)" label="Usil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8226" end="8230" title="Tivr" label="Tivr"/>
<link wikidata="Q644505" start="8249" end="8254" title="Turan (mythology)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q546761" start="8273" end="8278" title="Laran" label="Laran"/>
<link wikidata="Q935885" start="8292" end="8297" title="Maris (mythology)" label="Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520034" start="8325" end="8331" title="Leinth" label="Leinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704083" start="8351" end="8358" title="Selvans" label="Selvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482710" start="8378" end="8384" title="Thalna" label="Thalna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704046" start="8432" end="8437" title="Turms" label="Turms"/>
<link wikidata="Q613010" start="8479" end="8486" title="Fufluns" label="Fufluns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="8519" end="8525" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057235" start="8570" end="8575" title="Catha (mythology)" label="Catha"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966480" start="8577" end="8580" title="Lur (deity)" label="Lur"/>
<link wikidata="Q744543" start="8623" end="8646" title="Lead Plaque of Magliano" label="Lead Plaque of Magliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="8726" end="8739" title="Proto-Indo-European religion" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="8755" end="8760" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="8771" end="8774" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="8785" end="8789" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640742" start="8792" end="8799" title="Nethuns" label="Nethuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057411" start="8824" end="8827" title="Cel (goddess)" label="Cel"/>
<link wikidata="Q781357" start="9002" end="9009" title="Aritimi" label="Aritimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="9011" end="9018" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="9021" end="9027" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="9029" end="9036" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="9058" end="9064" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="9085" end="9091" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="9093" end="9101" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="9115" end="9122" title="Dionysus" label="Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="9144" end="9152" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="9196" end="9201" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="9203" end="9206" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="9211" end="9217" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="9302" end="9331" title="Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus" label="Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544276" start="9370" end="9382" title="dii involuti" label="dii involuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="9709" end="9717" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="10541" end="10546" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="10564" end="10568" title="Aita (mythology)" label="Aita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="10607" end="10613" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340960" start="10756" end="10765" title="Tuchulcha" label="Tuchulcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="11525" end="11540" title="votive offering" label="votive offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="11793" end="11800" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068267" start="12292" end="12339" title="Women in Etruscan society" label="women&amp;#x27;s social freedoms in ancient Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207585" start="12739" end="12751" title="Poggio Colla" label="Poggio Colla"/>
<link wikidata="Q82880" start="12777" end="12784" title="Vicchio" label="Vicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474386" start="12859" end="12872" title="spindle whorl" label="spindle whorl"/>
<link wikidata="Q931172" start="13419" end="13424" title="Vulci" label="Vulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q867621" start="14071" end="14076" title="cista" label="cista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479084" start="14382" end="14394" title="Mater Matuta" label="Mater Matuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="14690" end="14710" title="Interpretatio graeca" label="Interpretatio graeca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249617" start="14718" end="14755" title="List of Etruscan mythological figures" label="List of Etruscan mythological figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570299" start="14757" end="14796" title="List of Etruscan names for Greek heroes" label="List of Etruscan names for Greek heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="14798" end="14811" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557912" start="14813" end="14840" title="Daily life of the Etruscans" label="Daily life of the Etruscans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85682" wikidata="Q410277" url="?curid=85682" title="Aita">
<text>Aita (), also spelled Eita (), is an epithet of the Etruscan chthonic fire god Śuri as god of the underworld, roughly equivalent to the Greek god Hades ().

==Images==
Aita is a relatively late addition to the Etruscan pantheon, appearing in iconography and in Etruscan text beginning in the 4th century BC, and is heavily influenced by his Greek counterpart, Hades. Aita is pictured in only a few instances in Etruscan tomb painting, such as in the Golini Tomb from Orvieto and the tomb of Orcus II from Tarquinia. In these tomb paintings, he is shown with his consort Persipnei (), also spelled Phersipnai (), the Etruscan equivalent to the Greek Persephone.

Although Aita is very rarely depicted, he may appear enthroned and sometimes wears a wolf cap, borrowing a key attribute from the earlier Etruscan underworld wolf-deity, named Calu. Other examples of Aita in Etruscan art depict his abduction of Persipnei. Aside from tomb painting, Aita may be identified in a few examples in other media, including on a 4th-century painted vase from Vulci, two 2nd century alabaster ash urns from Volterra, and a Red Figure 4th3rd century Oinochoe.

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* 
** 
** 
* 
* 
** 
* 
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="0" end="4" title="Aita" label="Aita"/>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="22" end="26" title="Aita" label="Eita"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="52" end="60" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="61" end="69" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22123181" start="70" end="78" title="fire god" label="fire god"/>
<link wikidata="Q942519" start="79" end="83" title="Śuri" label="Śuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="98" end="108" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="118" end="128" title="interpretatio graeca" label="equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="136" end="141" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="146" end="151" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="219" end="227" title="Pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183971" start="450" end="461" title="Golini Tomb" label="Golini Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="467" end="474" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q946563" start="491" end="499" title="Orcus II" label="Orcus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="505" end="514" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424980" start="570" end="579" title="Persipnei" label="Persipnei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424980" start="597" end="607" title="Phersipnai" label="Phersipnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="649" end="659" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934408" start="838" end="842" title="Calu" label="Calu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132999" start="894" end="916" title="Rape of Persephone" label="abduction of Persipnei"/>
<link wikidata="Q547989" start="994" end="999" title="List of art media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q931172" start="1046" end="1051" title="Vulci" label="Vulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q103305" start="1093" end="1101" title="Volterra" label="Volterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q831869" start="1135" end="1143" title="Oinochoe" label="Oinochoe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85686" wikidata="Q4780006" url="?curid=85686" title="Aplu">
<text>Aplu, APLU may refer to:
* </text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85687" wikidata="Q781357" url="?curid=85687" title="Artume">
<text>Artume (also called &quot;Aritimi&quot;, &quot;Artames&quot;, or &quot;Artumes&quot;) was an Etruscan goddess who was the mistress of animals, goddess of human assemblies, and hunting deity of Neolithic origin. Etruscans later appropriated the Greek goddess Artemis. Aritimi was also considered the founder of the Etruscan town Aritie which is today the Italian town Arezzo.

==Artume in popular culture==
Artume appeared as a recurring character in Marvel Comics. However, this is not the goddess, but a daughter of Hippolyta in Marvel Comics, similar to how her DC counterpart uses the goddess&#x27;s Roman name.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q781357" start="0" end="6" title="Artume" label="Artume"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="93" end="101" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="258" end="265" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378" start="367" end="373" title="Arezzo" label="Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="450" end="463" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843408" start="517" end="526" title="Hippolyta (Marvel Comics)" label="Hippolyta"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="530" end="543" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="560" end="578" title="Wonder Woman" label="her DC counterpart"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85690" wikidata="Q5052004" url="?curid=85690" title="Cath">
<text>Cath may refer to:

==People==
* Cath Bishop (born 1971), British former rower and 2003 world champion
* Cath Carroll (born 1960), British musician and music journalist
* Cath Coffey (), one of the earliest members of British rap band Stereo MCs
* Cath Crowley (born 1971), Australian young adult fiction author
* Cath Kidston (born 1958), English fashion designer, businesswoman and author
* Cath Mayo, New Zealand short story writer, novelist and musician
* Cath Rae (born 1985), Scottish field hockey goalkeeper
* Cath Vautier (1902–1989), New Zealand netball player, teacher and sports administrator
* Cath Wallace (born 1952), New Zealand environmentalist and academic

==In mythology==
*Catha (mythology) or Cath, an Etruscan deity
*Cath Palug, a feline creature in Welsh mythology

==Songs==
*&quot;Cath...&quot;, a Death Cab for Cutie song
*&quot;Cath&quot;, a hit song by The Bluebells

==Other uses==
*Cath., abbreviation for Catholic
*Catheter or catheterization
*CATH, protein structure classification 
* Cathinone, usually a specific substituted cathinone drug.

== See also ==
* Kath (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5052004" start="0" end="4" title="Cath" label="Cath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052007" start="33" end="44" title="Cath Bishop" label="Cath Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941772" start="105" end="117" title="Cath Carroll" label="Cath Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052009" start="171" end="182" title="Cath Coffey" label="Cath Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28921787" start="248" end="260" title="Cath Crowley" label="Cath Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054225" start="314" end="326" title="Cath Kidston" label="Cath Kidston"/>
<link wikidata="Q56241464" start="393" end="402" title="Cath Mayo" label="Cath Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052010" start="460" end="468" title="Cath Rae" label="Cath Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052975" start="517" end="529" title="Cath Vautier" label="Cath Vautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052013" start="606" end="618" title="Cath Wallace" label="Cath Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057235" start="693" end="710" title="Catha (mythology)" label="Catha (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603986" start="739" end="749" title="Cath Palug" label="Cath Palug"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052006" start="806" end="813" title="Cath..." label="Cath..."/>
<link wikidata="Q4050978" start="881" end="894" title="The Bluebells" label="The Bluebells"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="936" end="944" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="946" end="954" title="Catheter" label="Catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008897" start="975" end="979" title="CATH" label="CATH"/>
<link wikidata="Q414242" start="1017" end="1026" title="Cathinone" label="Cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632116" start="1047" end="1068" title="substituted cathinone" label="substituted cathinone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735848" start="1093" end="1114" title="Kath (disambiguation)" label="Kath (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85692" wikidata="Q1067918" url="?curid=85692" title="Charun">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Charun (also spelled Charu, or Karun) acted as one of the psychopompoi of the underworld (not to be confused with the god of the underworld, known to the Etruscans as Aita). He is often portrayed with Vanth, a winged figure also associated with the underworld.

==Origins==
His name was imported from Greek Charon, although it is uncertain whether Etruscans had a native name for a god of the underworld before this. As suggested by alternations in the Etruscan language such as &quot;θu&quot; &quot;one&quot; changing to &quot;θunśna&quot; &quot;first&quot;, &quot;lev&quot; &quot;lion&quot; (from Greek leōn) and &quot;Apulu&quot; (from Greek &quot;Apóllōn&quot;), words ending in &quot;-n&quot; after &quot;u&quot; were disappearing from the language which is why we see his name spelled &quot;Xarun&quot; and later &quot;Xaru&quot;.

==Appearance==
The Etruscan Charun was fundamentally different from his Greek counterpart. Guarding the entry to the underworld, he is depicted with a hammer (his religious symbol) and is shown with pointed ears, snakes around his arms, and a blueish coloration symbolizing the decay of death. In some images, he has enormous wings. He is also depicted as a large creature with snake-like hair, a vulture&#x27;s hooked nose, large tusks like a boar, heavy brow ridges, large lips, fiery eyes, pointed ears a black beard, enormous wings, discolored (pale cream, bluish or greyish) skin, and snakes around his arm.

==Function==
Larissa Bonfante and Judith Swaddling have this to say about Charun: &quot;Many scenes feature the two purely Etruscan underworld demons, Vanth and Charu, whose job is not to punish the dead but rather to escort them to their final destination.&quot; However, there are at least two examples, on the sarcophagus of Laris Pulenas as well as a red figure stamnos from Orbetello, that do illustrate Charun in a menacing fashion. Each depicts Charun threatening a male figure with his hammer.

The grotesque nature of the depiction of Charun appears to have been at least partly apotropaic in nature. Apotropaic art was the practice of the neighboring Greeks at this time, as represented by the exaggerated eyes painted on drinking vessels in the 6th century BC to ward away spirits while drinking or the monstrous depiction of Medusa whose image was said to turn men to stone. Through these images of the grotesque, violence, and blood-letting, the Etruscans may have believed that they helped to fend off evil spirits from the tomb as well as sanctify the tomb perhaps in place of the actual ritual sacrifice of an animal usually performed in funerary rites.

Nancy de Grummond offers a different view. The relief on the sarcophagus of Laris Pulenas at Tarquinia, shows two Charuns swinging their hammers at a person&#x27;s head, though the head (probably that of Pulenas, the nobleman whose sarcophagus it is) no longer survives in the relief due to an accident of preservation. Years later, in the Colosseum, a Charun-like figure called Dispater would hit the loser with a hammer to make sure he was dead, perhaps in reflection of Charun. The hammer might also be used to protect the dead; it is sometimes swung at serpents attacking the deceased (as shown on the Orvieto amphora). Most often it is simply held, or the handle planted on the ground and the mallet head leaned upon &quot;(above)&quot;. De Grummond notes that the ferry of Charon appears only once in surviving Etruscan art, and that some Etruscan demons are equipped with oars, but they typically use them as weapons rather than in their maritime function.

==Modern views==

Many authors tend to take a more sensationalist view of Charun, speaking of him as a &quot;death-demon&quot;. Such authors may be inspired by Christian views of Hell and moral punishment. For the Etruscans, as with the Greeks, Hades was merely a morally neutral place of the dead. Neither the &quot;good&quot; nor the &quot;bad&quot; could escape the clutches of death, and both were assembled there together.

Ron Terpening, a professor of Italian literature at the University of Arizona, cites Franz de Ruyt, who claims Charun is similar to Chaldean demons or the Hindu divinities Shiva and Kali. He is presumed to be the servant of Mantus and Mania, and, like Charon, is comparable to the Greeks&#x27; Thanatos, the Erinyes, and the Keres. The author, like de Grummond, feels that some later Renaissance paintings of Greek Charon may show the continuity of pre-Christian Etruscan beliefs. Later on when the deity had evolved into the Greek Charon, or Caronte in Italian, Terpening notes that Charun&#x27;s hammer or mallet is sometimes replaced with an oar, although it does not fit with his duties.

According to Jeff Rovin , Charun guided souls on horseback to the underworld and &quot;brings horses to the newly-dead&quot;. He also claims that Charun appears to love violence and participates in warfare adding that Charun enjoys natural disasters as well. An Etruscan krater from François Tomb &quot;(above)&quot; depicts Charun with Ajax or Achilles &quot;(left, cropped out)&quot; slaughtering Trojan prisoners. This urn is currently held in Cabinet des Médailles 920, Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. Rovin says that some accounts depict him with a sword, and that he &quot;slices&quot; souls with it. At least one image shows him guiding a soul on horseback, equipped with both a hammer and a sword, though he is simply carrying it on his person.

The Charon of Vergil in the &quot;Aeneid&quot; is particularly cruel; according to W.F. Jackson Knight, &quot;Vergil&#x27;s Charon is not only the Greek ferryman of Aristophanes [in &quot;The Frogs&quot;], but more than half his Etruscan self, Charun, the Etruscan torturing death-devil, no ferryman at all.&quot;

==Assistants==
Charun is believed to have worked with many assistants in the Underworld, although they could be independent deities in their own right. Most of their names are lost to us, but at least one, Tuchulcha, is identified in the Tomb of Orcus II, and has hair and wings like a Gorgon. Tuchulcha, whose gender is debated among scholars, appears in a depiction of the story of Theseus (known to the Etruscans as &quot;These&quot;) visiting the underworld. These and his friend Peirithous are playing a board game, attended by Tuchulcha.

There are four Charuns shown in a fresco in the Tomb of the Charuns, and each appear to have sub-names. These are Charun Chunchules, the heavily blistered Charun Huths, Charun Lufe, and the fourth has crumbled away to illegibility. On Laris Pulena&#x27;s sarcophagus, there are also two Charuns and two Vanths on either side of the figure in the center who is presumably Laris Pulena himself. De Grummond does not cite these figures as assistants, but believes Charun may be a type of creature rather than a singular demon.

Many of Charun&#x27;s other presumed assistants appear in the Tomb of the Blue Demons, which is also the home of the only Etruscan rendering of the aforementioned ferry of Charon.

==Popular culture==
In contemporary times, Charun has never been as popular as his Greek counterpart, though there have been some occurrences.

*He appears in the poem &quot;Back Matter&quot; by Rachel Blau DuPlessis, invoking the imagery of the Tomb of the Charuns.
*Charun is Monster in My Pocket #97. Unlike Ancient depictions, he is bald, bulky, appears to be wearing no clothing, and his wings look leathery (perhaps in reference to Rovin&#x27;s claim of &quot;leathery skin&quot;) and lack feathers. 
*A brief reference to Charun in &quot;The Tribune&#x27;s Curse: SPQR VII&quot; a 2003 novel by John Maddox Roberts in an invocation to &quot;Father Dis&quot; and related figures, including &quot;Charun of the hammer&quot; (p. 65).
*Charun is referred to in the song &quot;The one who will not be named&quot; by the metal band GWAR

==References==
;Sources
*Bonfante, Larissa, and Judith Swaddling. &quot;Etruscan Myths&quot;. University of Texas Press, 2006.
*de Grummond, Nancy. &quot;Etruscan Myth, Sacred History and Legend&quot;. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Museum, 2006.
*de Ruyt, Franz. &quot;Charun: Démon étrusque de la mort&quot;. Rome: Institut Historique Belge, 1934.
*del Chiaro, Mario. &quot;The Etruscan Funnel Group&quot;. Florence: Sansoni Editore. 1974.
*Knight, W.F. Jackson. &quot;Roman Vergil&quot;. 1944. Reprint Middlesex: Penguin, 1966.
*Lurker, Manfred. &quot;A Dictionary of Gods &amp; Goddesses, Devils &amp; Demons&quot;. Routledge, 1987.
*Müller, Carl Ottfried. &quot;Ancient Art and Its Remains; or a Manual of the Archæology of Art&quot;. Adamant Media Corporation, 2001. pp. 155 and 159.
*Russell, Jeffrey Burton. &quot;The Prince of Darkness: Radical Evil and the Power of Good in History&quot;. Cornell University Press, 1992. p. 17
*Starr, Chester G. &quot;A History of the Ancient World&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press, USA, 1991. p 451.
*Terpening, Ronnie H. &quot;Charon and the Crossing: Ancient, Medieval, and Renaissance Transformations of a Myth&quot;. Lewisburg, Pennsylvania: Bucknell University Press, 1984.
*Turner, Alice K. &quot;The History of Hell&quot;. Harvest Books, 1995. pp. 7, 25. She states on the latter page, &quot;Eurynomus could have been one of the keres or derivative of Etruscan Charun, but Pausanias does not seem to think so.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="23" end="29" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="44" end="49" title="Charun" label="Charu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="54" end="59" title="Charun" label="Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="81" end="91" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="101" end="111" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="190" end="195" title="Aita (mythology)" label="Aita)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235270" start="224" end="229" title="Vanth" label="Vanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="324" end="329" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612" start="330" end="336" title="Charon (mythology)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="476" end="493" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="622" end="627" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="662" end="667" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="1012" end="1018" title="hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="1239" end="1244" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="1258" end="1265" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673594" start="1280" end="1284" title="human nose" label="nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q185635" start="1292" end="1297" title="tusks" label="tusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="1305" end="1309" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15173" start="1336" end="1339" title="lip" label="lip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="1362" end="1366" title="ears" label="ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="1375" end="1380" title="beard" label="beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="1391" end="1395" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="1441" end="1445" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q429177" start="1488" end="1504" title="Larissa Bonfante" label="Larissa Bonfante"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="2063" end="2073" title="Apotropaic magic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="2312" end="2318" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="2739" end="2748" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="2986" end="2995" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228338" start="3025" end="3033" title="Dispater" label="Dispater"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="3790" end="3794" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364469" start="4040" end="4053" title="Ron Terpening" label="Ron Terpening"/>
<link wikidata="Q503419" start="4096" end="4117" title="University of Arizona" label="University of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859459" start="4172" end="4180" title="Mesopotamian mythology" label="Chaldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="4195" end="4200" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="4212" end="4217" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q132127" start="4222" end="4226" title="Kali" label="Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630871" start="4264" end="4270" title="Mantus" label="Mantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q767293" start="4275" end="4280" title="Mania (mythology)" label="Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="4334" end="4342" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="4348" end="4355" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q403964" start="4365" end="4370" title="Keres (mythology)" label="Keres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4424" end="4435" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612" start="4455" end="4461" title="Charon (mythology)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202271" start="4648" end="4654" title="mallet" label="mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="4685" end="4688" title="oar" label="oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q476968" start="5004" end="5010" title="krater" label="krater"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="5070" end="5074" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="5078" end="5086" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="5132" end="5138" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q549143" start="5180" end="5201" title="Cabinet des Médailles" label="Cabinet des Médailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="5207" end="5229" title="Bibliothéque Nationale" label="Bibliothéque Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="5286" end="5291" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="5500" end="5506" title="Vergil" label="Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="5520" end="5526" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="5651" end="5663" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="5674" end="5683" title="The Frogs" label="The Frogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340960" start="6007" end="6016" title="Tuchulcha" label="Tuchulcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q946563" start="6039" end="6055" title="Tomb of Orcus II" label="Tomb of Orcus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="6087" end="6093" title="Gorgon" label="Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="6185" end="6192" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="6285" end="6295" title="Peirithous" label="Peirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="6310" end="6320" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235270" start="6649" end="6654" title="Vanth" label="Vanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="6863" end="6868" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279160" start="7247" end="7268" title="Rachel Blau DuPlessis" label="Rachel Blau DuPlessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807428" start="7330" end="7350" title="Monster in My Pocket" label="Monster in My Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392639" start="7623" end="7631" title="SPQR series" label="SPQR VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q320664" start="7654" end="7673" title="John Maddox Roberts" label="John Maddox Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q507863" start="7885" end="7889" title="GWAR" label="GWAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="8521" end="8530" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="8800" end="8824" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="8911" end="8934" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364469" start="8955" end="8964" title="Ron Terpening" label="Terpening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185021" start="9075" end="9098" title="Lewisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Lewisburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444679" start="9100" end="9119" title="Bucknell University" label="Bucknell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="9334" end="9343" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85694" wikidata="Q1274643" url="?curid=85694" title="Phoenix Mercury">
<text>The Phoenix Mercury are an American professional basketball team based in Phoenix, Arizona. The Mercury compete in the Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association (WNBA) as a member of the Western Conference. One of eight original franchises, it was founded before the league&#x27;s inaugural 1997 season began. The team plays their home games at PHX Arena.

The Mercury have qualified for the WNBA Playoffs in fifteen of its twenty-four years in Phoenix. In 1998, 2007, 2009, 2014, and 2021 the Mercury went to the WNBA Finals; they lost to Houston in 1998, but won the title in 2007, 2009, and 2014 over Detroit, Indiana, and Chicago respectively.

The franchise has been home to players such as former UConn Diana Taurasi, Rutgers grad Cappie Pondexter, former Temple power forward Candice Dupree, former Baylor center Brittney Griner, and Australian guard Penny Taylor.

In February 2023, Mat Ishbia, a former Michigan State college basketball player, completed the acquisition of Phoenix Mercury from Robert Sarver. The team was among Sarver&#x27;s several sports assets located in Arizona purchased by Ishbia.

==History==

===Mercury heating up (1997–1998)===
With a cast that included hall-of-famer Nancy Lieberman, and future hall-of-famers Michele Timms of Australia, and Jennifer Gillom, hyper-active star Bridget Pettis, and outspoken coach Cheryl Miller, the Mercury quickly established itself as a major franchise. In the first WNBA season, the Mercury posted a 16–12 record and reached the first WNBA playoffs. The Mercury lost to the New York Liberty, though, in those playoffs.

In 1998, the Mercury again qualified for the playoffs, posting a 19–11 record. The Mercury defeated the Cleveland Rockers to reach the WNBA Finals for the first time. In a hard-fought series, the Mercury fell 2 games to 1 to the defending champion Houston Comets.

===Mercury in retrograde (1999–2003)===
In 1999, the Mercury missed the playoffs, posting a 15–17 record. In 2000, the Mercury finished 20–12, but got swept by the Los Angeles Sparks. The team descended into turmoil after the season, as coach Miller left and the original core group of players broke up, via retirement or trades, and the team stopped being a playoff contender.

From 2001 to 2004, the Mercury were at the bottom of the WNBA. Fielding miserable teams, the Mercury were never competitive. The Mercury went through coach after coach, and nothing worked. During the lean years, the franchise remained in the news as forward Lisa Harrison would become a sex symbol. Playboy Magazine offered her money to pose in their magazine. She would decline the offer.

===Diana Taurasi joins the WNBA (2004–2005)===
After a horrible 2003 season, in which the Mercury posted an 8–26 record, the Mercury won the #1 overall choice in the 2004 WNBA Draft, and select coveted former UConn star Diana Taurasi. Taurasi went on to win the WNBA Rookie of the Year Award in the 2004 season, as the Mercury posted a better 17–17 record. The Mercury posted a 16–18 record in 2005, missing the playoffs again.

===Bringing back &quot;Paul Ball&quot; (2006–2007)===
Former NBA coach Paul Westhead became the Mercury&#x27;s head coach prior to the 2006 season and brought his up-tempo style to Phoenix. Westhead was the first WNBA coach to have won a previous NBA championship (with Los Angeles Lakers in 1980). The Mercury also drafted Cappie Pondexter with the #2 overall selection in the 2006 WNBA Draft. The addition provided Taurasi with a solid #2 player. Westhead&#x27;s run and gun offense quickly became The Mercury&#x27;s trademark and the franchise would soon set new league records for points scored.

The 2006 season was a positive one for the Mercury, as they posted a winning record for the first time since 2000, at 18–16. The Mercury competed for the playoffs all year, but fell just short of a postseason berth.

As the 2007 season came, the Mercury were poised and hungry for a deep playoff run. The Mercury would run away with the Western Conference, posting their best record in franchise history at 23–11, as well as clinching the #1 seed. The Mercury set a record by averaging 89.0 points in a season during 2007. In their first playoffs since 2000, the Mercury made quick work of the Seattle Storm in the first round, blowing them out in two games (Game 1: 101–84, Game 2: 95–89). In the Western Finals, the Mercury swept the San Antonio Silver Stars in a closer series (Game 1: 102–100, Game 2: 98–92), advancing to the WNBA Finals for the first time in nine years. In the Finals, the Mercury faced the defending 2006 champions Detroit Shock. The two teams split the first two games in Detroit. Coming back home, the Mercury suffered a letdown in game 3, losing 88–83. Down 2–1, the Mercury had to win game 4 or lose. Game 4 came down to the final seconds, but the Mercury edged out the Shock 77–76, with Cappie Pondexter scoring 26 points, and forced a Game 5 in Detroit. In Game 5, Phoenix won by a score of 108–92. Penny Taylor scored a game high 30 points in Game 5, and went 18-for-18 from the line. The Mercury won the series and their first championship with a 108–92 Game 5 victory, becoming the first WNBA team to win a championship on the road. Cappie Pondexter was named the WNBA Finals MVP, and averaged 22.0 points and 5.6 assists in the series. On November 7, 2007, The Mercury announced the hiring of Corey Gaines as head coach to replace the departing Paul Westhead.

===Mercury fall, Mercury rise (2008–2011)===
In 2008, the Mercury started slowly and never really found a groove, finishing the season with a disappointing record of 16–18, well out of the playoff picture in a tough Western Conference. The Mercury became the first team in WNBA history with the dubious honor of failing to qualify for the playoffs after winning the WNBA Finals the year before.

However, a year later, the Mercury were back to what they were two years before. The Mercury clinched the top spot in the playoffs along with the number one seed in the Western Conference. The Mercury defeated the 2008 conference champion San Antonio Silver Stars in the first round, winning the very exciting series 2–1 after losing the first game on the road. The Mercury then defeated the Los Angeles Sparks in the conference finals, winning 2–1 in a series that ended Lisa Leslie&#x27;s career. The Mercury then went on to beat the Indiana Fever 3–2 in the best of 5 series to capture the second title in their franchise history. Diana Taurasi captured the WNBA Finals MVP Award. All-star guard Cappie Pondexter was traded to the New York Liberty amid some controversy in the offseason; All-Star Candice Dupree joined the duo of Taurasi and Penny Taylor as the Mercury looked to repeat in 2010.

It was not easy, however, as the Mercury faced a few bad losing streaks throughout the 2010 season. The team managed to finish 15–19, good for second place in the Western Conference. Phoenix swept San Antonio in the first round of the Playoffs, but lost to the eventual champion Seattle Storm in the conference finals.

After a hectic offseason for Diana Taurasi, most of the Mercury team was rested and ready to play. The team started the 2011 season with a surprising 0–3 record, but flew back into playoff contention, entering the All-Star break with a 10–5 record. Ultimately, they recovered to gain the third seed in the 2011 WNBA Playoffs, and upset the Seattle Storm in the opening round, closing an 18-point deficit to win on Seattle&#x27;s home floor, allowing the Mercury to reach its third straight conference finals. Unfortunately, for the team, they came up short against the top-seeded Minnesota Lynx, losing in two games.

===Brittney Griner arrives (2013–2024)===

Coming off the 2012 WNBA season in which the Phoenix Mercury franchise finished with the second worst record in the WNBA, a 7–27 mark, Phoenix received the 2013 WNBA draft lottery and secured the top overall pick. Once the 2013 WNBA draft arrived in April 2013, the Mercury used the top overall pick on two time Women&#x27;s College Basketball Wooden award winner Brittney Griner. However, the Mercury lost to the Lynx in the Conference round of the playoffs.
The following season the Mercury under the guidance of new coach Sandy Brondello went on to set an all time WNBA record for wins in a season, with 29, and breezed through the 2014 playoffs to claim their 3rd WNBA Championship.

On February 3, 2015, Diana Taurasi announced that she would sit out the 2015 WNBA season at the request of her Russian Premier League team, UMMC Ekaterinburg. The team offered Taurasi to pay her more than her WNBA salary to skip the 2015 WNBA season. For the 2014 WNBA season, Taurasi made just under the league maximum of $107,000. But she makes 15 times that - approximately $1.5 million - playing overseas.

In 2016, the WNBA switched to a playoff format involving single elimination games in the first two rounds. The eighth-seeded Mercury upset the Indiana Fever in the First Round and New York Liberty in the Second Round to reach the Semifinals. However, they lost the Semifinals to the Minnesota Lynx.

In 2017, the Mercury once again sailed through the first two rounds of the playoffs, winning their games against the Seattle Storm and Connecticut Sun. Again, they lost in the Semifinals, this time to the Los Angeles Sparks.

2018 saw the Mercury win both single-elimination playoff games for the third year in a row with victories against the Dallas Wings and Connecticut Sun, giving Diana Taurasi a 13–0 record in winner-take-all elimination games in her career. In the semifinals, the Mercury came up short against the Seattle Storm in the decisive fifth game, giving Taurasi her first ever loss in a winner-take-all elimination game.

===Uniform sponsor===
In June 2009 the Mercury and WNBA announced a sponsorship agreement with identity theft protection service LifeLock to place that company&#x27;s logo on their jerseys through the 2013 season, making the Mercury among the first non-soccer franchises in the major leagues of North America to place a company logo on their uniforms. For the 2014 season and going forward, the Mercury will wear jerseys sponsored by Casino Arizona and Talking Stick Resort.

==Season-by-season records==
==Players==
===Current roster===
===Former players===

*DeWanna Bonner (2009–2019), now a member of the Connecticut Sun
*Kara Braxton (2010–2011)
* Emma Cannon (born 1989), now a member of the Israeli team Elitzur Ramla
*Monique Currie (2015)
*Anna DeForge (2003–2005)
*Candice Dupree (2010–2016)
*Tonya Edwards (2000-2001)
*Jennifer Gillom (1997–2002)
*Michelle Griffiths (1998–2000)
*Isabelle Harrison (2016), now a member of the Dallas Wings
*Lisa Harrison (1999–2005)
*Tamicha Jackson (2003; 2006)
*Temeka Johnson (2009–2011)
*Nancy Lieberman (1997)
*Kelly Mazzante (2007–2009)
*Kelly Miller (2006–2008)
*Leilani Mitchell (2015, 2017–2019), now a member of the Washington Mystics
*Bridget Pettis (1997–2001)
*Erin Phillips (2014)
*Plenette Pierson (2003–2005), now an assistant coach of the Minnesota Lynx
*Cappie Pondexter (2006–2009)
*Brandy Reed (1998; 2000–2002)
*Danielle Robinson (2017), now a member of the Indiana Fever
*Tangela Smith (2007–2010)
*Belinda Snell (2005–2007)
*Maria Stepanova (1998–2001, 2005)
*Diana Taurasi (2004-2024)
*Penny Taylor (2004–2007; 2009–2011; 2013–2014; 2016)
*Michelle Timms (1997–2001)
*Slobodanka Tuvić (2001–2004)
*Kamila Vodičková (2005–2006)
* Shatori Walker-Kimbrough (born 1995), now a player for the Israeli team Maccabi Bnot Ashdod, and the Washington Mystics 
*Adrian Williams-Strong (2000–2004)
*Le&#x27;coe Willingham (2009), now an assistant coach of the Dallas Wings
===Retired numbers===
===Hall of Famers===
(from Women&#x27;s Basketball Hall of Fame)
*Ann Meyers-Drysdale, enshrined 1999
*Jennifer Gillom, enshrined 2009
*Nancy Lieberman, enshrined 1996
*Cheryl Miller, enshrined 1995
*Linda Sharp, enshrined 2001
*Michele Timms, enshrined 2008
*Penny Taylor, enshrined 2022

===FIBA Hall of Famers===
==Coaches and staff==

===Owners===
*Jerry Colangelo, owner of the Phoenix Suns (1997–2003)
*Robert Sarver, owner of the Phoenix Suns (2004–2023)
*Mat Ishbia, owner of the Phoenix Suns (2023–present)

===Head coaches===

===General managers===
*Cheryl Miller (1997–2000)
*Seth Sulka (2001–2006)
*Ann Meyers-Drysdale (2007–2011)
*Corey Gaines (2012–2013)
*Amber Cox (2013)
*Jim Pitman (2013–2023)
* Nick U&#x27;Ren (2023–present)

===Assistant coaches===

*Steve Smith (1997)
*Kathy Anderson (1998)
*Carrie Graf (1998–1999, 2001, 2003)
*Howie Landa (1999)
*Tom Lewis (2000)
*Linda Sharp (2000–2002)
*Vonn Read (2000)
*Eric Cooper (2001–2002)
*Gary Kloppenburg (2003)
*Brian Agler (2004)
*Lisa Harrison (2004)
*Cedric Ceballos (2004)
*Michele Timms (2005)
*Bridget Pettis (2006–2011)
*Corey Gaines (2006–2007)
*Earl Cureton (2012–2013)
*Tom Hovasse (2012–2013)
*Anthony Boone (2013)
*Julie Hairgrove (2005–2021)
*Todd Troxel (2014–2018)
*Penny Taylor (2019)
*Chasity Melvin (2020–2021)
*Nikki Blue (2022–2023)
*Cinnamon Lister (2022–present)
*Crystal Robinson (2022)
*Charli Turner Thorne (2023)
*Taja Edwards (2023)
*Tully Bevilaqua (2023)
*Kristi Toliver (2024–present)
*Megan Vogel (2024–present)
* Michael Joiner (2024–present)
==Statistics==
|-
| 1997
| J. Gillom (15.7)
| T. Foster (6.1)
| M. Timms (5.1)
| 69.2 vs 65.2
| 32.9 vs 33.0
| .373 vs .413
| 1998
| J. Gillom (20.8)
| J. Gillom (7.3)
| M. Timms (5.3)
| 73.9 vs 67.5
| 31.4 vs 31.4
| .424 vs .434
| 1999
| J. Gillom (15.2)
| M. Askamp (7.2)
| M. Timms (5.0)
| 68.0 vs 68.2
| 31.3 vs 31.6
| .399 vs .415

| 2000
| B. Reed (19.0)
| B. Reed (5.8)
| M. Cleary (3.2)
| 70.1 vs 65.7
| 27.9 vs 30.3
| .446 vs .423
| 2001
| J. Gillom (12.3)
| M. Stepanova (6.3)
| K. Veal (4.3)
| 64.5 vs 67.8
| 29.4 vs 32.2
| .405 vs .415
| 2002
| J. Gillom (15.3)
| A. Williams (6.9)
| G. Grubin (3.3)
| 65.3 vs 71.6
| 28.7 vs 31.3
| .420 vs .455
| 2003
| A. DeForge (11.9)
| A. Williams (7.4)
| T. Jackson (4.3)
| 61.7 vs 66.8
| 29.4 vs 32.8
| .382 vs .447
| 2004
| D. Taurasi (17.0)
| P. Taylor (4.8)
| D. Taurasi (3.9)
| 67.6 vs 65.7
| 26.9 vs 30.0
| .430 vs .425
| 2005
| D. Taurasi (16.0)
| K. Vodichkova (7.0)
| D. Taurasi (4.5)
| 69.4 vs 69.2
| 31.2 vs 30.1
| .414 vs .429
| 2006
| D. Taurasi (25.3)
| K. Vodichkova (6.7)
| D. Taurasi (4.1)
| 87.1 vs 84.7
| 33.7 vs 37.7
| .443 vs .433
| 2007
| D. Taurasi (19.2)
| T. Smith (6.5)
| K. Miller (4.6)
| 89.0 vs 85.4
| 33.9 vs 40.9
| .439 vs .405
| 2008
| D. Taurasi (24.1)
| T. Smith (7.0)
| K. Miller (4.0)
| 88.5 vs 88.5
| 36.1 vs 38.2
| .430 vs .421
| 2009
| D. Taurasi (20.4)
| D. Bonner (5.8)
| C. Pondexter (5.0)
| 92.8 vs 89.1
| 35.0 vs 37.8
| .460 vs .424

| 2010
| D. Taurasi (22.6)
| C. Dupree (7.6)
| P. Taylor (5.0)
| 93.9 vs 93.8
| 35.7 vs 37.6
| .473 vs .455
| 2011
| D. Taurasi (21.6)
| C. Dupree (8.2)
| P. Taylor (4.7)
| 89.0 vs 86.0
| 35.1 vs 34.2
| .461 vs .440
| 2012
| D. Bonner (20.6)
| K. Thomas (8.0)
| S. Prahalis (4.5)
| 74.5 vs 86.7
| 37.4 vs 36.1
| .384 vs .437
| 2013
| D. Taurasi (20.3)
| C. Dupree (6.4)
| D. Taurasi (6.2)
| 79.7 vs 80.3
| 35.1 vs 34.2
| .453 vs .411
| 2014
| D. Taurasi (16.2)
| B. Griner (8.0)
| D. Taurasi (5.6)
| 83.5 vs 74.1
| 33.7 vs 34.5
| .484 vs .409
| 2015
| D. Bonner (15.8)
| B. Griner (8.1)
| D. Bonner (3.3)
| 75.1 vs 72.3
| 33.4 vs 35.0
| .437 vs .396
| 2016
| D. Taurasi (17.8)
| B. Griner (6.5)
| D. Taurasi (3.9)
| 84.6 vs 83.3
| 32.4 vs 34.4
| .453 vs .440
| 2017
| B. Griner (21.9)
| B. Griner (7.6)
| L. Mitchell (3.6)
| 81.9 vs 81.9
| 32.1 vs 34.6
| .440 vs .438
| 2018
| D. Taurasi (20.7)
| B. Griner (7.7)
| D. Taurasi (5.3)
| 85.8 vs 83.2
| 32.6 vs 34.4
| .457 vs .431
| 2019
| B. Griner (20.7)
| D. Bonner (7.6)
| D. Taurasi (5.3)
| 76.5 vs 77.6
| 32.5 vs 37.2
| .424 vs .422

| 2020
| D. Taurasi (18.7)
| B. Turner (9.0)
| B. Hartley &amp; D. Taurasi (4.5)
| 86.1 vs 84.1
| 34.0 vs 36.0
| .450 vs .425
| 2021
| B. Griner (20.5)
| B. Griner (9.5)
| S. Diggins-Smith (5.3)
| 82.1 vs 79.5
| 36.2 vs 34.9
| .450 vs .417
| 2022
| S. Diggins-Smith (19.7)
| B. Turner (6.8)
| S. Diggins-Smith (5.5)
| 81.1 vs 84.1
| 31.2 vs 37.2
| .429 vs .441
| 2023
| B. Griner (17.5)
| B. Griner &amp; B. Turner (6.3)
| S. Sutton (4.8)
| 76.6 vs. 84.9
| 24.3 vs. 30.8
| 44.4 vs. 44.8
| 2024
| K. Copper (21.1)
| B. Griner (6.6)
| N. Cloud (6.9)
| 81.5 vs 84.8
| .439 vs .431
| 32.3 vs 37.0
==Media coverage==
Currently, Mercury games are broadcast on &quot;Arizona&#x27;s Family&quot;, a group of Phoenix television stations (KPHO-TV, KTVK and KPHE-LD) owned by Gray Television. KTVK will carry at least 13 Mercury games per season, with the remaining games on KPHE.

Some Mercury games are broadcast nationally on ESPN, ESPN2, Ion Television, CBS, CBS Sports Network and ABC.

==All-time notes==

===Regular season attendance===
*A sellout for a basketball game at the PHX Arena is 17,071.
===Draft picks===
*1997 Elite: Bridget Pettis (7), Nancy Lieberman-Cline (15)
*1997: Toni Foster (8), Tia Jackson (9), Umeki Webb (24), Monique Ambers (25)
*1998: Maria Stepanova (8), Andrea Kuklova (18), Brandy Reed (28), Karen Wilkins (38)
*1999: Edna Campbell (10), Clarissa Davis-Wrightsil (22), Lisa Harrison (34), Amanda Wilson (46)
*2000: Adrian Williams (21), Tauja Catchings (37), Shantia Owens (53)
*2001: Kristen Veal (13), Ilona Korstine (29), Tere Williams (45), Carolyn Moos (53), Megan Franza (61)
*2002: Tootie Shaw (25), Kayte Christensen (40), Amba Kongolo (56)
*2003 Miami/Portland Dispersal Draft: Tamicha Jackson (4)
*2003: Plenette Pierson (4), Petra Ujhelyi (16), Telisha Quarles (31), Marion Jones (33)
*2004 Cleveland Dispersal Draft: Penny Taylor (1)
*2004: Diana Taurasi (1), Chandi Jones (8), Ashley Robinson (14), Maria Villarroel (27)
*2005: Sandora Irvin (3), Angelina Williams (18), Jamie Carey (31)
*2006: Cappie Pondexter (2), Liz Shimek (18), Mistie Williams (21), Crystal Smith (32)
*2007 Charlotte Dispersal Draft: selection waived
*2007: Lindsey Harding (1), Tyresa Smith (18), Leah Rush (28), Chrissy Givens (31), Emily Westerbeg (37)
*2008: LaToya Pringle (13), Leilani Mitchell (25), Merscilla Packer (41)
*2009 Houston Dispersal Draft: Sequoia Holmes (5)
*2009: DeWanna Bonner (5), Sha Brooks (31), Jessica Adair (34)
*2010 Sacramento Dispersal Draft: selection waived
*2010: Tyra Grant (24), Nyeshia Stevenson (36)
*2011: Brittany Spears (19), Tahnee Robinson (31)
*2012: Samantha Prahalis (6), C&#x27;eria Ricketts (24), Christine Flores (30), Amanda Johnson (33)
*2013: Brittney Griner (1), Nikki Greene (26)
*2014: Tiffany Bias (17), Maggie Lucas (21), Stephanie Talbot (33)
*2015: Isabelle Harrison (12), Alex Harden (18), Žofia Hruščáková (24), Promise Amukamara (36)
*2016: Courtney Williams (8), Jullian Alleyne (20), Nirra Fields (32)
*2017: Alexis Prince (29)
*2018: Marie Gülich (12), Tyler Scaife (20), Raisa Musina (21), Imani Wright (26)
*2019: Alanna Smith (8), Sophie Cunningham (13), Arica Carter (32)
*2020: Jocelyn Willoughby (10), Te&#x27;a Cooper (18), Stella Johnson (29)
*2021: Ciera Johnson (32)
*2022: Maya Dodson (26), Macee Williams (32)
*2023: Destiny Harden (27), Kadi Sissoko (29)
*2024: Charisma Osborne (25), Jaz Shelley (29)

===Trades===
*July 31, 1997: The Mercury acquired Mikiko Hagiwara from the Sacramento Monarchs in exchange for future considerations.
*July 6, 1998: The Mercury traded Pauline Jordan to the Sacramento Monarchs in exchange for Tiffani Johnson.
*October 27, 1999: The Mercury traded Marlies Askamp, Angela Aycock and Kristi Harrower to the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for Adia Barnes, Tonya Edwards and Trisha Fallon.
*February 18, 2000: The Mercury acquired Brandy Reed from the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for the fifth pick in the 2000 Draft.
*April 25, 2000: The Mercury traded Shantia Owens to the Miami Sol in exchange for a fourth-round pick in the 2001 Draft.
*May 27, 2001: The Mercury acquired Jaynetta Saunders from the Cleveland Rockers in exchange for a second-round pick in the 2002 Draft.
*June 22, 2001: The Mercury traded Tonya Edwards to the Charlotte Sting in exchange for a second-round pick in the 2002 Draft.
*March 4, 2002: The Mercury traded the eighth pick in the 2002 Draft to the Cleveland Rockers in exchange for Pollyana Johns-Kimborough.
*March 4, 2002: The Mercury traded the 15th pick in the 2002 Draft to the Miami Sol in exchange for Tracy Reid and the 13th pick in the 2002 Draft.
*March 4, 2002: The Mercury traded Bridget Pettis and the 13th pick in the 2002 Draft to the Indiana Fever in exchange for Gordana Grubin.
*May 3, 2002: The Mercury traded a fourth-round pick in the 2003 Draft to the Detroit Shock in exchange for Claudia das Neves.
*May 5, 2002: The Mercury traded Claudia das Neves to the Miami Sol in exchange for a third-round pick in the 2003 Draft.
*April 28, 2003: The Mercury traded Petra Ujhelyi and Telisha Quarles to the Detroit Shock in exchange for Edwina Brown and Lenae Williams.
*July 31, 2003: The Mercury traded Stacey Thomas to the Detroit Shock in exchange for Tamara Moore.
*June 29, 2005: The Mercury traded Plenette Pierson to the Detroit Shock in exchange for Andrea Stinson and a second-round pick in the 2006 Draft.
*February 21, 2007: The Mercury traded Sandora Irvin to the San Antonio Silver Stars in exchange for a second-round pick in the 2008 Draft.
*April 2, 2007: The Mercury traded a second-round pick in the 2008 Draft to the New York Liberty in exchange for Kelly Schumacher.
*April 4, 2007: The Mercury traded Lindsey Harding to the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for Tangela Smith.
*May 7, 2008: The Mercury traded Leilani Mitchell to the New York Liberty in exchange for a third-round pick in the 2009 Draft.
*January 30, 2009: The Mercury traded Kelly Miller and LaToya Pringle to the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for Nicole Ohlde.
*March 20, 2009: The Mercury traded Barbara Farris to the Sacramento Monarchs in exchange for A&#x27;Quonesia Franklin and Kim Smith.
*March 26, 2009: The Mercury traded a first-round pick in the 2010 Draft to the Los Angeles Sparks in exchange for Temeka Johnson.
*March 30, 2010: The Mercury traded Cappie Pondexter and Kelly Mazzante to the New York Liberty and received Candice Dupree from the Chicago Sky. Chicago received Shameka Christon and Cathrine Kraayeveld from New York as part of this trade.
*July 23, 2010: The Mercury traded Nicole Ohlde and a first-round pick in the 2011 Draft in exchange for Kara Braxton.
*April 11, 2011: The Mercury traded Tahnee Robinson to the Connecticut Sun in exchange for a third-round pick in the 2012 Draft.
*August 4, 2011: The Mercury traded Kara Braxton to the New York Liberty in exchange for Sidney Spencer.
*January 12, 2012: The Mercury traded Temeka Johnson to the Tulsa Shock in exchange for Andrea Riley.
*February 2, 2012: The Mercury traded a second-round pick in the 2013 Draft to the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for Alexis Hornbuckle.
*February 28, 2012: The Mercury traded the 18th pick in the 2012 Draft to the Minnesota Lynx in exchange for Charde Houston and the 24th pick in the 2012 Draft.
*March 11, 2014: The Mercury traded Lynetta Kizer to the Indiana Fever in exchange for Erin Phillips.
*March 27, 2014: The Mercury traded Charde Houston to the Seattle Storm in exchange for Ewelina Kobryn.
*May 12, 2014: The Mercury traded Maggie Lucas to the Indiana Fever in exchange for a second-round pick in the 2015 Draft.
*May 9, 2016: The Mercury traded Monique Currie to the San Antonio Stars in exchange for a second-round pick in the 2017 Draft.
*June 25, 2016: The Mercury traded Courtney Williams, Jillian Alleyne, and San Antonio&#x27;s second-round pick to the Connecticut Sun in exchange for Kelsey Bone.
*June 25, 2016: The Mercury traded Noelle Quinn to the Seattle Storm in exchange for Angel Robinson.
*January 31, 2017: The Mercury traded Isabelle Harrison and a 2017 first round draft pick to the San Antonio Stars in exchange for Danielle Robinson.
*February 21, 2017: In a three-team trade, the Mercury traded Candice Dupree and a second round pick in the 2017 Draft to the Indiana Fever and acquired Camille Little and the draft rights to Jillian Alleyne from the Connecticut Sun.
*February 21, 2018: The Mercury traded Cayla George for the 21st pick in the 2018 WNBA Draft. In a separate trade, the Mercury traded Kelsey Bone for 26th pick in the 2018 WNBA draft and a third round pick in the 2019 WNBA Draft.
*March 6, 2018: The Mercury traded the 8th pick in the 2018 WNBA Draft for Briann January. In a separate trade, the Mercury traded Danielle Robinson and a second round pick in the 2019 WNBA Draft for the 12th pick in the 2018 WNBA Draft.
*May 21, 2019: The Mercury traded Stephanie Talbot to Minnesota in exchange for Minnesota&#x27;s second round pick in the 2020 Draft.
*February 11, 2020: The Mercury traded DeWanna Bonner to Connecticut in exchange for the 7th and 10th pick in the 2020 Draft and Connecticut&#x27;s first round pick in the 2021 Draft.
*February 12, 2020: The Mercury traded the 5th and 7th pick in the 2020 Draft and Connecticut&#x27;s first round pick in the 2021 Draft (acquired via Feb. 11 trade) to Dallas in exchange for Skylar Diggins-Smith.
*February 19, 2020: The Mercury traded Briann January, the 17th pick in the 2020 Draft, and their second round pick in the 2021 Draft to Atlanta for Jessica Breland and Nia Coffey.
*April 17, 2020: The Mercury traded the draft rights to Jocelyn Willoughby to New York in exchange for Shatori Walker-Kimbrough.
*February 10, 2021: The Mercury traded the 6th overall pick in the 2021 Draft and a first round pick in the 2022 Draft to New York in exchange for Kia Nurse and Megan Walker.
*February 13, 2021: The Mercury traded Yvonne Turner to Atlanta for the Dream&#x27;s 2022 third round pick.
*January 31, 2022: The Mercury traded Kia Vaugh to Atlanta for the Dream&#x27;s 2023 third round pick.
*February 3, 2022: The Mercury traded Bria Hartley, the 20th pick in the 2022 Draft and a second round pick in the 2023 Draft to Indiana and their 2023 First Round pick to Chicago in exchange for Diamond DeShields.
*February 11, 2023: The Mercury traded Diamond DeShields and the right to swap 2025 first round picks with New York in exchange for Michaela Onyenwere, and Chicago&#x27;s Third Round pick in the 2024 WNBA Draft, and Second Round pick in the 2025 WNBA Draft.
*February 3, 2024: The Mercury traded Moriah Jefferson to Connecticut in exchange for Rebecca Allen.
*February 6, 2024: The Mercury traded Michaela Onyenwere, Brianna Turner, the third pick in the 2024 Draft, a second round pick in the 2025 Draft (originally Chicago&#x27;s), their own 2026 first round pick, and the rights to swap second round 2026 picks with Chicago in exchange for Kahleah Copper, and the rights to Morgan Bertsch.
*August 20, 2024: The Mercury traded Sug Sutton and their third round pick in the 2025 Draft to Washington in exchange for the rights to Klara Lundquist.

===All-Stars===
*1997: No All-Star Game
*1998: No All-Star Game
*1999: Michelle Timms
*2000: Brandy Reed
*2001: None
*2002: None
*2003: Adrian Williams
*2004: Anna DeForge, Diana Taurasi
*2005: Diana Taurasi
*2006: Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi
*2007: Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi, Penny Taylor
*2008: No All-Star Game
*2009: Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi
*2010: Candice Dupree, Diana Taurasi, Penny Taylor
*2011: Diana Taurasi, Penny Taylor
*2012: No All-Star Game
*2013: Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi
*2014: Candice Dupree, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi
*2015: DeWanna Bonner, Candice Dupree, Brittney Griner
*2016: No All-Star Game
*2017: Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi
*2018: DeWanna Bonner, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi
*2019: DeWanna Bonner, Brittney Griner
*2020: No All-Star Game
*2021: Skylar Diggins-Smith, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi
*2022: Skylar Diggins-Smith, Brittney Griner
*2023: Brittney Griner
*2024: Kahleah Copper, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi

===Olympians===
*2000: Maria Stepanova (RUS)
*2004: Diana Taurasi, Penny Taylor (AUS)
*2008: Diana Taurasi, Cappie Pondexter, Penny Taylor (AUS)
*2012: Diana Taurasi
*2016: Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi, Penny Taylor (AUS), Sonja Petrović (SER), Lindsey Harding (BLR), Marta Xargay (ESP)
*2020: Skylar Diggins-Smith, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi, Kia Nurse (CAN), Alanna Smith (AUS)
*2024: Kahleah Copper, Brittney Griner, Diana Taurasi

===Honors and awards===

*1997 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Jennifer Gillom
*1998 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Jennifer Gillom
*2002 &quot;Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award&quot;: Jennifer Gillom
*2004 &quot;Rookie of the Year&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2004 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2005 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2006 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2006 &quot;All-Rookie Team&quot;: Cappie Pondexter
*2006 &quot;Peak Performer (Scoring)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2007 &quot;Finals MVP&quot;: Cappie Pondexter
*2007 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2007 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Penny Taylor
*2008 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2008 &quot;Peak Performer (Scoring)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2009 &quot;Most Valuable Player&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2009 &quot;Finals MVP&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2009 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2009 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Cappie Pondexter
*2009 &quot;All-Rookie Team&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2009 &quot;Sixth Woman of the Year&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2009 &quot;Peak Performer (Scoring)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2010 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2010 &quot;Sixth Woman of the Year&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2010 &quot;Peak Performer (Scoring)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2011 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2011 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Penny Taylor
*2011 &quot;Sixth Woman of the Year&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2011 &quot;Peak Performer (Scoring)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2012 &quot;All-Rookie Team&quot;: Samantha Prahalis
*2013 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2013 &quot;All-Rookie Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2014 &quot;Finals MVP&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2014 &quot;Defensive Player of the Year&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2014 &quot;Peak Performer (Assists)&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2014 &quot;Coach of the Year&quot;: Sandy Brondello
*2014 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2014 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2014 &quot;All-Defensive First Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2015 &quot;Defensive Player of the Year&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2015 &quot;All-Defensive First Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2015 &quot;All-Defensive Second Team&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2015 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: DeWanna Bonner
*2015 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2016 &quot;All-Defensive Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2017 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2017 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2018 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2018 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2019 &quot;Most Improved Player&quot;: Leilani Mitchell
*2019 &quot;Peak Performer (Points)&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2019 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2019 &quot;All-Defensive Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2019 &quot;All-Rookie Team&quot;: Brianna Turner
*2020 &quot;All-Defensive First Team&quot;: Brianna Turner
*2020 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Diana Taurasi
*2020 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Skylar Diggins-Smith
*2021 &quot;All-Defensive First Team&quot;: Brianna Turner
*2021 &quot;All-Defensive Second Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2021 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Skylar Diggins-Smith
*2021 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Brittney Griner
*2022 &quot;All-WNBA First Team&quot;: Skylar Diggins-Smith
*2024 &quot;All-WNBA Second Team&quot;: Kahleah Copper
*2024 &quot;All-Defensive Second Team&quot;: Natasha Cloud
==Notes==
== References ==

==External links==
* Gaines announced as Head Coach of the Mercury
* Phoenix Mercury coverage from The Arizona Republic/azcentral.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1274643" start="4" end="19" title="Phoenix Mercury" label="Phoenix Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="49" end="59" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="74" end="90" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="119" end="163" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811048" start="190" end="208" title="Western Conference (WNBA)" label="Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517815" start="294" end="305" title="1997 WNBA season" label="1997 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538690" start="348" end="357" title="PHX Arena" label="PHX Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392139" start="395" end="408" title="WNBA Playoffs" label="WNBA Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314911" start="460" end="464" title="1998 WNBA season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314771" start="466" end="470" title="2007 WNBA season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539241" start="472" end="476" title="2009 WNBA season" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154045" start="478" end="482" title="2014 WNBA season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881910" start="488" end="492" title="2021 WNBA season" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262883" start="517" end="528" title="WNBA Finals" label="WNBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479748" start="543" end="550" title="Houston Comets" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175515" start="607" end="614" title="Detroit Shock" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="616" end="623" title="Indiana Fever" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q796358" start="629" end="636" title="Chicago Sky" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="706" end="711" title="University of Connecticut" label="UConn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="712" end="725" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="727" end="734" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="740" end="756" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="765" end="771" title="Temple University" label="Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="786" end="800" title="Candice Dupree" label="Candice Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="809" end="815" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="823" end="838" title="Brittney Griner" label="Brittney Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="861" end="873" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q100811627" start="894" end="904" title="Mat Ishbia" label="Mat Ishbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349577" start="1007" end="1020" title="Robert Sarver" label="Robert Sarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q271441" start="1208" end="1223" title="Nancy Lieberman" label="Nancy Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="1251" end="1264" title="Michele Timms" label="Michele Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1268" end="1277" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="1283" end="1298" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="Jennifer Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644588" start="1318" end="1332" title="Bridget Pettis" label="Bridget Pettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q267765" start="1354" end="1367" title="Cheryl Miller" label="Cheryl Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="1551" end="1567" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q536458" start="1701" end="1718" title="Cleveland Rockers" label="Cleveland Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479748" start="1845" end="1859" title="Houston Comets" label="Houston Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329633" start="2026" end="2044" title="Los Angeles Sparks" label="Los Angeles Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148974" start="2491" end="2498" title="Forward (basketball)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020465" start="2499" end="2512" title="Lisa Harrison" label="Lisa Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="2540" end="2556" title="Playboy (magazine)" label="Playboy Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="2841" end="2846" title="University of Connecticut" label="UConn"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="2852" end="2865" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601876" start="2894" end="2923" title="WNBA Rookie of the Year Award" label="WNBA Rookie of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="3122" end="3125" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609483" start="3132" end="3145" title="Paul Westhead" label="Paul Westhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="3331" end="3349" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579314" start="3353" end="3357" title="1980 NBA Finals" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="3385" end="3401" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544869" start="4256" end="4269" title="Seattle Storm" label="Seattle Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472697" start="4398" end="4422" title="San Antonio Silver Stars" label="San Antonio Silver Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175515" start="4601" end="4614" title="Detroit Shock" label="Detroit Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="4991" end="5003" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="5228" end="5244" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693510" start="5389" end="5401" title="Corey Gaines" label="Corey Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609483" start="5441" end="5454" title="Paul Westhead" label="Paul Westhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472697" start="6092" end="6116" title="San Antonio Silver Stars" label="San Antonio Silver Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="6389" end="6402" title="Indiana Fever" label="Indiana Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="6487" end="6500" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518653" start="6514" end="6535" title="WNBA Finals MVP Award" label="WNBA Finals MVP Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="6552" end="6568" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="6587" end="6603" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="6653" end="6667" title="Candice Dupree" label="Candice Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="6698" end="6710" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472697" start="6950" end="6961" title="San Antonio Silver Stars" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544869" start="7032" end="7045" title="Seattle Storm" label="Seattle Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="7102" end="7115" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537490" start="7287" end="7301" title="2011 WNBA All-Star Game" label="All-Star break"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364784" start="7379" end="7397" title="2011 WNBA Playoffs" label="2011 WNBA Playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544869" start="7413" end="7426" title="Seattle Storm" label="Seattle Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="7653" end="7667" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Minnesota Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038587" start="7957" end="7972" title="2013 WNBA draft" label="2013 WNBA draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="8098" end="8113" title="Brittney Griner" label="Brittney Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019603" start="8259" end="8274" title="Sandy Brondello" label="Sandy Brondello"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="8443" end="8456" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27704712" start="8836" end="8840" title="2016 WNBA Playoffs" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="8976" end="8989" title="Indiana Fever" label="Indiana Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q974705" start="9013" end="9029" title="New York Liberty" label="New York Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="9116" end="9130" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Minnesota Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530259" start="9136" end="9140" title="2017 WNBA Playoffs" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544869" start="9250" end="9263" title="Seattle Storm" label="Seattle Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126243" start="9268" end="9283" title="Connecticut Sun" label="Connecticut Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329633" start="9338" end="9356" title="Los Angeles Sparks" label="Los Angeles Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290367" start="9359" end="9363" title="2018 WNBA Playoffs" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q21334944" start="9477" end="9489" title="Dallas Wings" label="Dallas Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126243" start="9494" end="9509" title="Connecticut Sun" label="Connecticut Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="9518" end="9531" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544869" start="9655" end="9668" title="Seattle Storm" label="Seattle Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="9840" end="9851" title="Sponsor (commercial)" label="sponsorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="9867" end="9881" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544620" start="9901" end="9909" title="LifeLock" label="LifeLock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16890127" start="10206" end="10220" title="Casino Arizona" label="Casino Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041182" start="10225" end="10245" title="Talking Stick Resort" label="Talking Stick Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="10333" end="10347" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="DeWanna Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126243" start="10381" end="10396" title="Connecticut Sun" label="Connecticut Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q526067" start="10398" end="10410" title="Kara Braxton" label="Kara Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20752038" start="10425" end="10436" title="Emma Cannon" label="Emma Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777228" start="10483" end="10496" title="Elitzur Ramla (women&amp;#x27;s basketball)" label="Elitzur Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q529421" start="10498" end="10512" title="Monique Currie" label="Monique Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q451759" start="10521" end="10533" title="Anna DeForge" label="Anna DeForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="10547" end="10561" title="Candice Dupree" label="Candice Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531943" start="10575" end="10588" title="Tonya Edwards" label="Tonya Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="10602" end="10617" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="Jennifer Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019536" start="10631" end="10649" title="Michelle Griffiths" label="Michelle Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676907" start="10663" end="10680" title="Isabelle Harrison" label="Isabelle Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q21334944" start="10709" end="10721" title="Dallas Wings" label="Dallas Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020465" start="10723" end="10736" title="Lisa Harrison" label="Lisa Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980619" start="10750" end="10765" title="Tamicha Jackson" label="Tamicha Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q275307" start="10780" end="10794" title="Temeka Johnson" label="Temeka Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q271441" start="10808" end="10823" title="Nancy Lieberman" label="Nancy Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814402" start="10832" end="10846" title="Kelly Mazzante" label="Kelly Mazzante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032247" start="10860" end="10872" title="Kelly Miller (basketball)" label="Kelly Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229189" start="10886" end="10902" title="Leilani Mitchell" label="Leilani Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465192" start="10942" end="10960" title="Washington Mystics" label="Washington Mystics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644588" start="10962" end="10976" title="Bridget Pettis" label="Bridget Pettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q635785" start="10990" end="11003" title="Erin Phillips" label="Erin Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q731693" start="11012" end="11028" title="Plenette Pierson" label="Plenette Pierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="11072" end="11086" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Minnesota Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="11088" end="11104" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="Cappie Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643738" start="11118" end="11129" title="Brandy Reed" label="Brandy Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015040" start="11149" end="11166" title="Danielle Robinson" label="Danielle Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="11195" end="11208" title="Indiana Fever" label="Indiana Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515100" start="11210" end="11223" title="Tangela Smith" label="Tangela Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q432797" start="11237" end="11250" title="Belinda Snell" label="Belinda Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q294004" start="11264" end="11279" title="Maria Stepanova" label="Maria Stepanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="11299" end="11312" title="Diana Taurasi" label="Diana Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="11326" end="11338" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="11380" end="11394" title="Michelle Timms" label="Michelle Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486750" start="11408" end="11424" title="Slobodanka Tuvić" label="Slobodanka Tuvić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812697" start="11438" end="11454" title="Kamila Vodičková" label="Kamila Vodičková"/>
<link wikidata="Q29841112" start="11469" end="11493" title="Shatori Walker-Kimbrough" label="Shatori Walker-Kimbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919425" start="11541" end="11560" title="Maccabi Bnot Ashdod" label="Maccabi Bnot Ashdod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605643" start="11591" end="11613" title="Adrian Williams-Strong" label="Adrian Williams-Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828279" start="11627" end="11649" title="Le&amp;#x27;coe Willingham" label="Le&amp;#x27;coe Willingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21334944" start="11688" end="11700" title="Dallas Wings" label="Dallas Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308003" start="11789" end="11808" title="Ann Meyers-Drysdale" label="Ann Meyers-Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="11826" end="11841" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="Jennifer Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q271441" start="11859" end="11874" title="Nancy Lieberman" label="Nancy Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q267765" start="11892" end="11905" title="Cheryl Miller" label="Cheryl Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227620" start="11923" end="11934" title="Linda Sharp" label="Linda Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="11952" end="11965" title="Michele Timms" label="Michele Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="11983" end="11995" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687804" start="12076" end="12091" title="Jerry Colangelo" label="Jerry Colangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164177" start="12106" end="12118" title="Phoenix Suns" label="Phoenix Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349577" start="12132" end="12145" title="Robert Sarver" label="Robert Sarver"/>
<link wikidata="Q164177" start="12160" end="12172" title="Phoenix Suns" label="Phoenix Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q100811627" start="12186" end="12196" title="Mat Ishbia" label="Mat Ishbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164177" start="12211" end="12223" title="Phoenix Suns" label="Phoenix Suns"/>
<link wikidata="Q267765" start="12284" end="12297" title="Cheryl Miller" label="Cheryl Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308003" start="12335" end="12354" title="Ann Meyers-Drysdale" label="Ann Meyers-Drysdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693510" start="12368" end="12380" title="Corey Gaines" label="Corey Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q105593424" start="12394" end="12403" title="Amber Cox" label="Amber Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940246" start="12538" end="12549" title="Carrie Graf" label="Carrie Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227620" start="12613" end="12624" title="Linda K. Sharp" label="Linda Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525374" start="12681" end="12697" title="Gary Kloppenburg" label="Gary Kloppenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q911754" start="12706" end="12717" title="Brian Agler" label="Brian Agler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020465" start="12726" end="12739" title="Lisa Harrison" label="Lisa Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q932879" start="12748" end="12763" title="Cedric Ceballos" label="Cedric Ceballos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="12772" end="12785" title="Michele Timms" label="Michele Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644588" start="12794" end="12808" title="Bridget Pettis" label="Bridget Pettis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693510" start="12822" end="12834" title="Corey Gaines" label="Corey Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331753" start="12848" end="12860" title="Earl Cureton" label="Earl Cureton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992482" start="12874" end="12885" title="Tom Hovasse" label="Tom Hovasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="12975" end="12987" title="Penny Taylor" label="Penny Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961341" start="12996" end="13010" title="Chasity Melvin" label="Chasity Melvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q301356" start="13024" end="13034" title="Nikki Blue" label="Nikki Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698917" start="13080" end="13096" title="Crystal Robinson" label="Crystal Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084387" start="13105" end="13125" title="Charli Turner Thorne" label="Charli Turner Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q456457" start="13155" end="13170" title="Tully Bevilaqua" label="Tully Bevilaqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q955601" start="13179" end="13193" title="Kristi Toliver" label="Kristi Toliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q939308" start="13289" end="13293" title="1997 Phoenix Mercury season" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13296" end="13305" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979010" start="13315" end="13324" title="Toni Foster" label="T. Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="13333" end="13341" title="Michele Timms" label="M. Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901590" start="13395" end="13399" title="1998 Phoenix Mercury season" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13402" end="13411" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13421" end="13430" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="13439" end="13447" title="Michele Timms" label="M. Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901589" start="13501" end="13505" title="1999 Phoenix Mercury season" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13508" end="13517" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q59619" start="13527" end="13536" title="Marlies Askamp" label="M. Askamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019543" start="13545" end="13553" title="Michele Timms" label="M. Timms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901591" start="13608" end="13612" title="2000 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643738" start="13615" end="13622" title="Brandy Reed" label="B. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643738" start="13632" end="13639" title="Brandy Reed" label="B. Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053095" start="13648" end="13657" title="Michelle Cleary" label="M. Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901592" start="13711" end="13715" title="2001 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13718" end="13727" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q294004" start="13737" end="13749" title="Maria Stepanova" label="M. Stepanova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13758" end="13765" title="Kirsten Veal" label="K. Veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q787019" start="13819" end="13823" title="2002 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q461694" start="13826" end="13835" title="Jennifer Gillom" label="J. Gillom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605643" start="13845" end="13856" title="Adrian Williams-Strong" label="A. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110860" start="13865" end="13874" title="Gordana Grubin" label="G. Grubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901593" start="13928" end="13932" title="2003 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q451759" start="13935" end="13945" title="Anna DeForge" label="A. DeForge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605643" start="13955" end="13966" title="Adrian Williams-Strong" label="A. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980619" start="13975" end="13985" title="Tamicha Jackson" label="T. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q535911" start="14039" end="14043" title="2004 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14046" end="14056" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="14066" end="14075" title="Penny Taylor" label="P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14084" end="14094" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901594" start="14148" end="14152" title="2005 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14155" end="14165" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812697" start="14175" end="14188" title="Kamila Vodichkova" label="K. Vodichkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14197" end="14207" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901595" start="14261" end="14265" title="2006 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14268" end="14278" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812697" start="14288" end="14301" title="Kamila Vodichkova" label="K. Vodichkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14310" end="14320" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901596" start="14374" end="14378" title="2007 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14381" end="14391" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515100" start="14401" end="14409" title="Tangela Smith" label="T. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032247" start="14418" end="14427" title="Kelly Miller (basketball)" label="K. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901597" start="14481" end="14485" title="2008 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14488" end="14498" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515100" start="14508" end="14516" title="Tangela Smith" label="T. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032247" start="14525" end="14534" title="Kelly Miller (basketball)" label="K. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901600" start="14588" end="14592" title="2009 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14595" end="14605" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="14615" end="14624" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="D. Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q444781" start="14633" end="14645" title="Cappie Pondexter" label="C. Pondexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901602" start="14700" end="14704" title="2010 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14707" end="14717" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="14727" end="14736" title="Candice Dupree" label="C. Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="14745" end="14754" title="Penny Taylor" label="P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901604" start="14808" end="14812" title="2011 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="14815" end="14825" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="14835" end="14844" title="Candice Dupree" label="C. Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q264440" start="14853" end="14862" title="Penny Taylor" label="P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626541" start="14916" end="14920" title="2012 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="14923" end="14932" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="D. Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200031" start="14942" end="14951" title="Krystal Thomas" label="K. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965300" start="14960" end="14971" title="Samantha Prahalis" label="S. Prahalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629760" start="15025" end="15029" title="2013 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15032" end="15042" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468264" start="15052" end="15061" title="Candice Dupree" label="C. Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15070" end="15080" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274643" start="15134" end="15138" title="2014 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15141" end="15151" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15161" end="15170" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15179" end="15189" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878680" start="15243" end="15247" title="2015 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="15250" end="15259" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="D. Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15269" end="15278" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="15287" end="15296" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="D. Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886332" start="15350" end="15354" title="2016 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15357" end="15367" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15377" end="15386" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15395" end="15405" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530830" start="15459" end="15463" title="2017 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15466" end="15475" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15485" end="15494" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229189" start="15503" end="15514" title="Leilani Mitchell" label="L. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866656" start="15568" end="15572" title="2018 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15575" end="15585" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15595" end="15604" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15613" end="15623" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078110" start="15677" end="15681" title="2019 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15684" end="15693" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q866093" start="15703" end="15712" title="DeWanna Bonner" label="D. Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15721" end="15731" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q85736743" start="15786" end="15790" title="2020 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15793" end="15803" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50777712" start="15813" end="15822" title="Brianna Turner" label="B. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962893" start="15831" end="15841" title="Bria Hartley" label="B. Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q240726" start="15848" end="15858" title="Diana Taurasi" label="D. Taurasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106856583" start="15912" end="15916" title="2021 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15919" end="15928" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="15938" end="15947" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113195" start="15956" end="15972" title="Skylar Diggins-Smith" label="S. Diggins-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q110413333" start="16026" end="16030" title="2022 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113195" start="16033" end="16049" title="Skylar Diggins-Smith" label="S. Diggins-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q50777712" start="16059" end="16068" title="Brianna Turner" label="B. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113195" start="16077" end="16093" title="Skylar Diggins-Smith" label="S. Diggins-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q115817184" start="16147" end="16151" title="2023 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="16154" end="16163" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="16173" end="16182" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q50777712" start="16189" end="16198" title="Brianna Turner" label="B. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q98519411" start="16207" end="16216" title="Sug Sutton" label="S. Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q124985769" start="16273" end="16277" title="2024 Phoenix Mercury season" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q28660885" start="16280" end="16289" title="Kahleah Copper" label="K. Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925780" start="16299" end="16308" title="Brittney Griner" label="B. Griner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20109554" start="16317" end="16325" title="Natasha Cloud" label="N. Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191480" start="16513" end="16520" title="KPHO-TV" label="KPHO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191538" start="16522" end="16526" title="KTVK" label="KTVK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335578" start="16531" end="16538" title="KPHE-LD" label="KPHE-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598232" start="16549" end="16564" title="Gray Television" label="Gray Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="16702" end="16706" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953246" start="16708" end="16713" title="WNBA on ESPN" label="ESPN2"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="16715" end="16729" title="Ion Television" label="Ion Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="16731" end="16734" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009274" start="16736" end="16754" title="CBS Sports Network" label="CBS Sports Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16759" end="16762" title="NBA on ABC#WNBA on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538690" start="16857" end="16866" title="Footprint Center" label="PHX Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q43424022" start="17014" end="17028" title="Monique Ambers" label="Monique Ambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q655386" start="17464" end="17469" title="Miami Sol" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470412" start="17470" end="17478" title="Portland Fire" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q536458" start="17611" end="17620" title="Cleveland Rockers" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067358" start="17903" end="17912" title="Charlotte Sting" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479748" start="18131" end="18138" title="Houston Comets" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541588" start="18244" end="18254" title="Sacramento Monarchs" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q129669204" start="18466" end="18480" title="Amanda Johnson" label="Amanda Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130089" start="27932" end="27935" title="Russia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="RUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q264536" start="27973" end="27976" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="AUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q264536" start="28032" end="28035" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="AUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q264536" start="28111" end="28114" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="AUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725291" start="28133" end="28136" title="Serbia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="SER"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297943" start="28156" end="28159" title="Belarus women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="BLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471704" start="28176" end="28179" title="Spain women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="ESP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317933" start="28253" end="28256" title="Canada women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="CAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q264536" start="28273" end="28276" title="Australia women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="AUS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85696" wikidata="Q1399384" url="?curid=85696" title="Februus">
<text>Februus is an ancient Italic god of purifications, who was worshipped by both the Romans and Etruscans. He was also worshipped as the god of the underworld by the Etruscans. For them, Februus was also the god of riches (money and gold) and death, both connected loosely to the underworld in the same natural manner as with the better-known Roman god Pluto. Februus&#x27; name could mean &quot;the underground [one]&quot; in the Etruscan language.

Februus may have become the Roman Febris, goddess of fever (&quot;febris&quot; in Latin means fever). These are possibly connected with the sweating of fevers, which was considered a purgative, washing, and purification process.

Februus is possibly named in honor of the more ancient Februa, also Februalia, festival of washing and purification. Februus&#x27; holy month was &quot;Februarius&quot; (of Februa), hence the English ′′February′′, a month named for the Februa/Februalia purification festival which occurred on the 15th of that month. These purification activities occurred at about the same time as Lupercalia, a Roman festival in honor of Faunus and also the wolf who nursed Romulus and Remus, during which expiatory sacrifices and ritual purifications were also performed. Because of this coincidence, the two gods Faunus and Februus were often considered the same entity.

==See also==
*Deities and personifications of seasons
*List of death deities
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1399384" start="0" end="7" title="Februus" label="Februus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="145" end="155" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="163" end="172" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152262" start="350" end="355" title="Pluto (mythology)" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="428" end="445" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527609" start="482" end="488" title="Febris" label="Febris"/>
<link wikidata="Q650197" start="733" end="739" title="Februa" label="Februa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647226" start="830" end="840" title="Februarius" label="Februarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q650197" start="1060" end="1070" title="Lupercalia" label="Lupercalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089703" start="1101" end="1107" title="Faunus" label="Faunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197" start="1137" end="1154" title="Romulus and Remus" label="Romulus and Remus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808634" start="1351" end="1390" title="Deities and personifications of seasons" label="Deities and personifications of seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224467" start="1392" end="1413" title="List of death deities" label="List of death deities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85697" wikidata="Q613010" url="?curid=85697" title="Fufluns">
<text>In Etruscan religion, Fufluns () or Puphluns () was a god of plant life, happiness, wine, health, and growth in all things. He is mentioned twice among the gods listed in the inscriptions of the Liver of Piacenza, being listed among the 16gods that rule the Etruscan astrological houses. He is the 9th of those 16gods. He is the son of Semla and the god Tinia. He was worshipped at Populonia (Etruscan &quot;Fufluna&quot; or &quot;Pupluna&quot;) and is the namesake of that town.

His Greek equivalent is Dionysos (Latin Dionysus), whereas his Roman equivalent is Liber. For this reason he was also called Fufluns Pachies or Pacha. He was adopted by the Romans but was quickly meshed with Dionysus and his rituals were changed heavily by the influence of Dionysian frenzies.

==Iconography==
Fufluns is usually depicted as a beardless youth, but is sometimes rarely shown as an older, bearded man. Fufluns was shown in art with the thyrsus, satyrs, maenads, and other apotropaic symbols.

Fufluns is associated with several other deities in art, including Apulu (Apollo) who is considered his brother and his mother Semla. In association with them, Fufluns was sometimes seen as a chthonic deity associated with the underworld and a psychopomp that guided and protected souls. Fufluns was additionally associated with a purely Etruscan goddess named Catha.
==Myths==
Fufluns shares many myths with Dionysus, including the story of his birth, which parallels the story of Zeus and Semele. Like that myth, the pregnant Semla is killed by Tinia in the form of a lightning bolt, who then continues to bear Fufluns by sewing the infant into his thigh and later giving birth to him. However, Semla continues to appear in artwork in association with an adult Fufluns after her death, indicating either a resurrection or immortalization of his mother.

Additionally, Fufluns&#x27;s connection to his mother is sometimes cast as romantic, as seen in artwork that shows them in an embrace used elsewhere in Etruscan artwork to indicate erotic entanglement.

Another depiction of a lost myth regarding Fufluns depicts his relationship with Areatha, the Etruscan form of Ariadne. The bronze mirror shows Fufluns and Areatha but also includes additional figures that are not part of the Greek version of the myth, namely Castur (the Etruscan Castor), a male figure called Eiasun (Jason) and a small winged figure identified as Aminth, who is attributed as the personification of love. The implications of the scene are based on a myth that is no longer recorded, but indicate some disagreement between Eiasun and Fufluns in which Areatha is involved. The myth of Fuflun and Areatha itself follows the traditional Greek myth, in which Areatha is abandoned by Theseus after helping him escape the labyrinth of Minos. Fufluns then finds Areatha and falls in love with her, and they later marry.

==Notes==
==References==
* Bonfante, Larissa, and Judith Swaddling. (2006). &quot;Etruscan Myths&quot;. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
* Bonfante, Larissa. (2015). Etruscan mirrors and the grave. In &quot;L’écriture Et L’espace De La Mort. Épigraphie Et Nécropoles à L&#x27;époque *Préromaine&quot;, edited by Marie-Laurence Haack. Rome, IT: Publications De L’École Française De Rome, 2015. Accessed 22November 2016. http://books.openedition.org/efr/2741?lang=en.
* Pailler, J.-M. (1989) &quot;Fuluns e Catha: significato di un’associazione divina nella tarda età etrusca.&quot; &quot;Secondo Congresso Internazionale Etrusco, Firenze, 26 maggio – 2 giugno 1985. Atti III, pp. 1205–1211. Rome: Bretschneider.
* Paleothodoros, Dimitris. (2007). Dionysiac imagery in archaic Etruria. &quot;Etruscan Studies&quot;, &quot;10&quot;(1) (1January 2007). doi:10.1515/etst.2004.10.1.187 Accessed 22November 2016.
* Pavel, D. (2020) &quot;The image of the god Fufluns – Dionysus as reflected on Etruscan mirrors: a Greek or an Etruscan God?&quot;. Revista CICSA online, Serie Nouă VI:41-68. p45.https://www.ceeol.com/search/article-detail?id=939803
* Thomson, De Grummond Nancy. (2006). &quot;Etruscan Myth, Sacred History, and Legend&quot;. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology.
* Thomson, De Grummond Nancy, and Erika Simon. (2006). &quot;The Religion of the Etruscans&quot;. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="20" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q613010" start="22" end="29" title="Fufluns" label="Fufluns"/>
<link wikidata="Q613010" start="36" end="44" title="Fufluns" label="Puphluns"/>
<link wikidata="Q776429" start="195" end="212" title="Liver of Piacenza" label="Liver of Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704452" start="336" end="341" title="Semla (mythology)" label="Semla"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="354" end="359" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231948" start="382" end="391" title="Populonia" label="Populonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="505" end="513" title="Dionysos" label="Dionysos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145491" start="564" end="569" title="Liber" label="Liber"/>
<link wikidata="Q536850" start="932" end="939" title="thyrsus" label="thyrsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="941" end="946" title="satyr" label="satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="949" end="955" title="maenad" label="maenad"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="968" end="986" title="apotropaic magic" label="apotropaic symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634020" start="1056" end="1061" title="Apulu" label="Apulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1063" end="1069" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="1181" end="1189" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="1233" end="1243" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1471" end="1475" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="2159" end="2166" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="2329" end="2335" title="Castor and Pollux" label="Castor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="2367" end="2372" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="2745" end="2752" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q429177" start="2907" end="2924" title="Larissa Bonfante" label="Bonfante, Larissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q50320652" start="2930" end="2946" title="Judith Swaddling" label="Judith Swaddling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85698" wikidata="Q21447407" url="?curid=85698" title="Semia">
<text>Semia (from ) is a genus of Asian cicadas in the tribe Cicadini, erected by Matsumura in 1917.

==Species==
The following are included by the Global Biodiversity Information Facility:
# &quot;Semia albusequi&quot; 
# &quot;Semia brevidilata&quot; 
# &quot;Semia gialaiensis&quot; 
# &quot;Semia hainanensis&quot; 
# &quot;Semia klapperichi&quot; 
# &quot;Semia lachna&quot; 
# &quot;Semia magna&quot; 
# &quot;Semia majuscula&quot; 
# &quot;Semia pallida&quot; 
# &quot;Semia spinosa&quot; - Vietnam
# &quot;Semia spiritus&quot; 
# &quot;Semia tibetensis&quot; 
# &quot;Semia watanabei&quot; - type species (as &quot;Leptopsaltria watanabei&quot; )

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19" end="24" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="34" end="40" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="49" end="54" title="Tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19158870" start="55" end="63" title="Cicadini" label="Cicadini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531570" start="142" end="182" title="Global Biodiversity Information Facility" label="Global Biodiversity Information Facility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="192" end="207" title="Semia albusequi" label="Semia albusequi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="223" end="240" title="Semia brevidilata" label="Semia brevidilata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="256" end="273" title="Semia gialaiensis" label="Semia gialaiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="289" end="306" title="Semia hainanensis" label="Semia hainanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="322" end="339" title="Semia klapperichi" label="Semia klapperichi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355" end="367" title="Semia lachna" label="Semia lachna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="383" end="394" title="Semia magna" label="Semia magna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="410" end="425" title="Semia majuscula" label="Semia majuscula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="441" end="454" title="Semia pallida" label="Semia pallida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="470" end="483" title="Semia spinosa" label="Semia spinosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="508" end="522" title="Semia spiritus" label="Semia spiritus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="538" end="554" title="Semia tibetensis" label="Semia tibetensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="570" end="585" title="Semia watanabei" label="Semia watanabei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984389" start="617" end="630" title="Leptopsaltria" label="Leptopsaltria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85699" wikidata="Q349571" url="?curid=85699" title="Horta">
<text>Horta may refer to:
== People ==
* Horta (surname), a list of people

== Places ==
* Horta, Africa, an ancient city and former bishopric in Africa Proconsularis, now in Tunisia and a Latin Catholic titular see
* Horta, Azores, Portugal, a municipality and city on the island of Faial
* Horta (district), Portugal, a former district of the Azores
* Horta, Portugal, a civil parish in the municipality of Vila Nova de Foz Côa
* Horta, Barcelona, Spain, a neighborhood in the Horta-Guinardó district of Barcelona
* Horta (Italy), an ancient city
* Horta of Valencia, a horticultural region in Central Valencia and a historic &quot;comarca&quot; of the Valencian Community
** Horta Nord, present-day comarca in the Valencian Community
** Horta Sud, present-day comarca in the Valencian Community
** Horta Oest, present-day comarca in the Valencian Community

== Transportation ==
* Horta (Barcelona Metro), the northern terminus of Barcelona metro line 5
* Horta premetro station, Saint-Gilles, Belgium
* Horta Airport, Azores, Portugal

== Other uses ==
* Horta (genus of plants) Including Horta superba.
* Horta (mythology), a goddess in Etruscan mythology
* Horta (food), Greek boiled green vegetables
* UA Horta, a football club based in Barcelona
* Horta or huerta, a fertile area or field in Portuguese, Catalan and Galician
* HORTA (mining), an underground geographic positioning technology used in mining
* Horta, an intelligent lifeform in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; episode &quot;The Devil in the Dark&quot;

==See also==
* Huerta (disambiguation)
* Hortus botanicus, botanical garden</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q349571" start="0" end="5" title="Horta" label="Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q37552843" start="35" end="50" title="Horta (surname)" label="Horta (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630164" start="85" end="98" title="Horta, Africa" label="Horta, Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q990385" start="212" end="225" title="Horta, Azores" label="Horta, Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412409" start="286" end="302" title="Horta (district)" label="Horta (district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q537471" start="403" end="423" title="Vila Nova de Foz Côa" label="Vila Nova de Foz Côa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225338" start="426" end="442" title="Horta, Barcelona" label="Horta, Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q176180" start="512" end="525" title="Horta (Italy)" label="Horta (Italy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068364" start="545" end="562" title="Horta of Valencia" label="Horta of Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q766277" start="628" end="635" title="Comarques of the Valencian Community" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298465" start="672" end="682" title="Horta Nord" label="Horta Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247650" start="734" end="743" title="Horta Sud" label="Horta Sud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390627" start="795" end="805" title="Horta Oest" label="Horta Oest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643379" start="878" end="901" title="Horta (Barcelona Metro)" label="Horta (Barcelona Metro)"/>
<link wikidata="Q764567" start="953" end="975" title="Horta premetro station" label="Horta premetro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431519" start="1001" end="1014" title="Horta Airport" label="Horta Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1053" end="1076" title="Horta (genus of plants)" label="Horta (genus of plants)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1087" end="1100" title="Horta superba" label="Horta superba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248355" start="1104" end="1121" title="Horta (mythology)" label="Horta (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="1157" end="1169" title="Horta (food)" label="Horta (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742905" start="1203" end="1211" title="UA Horta" label="UA Horta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642483" start="1259" end="1265" title="huerta" label="huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635470" start="1329" end="1343" title="HORTA (mining)" label="HORTA (mining)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315800" start="1485" end="1506" title="The Devil in the Dark" label="The Devil in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633956" start="1529" end="1552" title="Huerta (disambiguation)" label="Huerta (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="1573" end="1589" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85700" wikidata="Q546761" url="?curid=85700" title="Laran">
<text>In Etruscan mythology and religion, Laran (or Larun) is the god of war. In art, he was portrayed as a naked youth wearing a helmet, a cuirass and carrying a spear, shield, or lance. Laran also appears to be an underworld god. Among his attributes is his responsibility to maintain peace. According to some scholars, he also seems to have been the guardian of boundaries as shown by the boundary cippi found in Bettona with the inscriptions &quot;tular Larna&quot; and &quot;tular larns.&quot; Along with eight other Etruscan gods, he can wield lightning. Due to the &quot;Tabula Capuana&quot; we know that the Laran festival was celebrated on the Ides of May. Laran is the Etruscan equivalent of the Greek Ares and the Roman Mars. Like many other Etruscan gods, his name is gender neutral.

Previous scholarship thought that Marís, a mysterious figure(s) was the Etruscan god of war due to the similarity of the name to the Roman war god Mars. However, that has been disproven and Laran has been identified as the Etruscan god of war.

Laran was also shown in the company of another Etruscan god, Lurs. The two names were associated with each other since the archaic period.

==Worship==
Evidence shows that Etruscan deities could be prepared meals by priests for the gods in utilitarian ware. An inscription found implies that meals were prepared in his honour.

Inscriptions have been found showing evidence of cult worship of Laran. One description states that the person offering the vase belonged is that of Lurs, who of which is of Laran.

Due to the &quot;Tabula Capuana&quot; we know that the festival of Laran was celebrated on the Ides of May. The Tabula Capuana also contains a variant in spelling of Laran’s name: Larun.

==Scenes from Etruscan Art==
Laran may be recognized in Etruscan art from his attributes, or is sometimes identified by his name. Since Etruscan literature has not survived, the meaning of the scenes in which he appears can only be interpreted by comparison to Greek and Roman myths, through information about Etruscan myths preserved by Greek and Latin literature, or through conjectural reconstructions based on other Etruscan representations.

* Laran appears with Turms and a youthful, long haired Tinia on a mirror from Orvieto, Settecamini. He is shown with a spear and with his hand over a shield, with a sun like motif on it. 
* A scene on an Etruscan mirror shows Leinth, Turan, Menrva, Laran, and two Mariś babies. He stands behind Menrva, holding a spear and wearing a mantle. 
* He fights against the giant Celsclan, the son of the earth goddess Cel on a mirror from Populonia in Florence.

==Inscriptions==
A 5th century BCE vase from a sanctuary near a bridge at San Giovenale states has been identified showing a connection between the two gods Lurs and Laran:

* mi l[urs l]aruniθla ‘I (am) of Lurs that of Larun (*lurs laruniθa)’

==See also==
* Turan
* Mars
* Ares
* Etruscan mythology
*Etruscan Religion

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="34" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology and religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q546761" start="36" end="41" title="Laran" label="Laran"/>
<link wikidata="Q546761" start="46" end="51" title="Laran" label="Larun"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="67" end="70" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="102" end="107" title="nudity" label="naked"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="124" end="130" title="helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182731" start="134" end="141" title="cuirass" label="cuirass"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="157" end="162" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131559" start="164" end="170" title="shield" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003053" start="175" end="180" title="lance" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20143" start="410" end="417" title="Bettona" label="Bettona"/>
<link wikidata="Q568779" start="572" end="586" title="Tabula Capuana" label="Tabula Capuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="673" end="681" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="706" end="710" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="725" end="729" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="747" end="755" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q935885" start="825" end="830" title="Maris (mythology)" label="Marís"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="863" end="871" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="924" end="929" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="938" end="942" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966480" start="1097" end="1101" title="Lur (deity)" label="Lurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q568779" start="1563" end="1577" title="Tabula Capuana" label="Tabula Capuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="1870" end="1889" title="Liber Linteus" label="Etruscan literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="2236" end="2241" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="2259" end="2266" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480691" start="2268" end="2279" title="Settecamini" label="Settecamini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520034" start="2407" end="2413" title="Leinth" label="Leinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q644505" start="2415" end="2420" title="Turan (mythology)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="2422" end="2428" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q935885" start="2445" end="2450" title="Maris (mythology)" label="Mariś"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="2476" end="2482" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057411" start="2592" end="2595" title="Cel (goddess)" label="Cel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231948" start="2613" end="2622" title="Populonia" label="Populonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2626" end="2634" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966480" start="2794" end="2798" title="Lur (deity)" label="Lurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q644505" start="2897" end="2902" title="Turan (mythology)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="2905" end="2909" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="2912" end="2916" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="2919" end="2937" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="2939" end="2956" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan Religion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85701" wikidata="Q449161" url="?curid=85701" title="Lasa">
<text>Lasa or LASA may refer to:

== Places ==
* Lassa, Lebanon, a village in the Byblos District
* Lasa, Paphos, a village in Paphos District, Cyprus
* &quot;Lasa&quot;, the Italian name for Laas, a municipality in South Tyrol, Italy
* Lhasa, the capital of Tibet Autonomous Region of People&#x27;s Republic of China

==Other uses==
* Laboratory Animal Science Association, a member of the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations
* Lares or Lasas, gods and goddesses in Etruscan mythology
* Latin American Studies Association
* Liberal Arts and Science Academy in Austin, Texas, a magnet high school

==People with the name==
* Bernardo Estornés Lasa (1907–1999), writer and promoter of Basque culture
* Mikel Lasa (born 1971), Spanish football player
* or Lasa III (born 1972), Spanish player of Basque pelota
* Tassilo von Heydebrand und der Lasa, German chess master
* Ernst von Heydebrand und der Lasa (1851–1924), German politician and landowner

== See also ==
* Lhasa (disambiguation)
* Lahsa (disambiguation)
* Lassa (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449161" start="0" end="4" title="Lasa" label="Lasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q449161" start="8" end="12" title="Lasa" label="LASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948896" start="43" end="57" title="Lassa, Lebanon" label="Lassa, Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880005" start="94" end="106" title="Lasa, Paphos" label="Lasa, Paphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q420306" start="186" end="190" title="Laas, South Tyrol" label="Laas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026100" start="231" end="236" title="Lhasa" label="Lhasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="330" end="367" title="Laboratory Animal Science Association" label="Laboratory Animal Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440799" start="385" end="446" title="Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations" label="Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q504377" start="449" end="454" title="Lares" label="Lares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741214" start="508" end="542" title="Latin American Studies Association" label="Latin American Studies Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540586" start="545" end="577" title="Liberal Arts and Science Academy" label="Liberal Arts and Science Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898950" start="645" end="667" title="Bernardo Estornés Lasa" label="Bernardo Estornés Lasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q937833" start="721" end="731" title="Mikel Lasa" label="Mikel Lasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q61248" start="830" end="865" title="Tassilo von Heydebrand und der Lasa" label="Tassilo von Heydebrand und der Lasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="889" end="922" title="Ernst von Heydebrand und der Lasa" label="Ernst von Heydebrand und der Lasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q422292" start="986" end="1008" title="Lhasa (disambiguation)" label="Lhasa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473469" start="1011" end="1033" title="Lahsa (disambiguation)" label="Lahsa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171501" start="1036" end="1058" title="Lassa (disambiguation)" label="Lassa (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85702" wikidata="Q3837445" url="?curid=85702" title="Losna (mythology)">
<text>Losna was the Etruscan moon goddess. She is also associated with the oceans and the tides. She is similar to Greek Leucothea. Losna&#x27;s Roman equivalent is Luna.

==See also==
*Luna (goddess)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3837445" start="0" end="5" title="Losna (mythology)" label="Losna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="14" end="22" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569856" start="23" end="35" title="lunar deity" label="moon goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821610" start="115" end="124" title="Leucothea" label="Leucothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235172" start="159" end="163" title="Luna (goddess)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235172" start="180" end="194" title="Luna (goddess)" label="Luna (goddess)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85706" wikidata="Q2003921" url="?curid=85706" title="Menrva">
<text>Menrva (also spelled Menerva or Menfra) was an Etruscan goddess of war, art, wisdom, and medicine. She contributed much of her character to the Roman Minerva. She was the child of Uni and Tinia.

Although Menrva was seen by Hellenized Etruscans as their counterpart to Greek Athena, Menrva has some unique traits that make it clear that she was not an import from Greece. Etruscan artists under the influence of Greek culture, however, liked to portray Menrva with Gorgoneion, helmet, spear, and shield, and, on one mirrorback, as bursting from the head of her father, Tinia. Also, she commonly is seen as the protector of Hercle (Heracles) and &quot;Pherse&quot; (Perseus). On a bronze mirror found at Praeneste, she attends Perseus, who consults two Graeae, and, on another, holds high the head of Medusa, while she and seated Perseus and Hermes all gaze safely at its reflection in a pool at their feet. These images are more likely to reflect literary sources than any cult practice. On a bronze mirror from Bolsena, , she is portrayed attending a scene of Prometheus Unbound with Esplace (Asclepius), who bandages Prometheus&#x27; chest.

Often, Menrva is depicted in a more essentially Etruscan style, as a lightning thrower. Martianus mentions her as one of nine Etruscan lightning deities. Etruscan style works often depict Menrva with a thunderbolt; the thunderbolt imagery seems to be unique to Etruscan Menrva images.

Menrva seems to have been associated with weather phenomena. The Greeks never attributed an association with weather to Athena, making this another important difference between the two religious cults that demonstrates their separate characteristics.

Menrva&#x27;s name is indigenous to Italy and might even be of Etruscan origin, stemming from an Italic moon goddess, &quot;*Meneswā&quot; &#x27;She who measures&#x27;. It is thought that the Etruscans adopted the inherited Old Latin name, &quot;*Menerwā&quot;, thereby calling her Menrva. However, this has been disputed. Carl Becker suggests that her name appears to contain the PIE root &quot;*men-&quot;, which he notes was linked in Greek primarily to memory words (cf. Greek &quot;mnestis&quot;/μνῆστις &#x27;memory, remembrance, recollection&#x27;), but which more generally referred to &#x27;mind&#x27; in most Indo-European languages.

Menrva often was depicted in the Judgement of Paris, called Elcsntre (Alexander, his alternative name in Greek) in Etruscan, one of the most popular Greek myths in Etruria.

Menrva was part of a triple deity with Uni and Tinia, later reflected in the Roman Capitoline Triad of Juno, Jupiter, and Minerva.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="0" end="6" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="21" end="28" title="Menrva" label="Menerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="32" end="38" title="Menrva" label="Menfra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="47" end="63" title="Etruscan goddess" label="Etruscan goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="144" end="149" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="150" end="157" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="180" end="183" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="188" end="193" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="269" end="274" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="275" end="281" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="465" end="475" title="Gorgoneion" label="Gorgoneion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="623" end="629" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="665" end="672" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243133" start="703" end="712" title="Praeneste" label="Praeneste"/>
<link wikidata="Q257768" start="752" end="758" title="Graeae" label="Graeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="800" end="806" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="841" end="847" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="973" end="987" title="Cult (religion)" label="cult practice."/>
<link wikidata="Q159685" start="1012" end="1019" title="Bolsena" label="Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="1085" end="1104" title="Asclepius" label="Esplace (Asclepius)"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="1232" end="1241" title="Martianus" label="Martianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2063" end="2066" title="PIE" label="PIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784308" start="2360" end="2378" title="Judgement of Paris" label="Judgement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="2442" end="2450" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106393" start="2522" end="2534" title="triple deity" label="triple deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246962" start="2584" end="2600" title="Capitoline Triad" label="Capitoline Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="2604" end="2608" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="2610" end="2617" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="2623" end="2630" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85707" wikidata="Q1640742" url="?curid=85707" title="Nethuns">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Nethuns was the god of wells, later expanded to all water, including the sea. The name &quot;Nethuns&quot; is likely cognate with that of the Celtic god Nechtan and the Persian and Vedic gods sharing the name Apam Napat, perhaps all based on the Proto-Indo-European word &quot;*népōts&quot; &quot;nephew, grandson.&quot; In this case, Etruscan may have borrowed the Umbrian name &quot;*Nehtuns&quot; (Roman Neptune, who was originally a god of water).

Nethuns is mentioned on the Piacenza liver, a third-century BC bronze model of a sheep&#x27;s liver used for divinatory rites called haruspicy, as &quot;Neθ&quot;, an abbreviation for his full name. As a patron god his profile, wearing a &quot;ketos&quot; (sea monster) headdress, appears on a coin of Vetulonia, circa 215 – 211 BC; he is accompanied by his trident between two dolphins.

 is engraved on a bronze Etruscan mirror in the Museo Gregoriano in the Vatican.

==Notes==

==References==
* &quot;Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicum&quot;, VII (Zurich and Munich:Artemis) 1994. The basic professional reference.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640742" start="23" end="30" title="Nethuns" label="Nethuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681141" start="35" end="42" title="Tutelary deity" label="the god"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="46" end="50" title="water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="75" end="80" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="96" end="99" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="140" end="147" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q580163" start="176" end="183" title="Nechtan (mythology)" label="Nechtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358219" start="232" end="242" title="Apam Napat" label="Apam Napat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="269" end="288" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q36957" start="389" end="396" title="Umbrian language" label="Umbrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="430" end="437" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q776429" start="504" end="518" title="Liver of Piacenza" label="Piacenza liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="609" end="618" title="haruspicy" label="haruspicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="720" end="725" title="Cetus" label="ketos"/>
<link wikidata="Q633467" start="778" end="787" title="Vetulonia" label="Vetulonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271628" start="834" end="841" title="trident" label="trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q182955" start="913" end="944" title="Vatican Museums" label="Museo Gregoriano in the Vatican"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85709" wikidata="Q1434285" url="?curid=85709" title="Nortia">
<text>Nortia is the Latinized name of the Etruscan goddess Nurtia (variant manuscript readings include &quot;Norcia&quot;, &quot;Norsia&quot;, &quot;Nercia&quot;, and &quot;Nyrtia&quot;), whose sphere of influence was time, fate, destiny, and chance.

==Evidence==
Little or no Etruscan evidence for Nortia survives. Her name is not among those of the deities on the Liver of Piacenza. She appears a few times in Latin literature and inscriptions. She is mentioned in one of Juvenal&#x27;s satires and identified with the Roman goddess Fortuna, and Martianus Capella lists her along with other goddesses of fate and chance such as Sors, Nemesis, and Tyche. Tertullian names Nortia twice in Christian polemic.

A name has been deciphered as possibly Nortia among those of other deities in an inscription found within an Umbrian sanctuary at the Villa Fidelia, Hispellum. The 4th-century writer and consul Avienius, who was from Nortia&#x27;s seat in Volsinii, addressed the goddess in a devotional inscription:

Nortia, I venerate you, I who sprang from a Volsinian &quot;lar&quot;, living now at Rome, boosted by the honor of a doubled term as proconsul, crafting many poems, leading a guilt-free life, sound for my age, happy with my marriage to Placida and jubilant about our serial fecundity in offspring. May the spirit be vital for those things which, as arranged by the law of the fates, remain to be carried out.

The ancient location of Volsinii is vexed, and the Etruscan town was refounded by the Romans. At Bolsena, the most likely candidate for the new Volsinii, there is a ruin outside the Florence gate that is known locally as the &quot;Tempio di Norzia&quot;, but as George Dennis pointed out in the 19th century, no evidence other than the existence of the cult of Nortia supports this identification, and the architecture is Roman.

==Ritual of the nail==
Nortia&#x27;s attribute was a nail, which was driven into a wall within her temple at Volsinii annually to mark the New Year. The Roman historian Livy took note of the ritual:
Cincius, an industrious researcher of antiquarian matters, confirms that at Volsinii nails are in evidence at the temple of the Etruscan goddess Nortia, fixed to mark the number of years.
The ritual seems to &quot;nail down&quot; the fate of the people for the year. Cicero refers to a form of timekeeping in which the nail of the year is to be moved &quot;(clavum anni movebis)&quot;. In context, the reference is probably to &quot;parapegmata&quot;, calendars in which the day is marked by the moving of a peg. Some extant Roman calendars in stone or metal have holes for this purpose.

H.S. Versnel conjectured that the ritual of the nail was associated with the annual meeting of the Etruscan league, and that Nortia&#x27;s consort could have been Voltumna, the counterpart of Roman Vortumnus. The rite is analogous to, or a borrowed precedent for, a similar ritual at Rome originally held in the Temple of Capitoline Jupiter, near a statue of Minerva. Nortia may thus have been related to the Etruscan Menerva. At Rome, the goddess Necessitas, the divine personification of necessity, was also depicted with a nail, &quot;the adamantine nail / That grim Necessity drives,&quot; as described by the Augustan poet Horace. In a poem addressing Fortuna and acknowledging her power over all, from the lowliest to the highest, Horace pictures Necessity carrying nails large enough to drive into wooden beams, and wedges.

The ritual of the nail illuminates the otherwise puzzling iconography on the back of an Etruscan bronze mirror. Meleager is depicted under the wings of another Etruscan goddess of fate, identified by inscription as &quot;Athrpa&quot;, the counterpart of the Greek fate goddess Atropos who is one of the three Moirai. Athrpa holds a hammer in her right hand and a nail in her left. With Meleager is his beloved Atalanta (both names given in the Etruscan spelling), who will be parted by his death in a boar hunt presaged at the top of the composition. Turan and Atunis (the Etruscan Venus and Adonis myth) also appear, as another couple whose love is destroyed by the savagery of the hunt. The hammer ready to drive in the nail symbolizes &quot;the inexorability of human fate.&quot;

R.S. Conway compared Nortia to the Venetic goddess Rehtia, whose name seems to be the Venetic equivalent of Latin &quot;rectia&quot;, &quot;right, correct.&quot; Bronze nails finely inscribed with dedications were found within a temple precinct thought to have been that of Rehtia at Ateste (modern Este). The heads of the nails have links that attach them to small objects or charms, perhaps the &quot;wedges of necessity&quot; that Horace said Fortuna carried. Rehtia has been seen as a counterpart of the Roman Iustitia, the divine embodiment of justice, or the Greek goddesses Themis or Dikē.

==References==
==External links==
* Nortia The Obscure Goddess Online Directory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1434285" start="0" end="6" title="Nortia" label="Nortia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="14" end="23" title="Latinization (literature)" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="36" end="52" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434285" start="53" end="59" title="Nortia" label="Nurtia"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="69" end="88" title="textual criticism" label="manuscript readings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805266" start="212" end="222" title="Time and fate deities" label="time, fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="224" end="231" title="destiny" label="destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q876695" start="237" end="243" title="Chance (Ancient Greek concept)" label="chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q776429" start="361" end="378" title="Liver of Piacenza" label="Liver of Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="407" end="423" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="469" end="476" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="496" end="511" title="interpretatio romana" label="identified with"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="516" end="529" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="530" end="537" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="543" end="560" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563745" start="625" end="629" title="Sors" label="Sors"/>
<link wikidata="Q185747" start="631" end="638" title="Nemesis (mythology)" label="Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q213440" start="644" end="649" title="Tyche" label="Tyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="651" end="661" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="684" end="701" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian polemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="785" end="796" title="epigraphy" label="inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q389236" start="813" end="818" title="Umbri" label="Umbri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="838" end="851" title="Villa Fidelia" label="Villa Fidelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895226" start="853" end="862" title="Hispellum" label="Hispellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="891" end="897" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q366793" start="898" end="906" title="Avienius" label="Avienius"/>
<link wikidata="Q504377" start="1065" end="1068" title="Lares" label="lar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="1138" end="1147" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q159685" start="1512" end="1519" title="Bolsena" label="Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101529" start="1677" end="1690" title="George Dennis (explorer)" label="George Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="1821" end="1842" title="Ancient Roman architecture" label="architecture is Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398480" start="1954" end="1962" title="Volsinii" label="Volsinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="1984" end="1992" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345364" start="1998" end="2013" title="Roman historiography" label="Roman historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="2014" end="2018" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855302" start="2044" end="2051" title="Cincius" label="Cincius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="2082" end="2093" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2311" end="2317" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q171341" start="2477" end="2486" title="parapegma" label="parapegma"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="2569" end="2583" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="2732" end="2747" title="Etruscan league" label="Etruscan league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119919" start="2796" end="2804" title="Voltumna" label="Voltumna"/>
<link wikidata="Q374311" start="2831" end="2840" title="Vertumnus" label="Vortumnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="2945" end="2973" title="Temple of Capitoline Jupiter" label="Temple of Capitoline Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="2992" end="2999" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="3051" end="3058" title="Menerva" label="Menerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q332246" start="3081" end="3091" title="Necessitas" label="Necessitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207174" start="3104" end="3119" title="personification" label="personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821013" start="3247" end="3260" title="Augustan literature (ancient Rome)" label="Augustan poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="3261" end="3267" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="3290" end="3297" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131408" start="3456" end="3462" title="Wedge (mechanical device)" label="wedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="3523" end="3534" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135171" start="3553" end="3561" title="Corpus Speculorum Etruscorum" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041984" start="3562" end="3575" title="bronze mirror" label="bronze mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q321541" start="3577" end="3585" title="Meleager" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q753294" start="3742" end="3749" title="Atropos" label="Atropos"/>
<link wikidata="Q180287" start="3774" end="3780" title="Moirai" label="Moirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q190323" start="3875" end="3883" title="Atalanta" label="Atalanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q271565" start="3909" end="3926" title="Etruscan alphabet" label="Etruscan spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q644505" start="4016" end="4021" title="Turan (mythology)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="4026" end="4032" title="Atunis" label="Atunis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4047" end="4063" title="Aphrodite#Adonis" label="Venus and Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349703" start="4249" end="4260" title="Robert Seymour Conway" label="R.S. Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q220379" start="4284" end="4291" title="Adriatic Veneti" label="Venetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36871" start="4335" end="4342" title="Venetic language" label="Venetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813131" start="4533" end="4539" title="Ateste" label="Ateste"/>
<link wikidata="Q34607" start="4548" end="4552" title="Este, Italy" label="Este"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4798" end="4805" title="Glossary of ancient Roman religion#ius" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q159168" start="4830" end="4836" title="Themis" label="Themis"/>
<link wikidata="Q465875" start="4840" end="4844" title="Dike (mythology)" label="Dikē"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85713" wikidata="Q659594" url="?curid=85713" title="Tages">
<text>Tages was claimed as a founding prophet of Etruscan religion who is known from reports by Latin authors of the late Roman Republic and Roman Empire. He revealed a cosmic view of divinity and correct methods of ascertaining divine will concerning events of public interest. Such divination was undertaken in Roman society by priestly officials called &quot;haruspices&quot;.

The religious texts recording the revelations of Tages (and a few other prophets, mainly a female figure known as Vegoia) were called by the Romans the &quot;Etrusca Disciplina&quot; at least as early as the late republic. They were written in the Etruscan language, despite their Latin titles. None presently survive. The last author claiming to have read elements of the &quot;disciplina&quot; is the sixth-century John the Lydian, writing at Constantinople. Thus, knowledge of Tages comes mainly from what is said about him by the classical authors, which is a legendary and quasimythical view; John the Lydian suggested Tages is only a parable.

==Etymology==
As the Etruscan alphabet had no &#x27;G&#x27;, Tages is most likely a Latinization of an Etruscan word. The reverse of a third-century BC bronze mirror from Tuscania depicts a youthful &quot;haruspex&quot; in a conical hat examining a liver. He is labeled &quot;pavatarchies&quot;. A second, older &quot;haruspex&quot; with a beard listens and is labeled &quot;avl tarchunus&quot;. Massimo Pallottino made the generally accepted suggestion that the first name is to be segmented &quot;pava Tarchies&quot; and means &quot;the child, Tarchies.&quot; The second name is &quot;the son of Tarchon&quot;, where Tarchon is the legendary king of Tarquinia, location of Tages&#x27; revelation, and also one of the founders of the Etruscan League. 

Gm. M. Facchetti proposed an alternative hypothesis linking the name to the repetitive Etruscan stem thac-/thax, which he interprets as &#x27;voice&#x27;.

==Legend==
There are multiple versions of the origins of Tages. Broadly Tages appeared from the earth while an Etruscan was ploughing, and then taught Etruscans divination. He is sometimes the grandson of Jove. Cicero reports the myth in this way:They tell us that one day as the land was being ploughed in the territory of Tarquinii, and a deeper furrow than usual was made, suddenly Tages sprang out of it and addressed the ploughman. Tages, as it is recorded in the works of the Etrurians (&quot;Libri Etruscorum&quot;), possessed the visage of a child, but the prudence of a sage. When the ploughman was surprised at seeing him, and in his astonishment made a great outcry, a number of people assembled around him, and before long all the Etrurians came together at the spot. Tages then discoursed in the presence of an immense crowd, who noted his speech and committed it to writing. The information they derived from this Tages was the foundation of the science of the soothsayers (&quot;haruspicinae disciplina&quot;), and was subsequently improved by the accession of many new facts, all of which confirmed the same principles. We received this record from them. This record is preserved in their sacred books, and from it the augurial discipline is deduced.

In Ovid&#x27;s version, &quot;Tyrrhenus arator&quot; (&quot;a Tyrrhenian ploughman&quot;) observed a clod turn into a man and begin to speak of things destined to happen and how the Etruscan people could discover the future.

==Etrusca disciplina==
Joannes Laurentius Lydus lived in the sixth century AD. Although the last classical-period writer to have read the books, he is the most specific about his sources. He implies that he read &quot;the texts of the Etruscans&quot;; that is, the &quot;Etrusca Disciplina&quot;, including the report of the &quot;haruspex&quot;, Tarchon, who was instructed by Tyrrhenus. Tarchon&#x27;s work on Tages, he says, is a dialogue in which Tarchon asks Tages questions in &quot;the ordinary language of the Italians&quot;. This is presumably Vulgar Latin, as Lydus cannot mean any early Italic dialect. Tages&#x27; recorded response is &quot;in ancient letters&quot;, presumably in the Etruscan language. Lydus says it is not very understandable, and that he relies on translations.

==Representations of Tages==
Labeled Etruscan representations of Tages are very rare, and scenes clearly tied to the Tages myth are almost as rare. Figures leaning on the &quot;lituus&quot;, the crooked staff of the &quot;augur&quot;, or examining entrails wearing the conical cap of the &quot;haruspex&quot;, are common, but are not necessarily Tages. Winged figures, representing divinity, are also common, especially on funerary urns from Tarquinia, but whether any depict Tages is questionable. Assuming that a certain percentage of these representations are, in fact, Tages, there appears to be no standard way to depict him. Art historians have inserted Tages freely among them but entirely in a speculative fashion.

In addition to the labelled scene on the bronze mirror described above, which must have been repeated many times without labels, a type of scene engraved on fourth-century BC gemstones, once set in seal rings, appears to describe the Tages myth. A bearded figure (Tarchon?) bends over as though listening at the head or head and torso of another, beardless figure embedded in or arising from the ground. On a similar theme is a third-century BC bronze votive statuette, high, from Tarquinia, of a sitting infant peering upward with an adult&#x27;s head and visage.

==References==
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q659594" start="0" end="5" title="Tages" label="Tages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="32" end="39" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="43" end="60" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="116" end="130" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="135" end="147" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="278" end="288" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="350" end="372" title="haruspex" label="&amp;quot;haruspices&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="379" end="393" title="religious text" label="religious text"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563978" start="489" end="495" title="Vegoia" label="Vegoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="623" end="640" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389145" start="792" end="807" title="John the Lydian" label="John the Lydian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="820" end="834" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q271565" start="1046" end="1063" title="Etruscan alphabet" label="Etruscan alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="1077" end="1078" title="G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1174" end="1176" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q180032" start="1196" end="1204" title="Tuscania" label="Tuscania"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="1230" end="1238" title="haruspex" label="haruspex"/>
<link wikidata="Q679576" start="1421" end="1439" title="Massimo Pallottino" label="Massimo Pallottino"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="1677" end="1686" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="2096" end="2106" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="2140" end="2144" title="Jove" label="Jove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2146" end="2152" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="2259" end="2268" title="Tarquinii" label="Tarquinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="3206" end="3210" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389145" start="3452" end="3476" title="Joannes Laurentius Lydus" label="Joannes Laurentius Lydus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="3504" end="3506" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="3760" end="3768" title="haruspex" label="haruspex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194399" start="3776" end="3783" title="Tarchon" label="Tarchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400413" start="3807" end="3816" title="Tyrrhenus" label="Tyrrhenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="3982" end="3994" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="4126" end="4143" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553522" start="4401" end="4407" title="lituus" label="lituus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="4446" end="4451" title="augur" label="augur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="4666" end="4675" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="5120" end="5122" title="Anno Domini" label="BC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85714" wikidata="Q1194399" url="?curid=85714" title="Tarchon">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Tarchon was a culture hero who co-founded the Etruscan dodecapolis along with his brother Tyrrhenus. He appears in literature such as Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, where he is described as King of the Tyrrhenians. In the poem, he leads the Etruscans in their alliance with Aeneas against Turnus and the other Latian tribes. The later Byzantine writer John the Lydian distinguishes two legendary people by this name. In his version of the myth, Tarchon the Elder received the &quot;Etrusca Disciplina&quot; from the prophet Tages while Tarchon the Younger fought with Aeneas after his arrival in Italy.

The English spelling &quot;Tarchon&quot; comes from the Greek , or which itself is thought to reflect &quot;&quot; in the Etruscan language. The name is thought to be related to the Latin Tarquinius, the name of a Roman &quot;gens&quot;, and of the Tarquins, two of the legendary Seven Kings of Rome. The Hittitologist Oliver Gurney proposed that the name could be related to the name of the Luwian storm god Tarhunt, though this connection has been dismissed by other researchers such as Carlo De Simone.

==References==

&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194399" start="23" end="30" title="Tarchon" label="Tarchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="37" end="49" title="culture hero" label="culture hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q125458111" start="69" end="89" title="Etruscan dodecapolis" label="Etruscan dodecapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400413" start="113" end="122" title="Tyrrhenus" label="Tyrrhenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="157" end="163" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="177" end="183" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="300" end="306" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q633549" start="315" end="321" title="Turnus" label="Turnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389145" start="378" end="393" title="John the Lydian" label="John the Lydian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="508" end="526" title="Etruscan_religion#Etrusca_Disciplina" label="Etrusca Disciplina"/>
<link wikidata="Q659594" start="550" end="555" title="Tages" label="Tages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="686" end="691" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="752" end="769" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17326504" start="818" end="828" title="Tarquinius" label="Tarquinius"/>
<link wikidata="Q899409" start="856" end="860" title="gens" label="gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q55375123" start="910" end="929" title="Seven Kings of Rome" label="Seven Kings of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q491481" start="935" end="948" title="Hittitology" label="Hittitologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q351122" start="949" end="962" title="Oliver Gurney" label="Oliver Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="1022" end="1028" title="Luwian" label="Luwian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21848507" start="1039" end="1046" title="Tarhunt" label="Tarhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q325601" start="1119" end="1134" title="Carlo De Simone (linguist)" label="Carlo De Simone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85715" wikidata="Q1400413" url="?curid=85715" title="Tyrrhenus">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Tyrrhenus (in ) was one of the founders of the Etruscan League of twelve cities, along with his brother Tarchon. Herodotus describes him as the saviour of the Etruscans, because he led them from Lydia to Etruria; however this Lydian origin is to be debated as it contradicts cultural and linguistic evidence, as well as the view held by both the Etruscans themselves and by other Etrusco-Roman and Greek ancient sources. His name was given to the Etruscan people by the Greeks. The Romans extended this use to the sea west of Etruria: the Tyrrhenian Sea.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400413" start="23" end="32" title="Tyrrhenus" label="Tyrrhenus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70" end="85" title="Etruscan civilization#Etruscan League" label="Etruscan League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194399" start="127" end="134" title="Tarchon" label="Tarchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="136" end="145" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="218" end="223" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="227" end="234" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="562" end="576" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85716" wikidata="Q2482710" url="?curid=85716" title="Thalna">
<text>In Etruscan religion and myth, Thalna was a divine figure usually regarded as a goddess of childbirth. Determinate gender, however, is not necessarily a characteristic of Etruscan deities, and Thalna is also either depicted as male, or seems to be identified as a male figure because of the placement of names around a scene. Her other functions include friendship and prophecy. Her name may mean &quot;growth, bloom.&quot; She appears in Etruscan art in the company of Turan, Tinia, and Menrva.

On Etruscan bronze mirrors Thalna is present and looking on in scenes pertaining to birth and infancy.

==See also==
* List of Etruscan mythological figures
* List of Roman birth and childhood deities

== References ==


 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="29" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan religion and myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482710" start="31" end="37" title="Thalna" label="Thalna"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="80" end="87" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="91" end="101" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q644505" start="470" end="475" title="Turan (mythology)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="477" end="482" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003921" start="488" end="494" title="Menrva" label="Menrva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041984" start="509" end="522" title="bronze mirror" label="bronze mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249617" start="616" end="653" title="List of Etruscan mythological figures" label="List of Etruscan mythological figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q14226036" start="656" end="697" title="List of Roman birth and childhood deities" label="List of Roman birth and childhood deities"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85717" wikidata="Q926518" url="?curid=85717" title="Tinia">
<text>Tinia (also Tin, Tinh, Tins or Tina) was the sky god and the highest deity in Etruscan religion, equivalent to the Roman Jupiter and the Greek Zeus.

However, a primary source from the Roman Varro states that Veltha, not Tins, was the supreme deity of the Etruscans. This has led some scholars to conclude that they were assimilated, but this is speculation.

Tinia was the husband of Uni and the father of Hercle. Like many other Etruscan deities, his name is gender neutral.

The Etruscans had a group of nine gods who had the power of hurling thunderbolts; they were called &quot;Novensiles&quot; by the Romans. Of thunderbolts there were eleven sorts, of which Tinia wielded three. 

Tinia was sometimes represented with a beard or sometimes as youthful and beardless. In terms of symbolism, Tinia has the thunderbolt. Tinia&#x27;s thunderbolts could be red or blood coloured.

Like Selvans and possibly Laran, Tinia also protected boundaries. His name appears as the guarantor on three boundary stones with identical inscriptions found in Tunisia, originally placed there by the Etruscan colonists.

Some of Tinia&#x27;s possible epithets are detailed on the Piacenza Liver, a bronze model of a liver used for haruspicy. These inscriptions have been transcribed as &quot;Tin Cilens&quot;, &quot;Tin Θuf&quot; and &quot;Tinś Θne&quot;. There have been a number of suggestions as to their meaning, but the Etruscan language is poorly understood and there is no scholarly consensus for the translation.

==Inscriptions==

Tinia appears in several inscriptions, including:
* Kylix painted by Oltos (c. 500 BC):
**This has given Venel Atelinas for the sons of Tin (ie: The Dioscuri)
*On the bronze Chimera of Arezzo:
**Tinscvil
**A gift to Tins

==See also==
*Etruscan religion 
*Etruscan civilization 
*Uni 
*Hercle
*Novensiles 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="0" end="5" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="12" end="15" title="Tinia" label="Tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="17" end="21" title="Tinia" label="Tinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="23" end="27" title="Tinia" label="Tins"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="31" end="35" title="Tinia" label="Tina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639573" start="45" end="52" title="sky god" label="sky god"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="78" end="95" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="115" end="120" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="121" end="128" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="137" end="142" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="143" end="147" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119919" start="209" end="215" title="Voltumna" label="Veltha"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="385" end="388" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="407" end="413" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530992" start="461" end="475" title="gender neutrality" label="gender neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="482" end="491" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939057" start="583" end="593" title="Novensiles" label="Novensiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="607" end="613" title="ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="785" end="791" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794866" start="810" end="821" title="thunderbolt" label="thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704083" start="887" end="894" title="Selvans" label="Selvans"/>
<link wikidata="Q546761" start="908" end="913" title="Laran" label="Laran"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="1044" end="1051" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="1135" end="1142" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="1164" end="1178" title="Haruspex" label="Piacenza Liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="1215" end="1224" title="haruspicy" label="haruspicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="1409" end="1426" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q668349" start="1576" end="1581" title="Kylix (drinking cup)" label="Kylix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360826" start="1593" end="1598" title="Oltos" label="Oltos"/>
<link wikidata="Q190103" start="1673" end="1681" title="Dioscuri" label="Dioscuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q478807" start="1698" end="1715" title="Chimera of Arezzo" label="Chimera of Arezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="1760" end="1777" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="1780" end="1801" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="1804" end="1807" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="1810" end="1816" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11939057" start="1818" end="1828" title="Novensiles" label="Novensiles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85718" wikidata="Q1969214" url="?curid=85718" title="Thesan">
<text>In Etruscan religion and mythology, Thesan is the Etruscan goddess of the dawn. Thesan is the Roman equivalent of Aurora. In Etruria, she received offerings together with the sun god Usil as described in the liber linteus. She was especially worshipped at Caere&#x27;s harbour of Pyrgi, where a temple was dedicated to her and a singular series of &quot;daybreak antefixes&quot; was excavated.

Thesan was depicted with wings and sometimes nude, such as a clay acroterium from Astrone valley. According to scholar De Grummond: &quot;Although Thesan is often compared with the Greek Eos and the Roman Aurora, Greek texts suggest that they understood her cult persona at Pyrgi to be rather a counterpart of Leukothea, the “White Goddess,” who had a special connection with the sea, and who in turn was assimilated to the Roman Mater Matuta, a goddess of the morning and of childbirth.&quot;

Unlike Eos in the Greek religion, Thesan is worshipped in the Etruscan religion. Her name appears on the mummy wrappings of the Zagreb mummy (Liber Linteus) and on a bronze tablet from Pyrgi.

==Etymology==

Thesan was depicted on several bronze Etruscan mirror backs, bearing a great pair of wings on her back like many other Etruscan goddesses, especially appropriate to a sky-goddess. One meaning of her name is simply &quot;dawn&quot;, and related words are &quot;thesi&quot;, meaning &quot;illumination&quot;, and &quot;thesviti&quot;, &quot;clear or famous&quot;. The other meaning of her name connects her with the ability to see the future, for &quot;thesan&quot; also means &quot;divination&quot;, as seen in the related Etruscan word &quot;thesanthei&quot;, &quot;divining&quot;, &quot;illuminating&quot;, or &quot;brilliant&quot;. This relates to her function as a dawn goddess – since divination throws light on the dark future and enables one to see what may happen, like the dawn, which illuminates what was previously dark. She was called by some as a childbirth goddess, as she was present at the beginning of the day, which finds its parallel in the beginning of a new baby&#x27;s life. Similar to the Roman goddess Lucina, goddess of light and childbirth, who brought the infant into the light of day.

==Mythology==
===The Curse of Aphrodite===

The Etruscans identified their Thesan with the Greek dawn goddess Eos. In the Greek legend, Aphrodite had found Eos in bed with her lover Ares; to punish Eos, Aphrodite &quot;tormented with constant passion, and Eos became infamous for her many young lovers. The Etruscans seemed to quite like these stories and easily transferred them to their dawn goddess Thesan; the stories depicted on the mirrors are generally straight out of Greek myth. Thesan, the goddess of the dawn, “,” is depicted abducting a younger mortal on several engraved Etruscan mirrors dated from 530 to 450 B.C., w

==Thesan Motif in Art==

=== with her chariot ===
The upper exergue has Thesan (Eos), the goddess of dawn, in her quadriga, a four-horse chariot. Asset number 812745001

===with Cephalus===
A common representation of Thesan is carrying off Kephalos. The handsome hunter is the son of Hermes. Eos is often depicted carrying or embracing Kephalos before returning him to his wife, Prokris, in Athens.

The motif of Thesan and her lover can be found on Etruscan mirrors, pottery, and tomb frescoes.

In one mirror depiction from 480-470 BCE at the Museo Gregoriano Etrusco Thesan is running off with Kephalos. Winged and with a nimbus, Thesan is depicted running or in flight with Kephalos in her arms after having kidnapped him. This is probably the first version of the myth according to which Thesan falls in love with the young hunter hero, son of Hermes and Herse, who then becomes Thesan&#x27;s husband. This mirror is from Vulci, from the excavations of Luciano and Alexandrine Bonaparte, princes of Canino; acquired in 1840 Cat. 12241. According to the museum:

&quot;Bronze workers from Vulci in the late archaic period were able to cast flawless mirrors with complex decorations, already using wax models rather than cold engraving. The very low relief is enriched with engraved calligraphic details; there were leaves inlaid with silver on the frame.&quot;

Another relief mirror from the British Museum is museum number 1865,0712.14, Thesan is shown in the act of abducting Cephalus, a young man of Athens who had been married to the King Erechtheus’ daughter, Procris. Thesan is winged here, wearing a chiton and diagonal himation that flows in the breeze; about her head is a halo, to emphasize her function as a goddess of light. She runs off to the left carrying Cephalus in her arms, who is shown as nude and much smaller than she is. He does not look at all distressed at the situation and he rests in her arms with his right hand on her shoulder. Like many depictions of Etruscan women and their lovers, she is shown as larger and therefore more important or powerful than the man: This has been taken as an indication of the high status of Etruscan women.

The same scene is depicted on a mirror handle in high relief openwork; Cephalus is again quite a lot smaller (and younger) than Thesan, who is not winged this time, but whose cloak billows behind her in the breeze. She smiles down at young Kephalos as She lifts him up, and he is nude save for a short cloak and hunting boots.

This same image is depicted in a in the British Museum Museum number 1847,0806.130
===with Memnun ===
Another favorite scene of Thesan/Eos depicts a far more somber affair. Her son&#x27;s Etruscan name is recorded as Memnum (Memrun) being the equivalent to the Greek Memnon. This son by Tithonus, another young man she abducted to be her lover, called &quot;Thinthun&quot; by the Etruscans and was killed in the Trojan War.Eos grieved so terribly that she threatened never to bring forth the dawn again. She was finally persuaded to return, but in Her grief she weeps tears of dew every morning for Her beloved son. One mirror-back shows Her before Tinia (Zeus) with &quot;Thethis&quot; (Thetis), the mother of Achle (Achilles). Both goddesses plead with Tinia to spare their sons&#x27; lives; but both were already doomed to die. This is known as the Memnon Pieta. The relief mirror mentioned (right) depicts Thesan carrying off the body of her dead son Memnun. Often in ancient art there are different interpretations as often figures were not labelled. However Etruscan mirrors with figures do have names engraved beside them.

=== with Tinia ===

As with Greek art depictions, Thesan is depicted in bronze mirrors entreating upon Tinia along with Thethis (=Thetis) to spare the lives of their sons, Memnun and Achle respectively. The goddesses were him to affect the destiny of their sons in their battle against each other.

===with Usil and Nethuns===
The Liber Lintaeus connects Thesan with the Etruscan sun god Usil, equivalent to the Greek Helios and Roman Sol. She has her arm around Usil’s back, implying a connection that Helios and Eos do not have. A fourth century mirror now shows her in conversation with both Usil and Nethuns (Etruscan Neptune / Poseidon).

==See also==

* Aurora 
* Dawn goddess
* Eos
* Memnun
* Memnon
* Kephalos
* Etruscan civilization 
* Etruscan religion
* Mater Matuta
* Usil
==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="34" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan religion and mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969214" start="36" end="42" title="Thesan" label="Thesan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="50" end="58" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326182" start="74" end="78" title="dawn" label="dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="94" end="99" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178831" start="114" end="120" title="Aurora (mythology)" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="183" end="187" title="Usil" label="Usil"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="208" end="221" title="liber linteus" label="liber linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914373" start="256" end="261" title="Caere" label="Caere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724661" start="280" end="285" title="Pyrgi" label="Pyrgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q421214" start="461" end="471" title="Acroterion" label="acroterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821610" start="705" end="714" title="Leucothea" label="Leukothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479084" start="825" end="837" title="Mater Matuta" label="Mater Matuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="1018" end="1030" title="Zagreb mummy" label="Zagreb mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="1032" end="1045" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Linteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="1136" end="1151" title="Etruscan mirror" label="Etruscan mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242541" start="1766" end="1778" title="dawn goddess" label="dawn goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668203" start="1957" end="1975" title="childbirth goddess" label="childbirth goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q604898" start="2123" end="2129" title="Lucina (goddess)" label="Lucina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="2259" end="2268" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="2321" end="2324" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="2347" end="2356" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="2393" end="2397" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="2409" end="2412" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="2957" end="2965" title="quadriga" label="quadriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139470" start="3222" end="3229" title="Procris" label="Prokris"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771423" start="4326" end="4334" title="Cephalus" label="Cephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="4351" end="4357" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="4386" end="4402" title="Erechtheus" label="King Erechtheus’"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139470" start="4413" end="4420" title="Procris" label="Procris"/>
<link wikidata="Q188906" start="4455" end="4461" title="chiton" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q781731" start="4475" end="4483" title="himation" label="himation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341893" start="4530" end="4534" title="Halo (religious iconography)" label="halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765967" start="4567" end="4583" title="List of light deities" label="goddess of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q506781" start="5612" end="5618" title="Memnon (mythology)" label="Memnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737306" start="5632" end="5640" title="Tithonus" label="Tithonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="5757" end="5767" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="5994" end="5999" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="6001" end="6005" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="6033" end="6039" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="6063" end="6071" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="6100" end="6105" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="6807" end="6821" title="Liber Linteus" label="Liber Lintaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="6864" end="6868" title="Usil" label="Usil"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="6894" end="6900" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="6911" end="6914" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="6939" end="6943" title="Usil" label="Usil"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="6979" end="6985" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="6990" end="6993" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="7024" end="7030" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="7071" end="7075" title="Usil" label="Usil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640742" start="7080" end="7087" title="Nethuns" label="Nethuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="7098" end="7105" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="7108" end="7116" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178831" start="7136" end="7142" title="Aurora (mythology)" label="Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242541" start="7146" end="7158" title="Dawn goddess" label="Dawn goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q178417" start="7161" end="7164" title="Eos" label="Eos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7167" end="7173" title="Memnun" label="Memnun"/>
<link wikidata="Q506781" start="7176" end="7182" title="Memnon" label="Memnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771423" start="7185" end="7193" title="Kephalos" label="Kephalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="7196" end="7217" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="7221" end="7238" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479084" start="7241" end="7253" title="Mater Matuta" label="Mater Matuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23537946" start="7256" end="7260" title="Usil" label="Usil"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85719" wikidata="Q1340960" url="?curid=85719" title="Tuchulcha">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Tuchulcha was a chthonic daemon (not to be confused with the Christian term &quot;demon&quot;) with pointed ears (perhaps those of a donkey), hair made of snakes, and a beak (perhaps that of a vulture). Tuchulcha lived in the underworld known as Aita.

Many scholars refer to this deity as male because of masculine features, such as animalistic facial hair that may resemble a beard. According to Nancy de Grummond, &quot;This monster is often referred to as male but in fact is very likely female (or neither gender), for she wears a woman’s dress, has decidedly pale pinkish skin (compare the standard brick-red male flesh of These), and even appears to have breasts.&quot; She also identifies the diamond-marking of Tuchulcha&#x27;s serpents as identifying the poisonous adder (&quot;Vipera berus berus&quot;). Emeline Hill Richardson and Graeme Barker and Tom Rasmussen also state that Tuchulcha is female. Tuchulcha&#x27;s garment is known to classical historians as a chiton and is worn by both men and women. As well, the same clothing is worn by another male deity, Charun.

The only known depiction of Tuchulcha is a wall painting in the Tomb of Orcus II, in Tarquinia, Italy. There the deity appears in an episode from the story of &quot;These&quot; (Greek Theseus) visiting the underworld. These and his friend Peirithous (only his head visible in the surviving portion of the image) are playing a board game, attended by Tuchulcha.

In the film, &quot;The Dead Are Alive&quot; (1972, directed by Armando Crispino), a fresco depicting Tuchulcha is the inspiration for a serial killer&#x27;s murders occurring somewhere between Spoleto and Cerveteri.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340960" start="23" end="32" title="Tuchulcha" label="Tuchulcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="39" end="47" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157625" start="48" end="54" title="daemon (mythology)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="84" end="93" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="105" end="110" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112804" start="123" end="135" title="pointed ears" label="pointed ears"/>
<link wikidata="Q28472" start="165" end="169" title="hair" label="hair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="178" end="183" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="192" end="196" title="beak" label="beak"/>
<link wikidata="Q123120" start="216" end="223" title="vulture" label="vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="249" end="259" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="269" end="273" title="Aita (mythology)" label="Aita"/>
<link wikidata="Q42804" start="401" end="406" title="beard" label="beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q200539" start="567" end="572" title="dress" label="dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192056" start="811" end="829" title="Vipera berus" label="Vipera berus berus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944031" start="998" end="1004" title="chiton (costume)" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="1098" end="1104" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q946563" start="1171" end="1187" title="Tomb of Orcus II" label="Tomb of Orcus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="1192" end="1201" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="1285" end="1290" title="Greek people" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="1291" end="1298" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="1433" end="1443" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819119" start="1488" end="1506" title="The Dead Are Alive" label="The Dead Are Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q509674" start="1532" end="1548" title="Armando Crispino" label="Armando Crispino"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="1662" end="1669" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q242505" start="1674" end="1683" title="Cerveteri" label="Cerveteri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85722" wikidata="Q164585" url="?curid=85722" title="Turan">
<text>Turan (; ; , , ) is a historical region in Central Asia. The term is of Iranian origin and may refer to a particular prehistoric human settlement, a historic geographical region, or a culture. The original Turanians were an Iranian tribe of the Avestan age.

== Overview ==
In ancient Iranian mythology, Tūr or Turaj (&quot;Tuzh&quot; in Middle Persian) is the son of the emperor Fereydun. According to the account in the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, the nomadic tribes who inhabited these lands were ruled by Tūr. In that sense, the Turanians could be members of two Iranian peoples both descending from Fereydun, but with different geographical domains and often at war with each other. Turan, therefore, comprised five areas: the Kopet Dag region, the Atrek valley, parts of Bactria, Sogdia and Margiana.

A later association of the original Turanians with Turkic peoples is based primarily on the subsequent Turkification of Central Asia, including the above areas. According to C. E. Bosworth, however, there was no cultural relationship between the ancient Turkic cultures and the Turanians of the Shahnameh.

== History ==
=== Ancient literature ===
==== Avesta ====

The oldest existing mention of Turan is in the Farvardin &quot;yashts&quot;, which are in the Young Avestan language and have been dated by linguists to about 2500 years ago. According to Gherardo Gnoli, the &quot;Avesta&quot; contains the names of various tribes who lived in proximity to each other: &quot;the Airyas [Aryans], Tuiryas [Turanians], Sairimas [Sarmatians], Sainus [Sacae] and Dahis [Dahae]&quot;. In the hymns of the &quot;Avesta&quot;, the adjective &quot;Tūrya&quot; is attached to various enemies of Zoroastrism like Fraŋrasyan (Shahnameh: Afrāsīāb). The word occurs only once in the &quot;Gathas&quot;, but 20 times in the later parts of the &quot;Avesta&quot;. The Tuiryas as they were called in Avesta play a more important role in the &quot;Avesta&quot; than the Sairimas, Sainus and Dahis. Zoroaster himself hailed from the Airya people but he also preached his message to other neighboring tribes.

According to Mary Boyce, in the Farvardin Yasht, &quot;In it (verses 143–144) are praised the fravashis of righteous men and women not only among the Aryas (as the &quot;Avestan&quot; people called themselves), but also among the Turiyas, Sairimas, Sainus and Dahis; and the personal names, like those of the people, all seem Iranian in character&quot;. Hostility between Tuirya and Airya is indicated also in the Farvardtn Yast (vv. 37-8), where the Fravashis of the Just are said to have provided support in battle against the Danus, who appear to be a clan of the Tura people. Thus in the &quot;Avesta&quot;, some of the Tuiryas believed in the message of Zoroaster while others rejected the religion.

Similar to the ancient homeland of Zoroaster, the precise geography and location of Turan is unknown. In post-Avestan traditions they were thought to inhabit the region north of the Oxus, the river separating them from the Iranians. Their presence accompanied by incessant wars with the Iranians, helped to define the latter as a distinct nation, proud of their land and ready to spill their blood in its defense. The common names of Turanians in Avesta and &quot;Shahnameh&quot; include Frarasyan, Aghraethra, Biderafsh, Arjaspa Namkhwast. The names of Iranian tribes including those of the Turanians that appear in Avesta have been studied by Manfred Mayrhofer in his comprehensive book on Avesta personal name etymologies.

==== Sassanian Empire ====
From the 5th century CE, the Sasanian Empire defined &quot;Turan&quot; in opposition to &quot;Iran&quot;, as the land where lay its enemies to the northeast.

The continuation of nomadic invasions on the north-eastern borders in historical times kept the memory of the Turanians alive. After the 6th century the Turks, who had been pushed westward by other tribes, became neighbours of Iran and were identified with the Turanians. The identification of the Turanians with the Turks was a late development, possibly made in the early 7th century; the Turks first came into contact with the Iranians only in the 6th century.

=== Middle literature ===
==== Early Islamic era ====
According to Clifford E. Bosworth:

The terms &quot;Turk&quot; and &quot;Turanian&quot; became used interchangeably during the Islamic era. &quot;The Shahnameh&quot;, or the Book of Kings, the compilation of Iranian mythical heritage, uses the two terms equivalently. Other authors, including Tabari, Hakim Iranshah and many other texts follow like. A notable exception is the Abl-Hasan Ali ibn Masudi, an Arab historian who writes: &quot;The birth of Afrasiyab was in the land of Turks and the error that historians and non-historians have made about him being a Turk is due to this reason&quot;. By the 10th century, the myth of Afrasiyab was adopted by the Qarakhanid dynasty. During the Safavid era, following the common geographical convention of the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, the term Turan was used to refer to the domain of the Uzbek empire in conflict with the Safavids.

Some linguists derive the word from the Indo-Iranian root *&quot;tura-&quot; &quot;strong, quick, sword(Pashto)&quot;, Pashto &quot;turan (thuran)&quot; &quot;swordsman&quot;. Others link it to old Iranian *&quot;tor&quot; &quot;dark, black&quot;, related to the New Persian &quot;tār(ik)&quot;, Pashto &quot;tor (thor)&quot;, and possibly English &quot;dark&quot;. In this case, it is a reference to the &quot;dark civilization&quot; of Central Asian nomads in contrast to the &quot;illuminated&quot; Zoroastrian civilization of the settled Ārya.

==== Shahnameh ====
In the Persian epic &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, the term &quot;Tūrān&quot; (&quot;land of the Tūrya&quot; like &quot;Ērān, Īrān&quot; = &quot;land of the Ārya&quot;) refers to the inhabitants of the eastern-Iranian border and beyond the Oxus. According to the foundation myth given in the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, King Firēdūn (= Avestan Θraētaona) had three sons, Salm, Tūr and &quot;Iraj&quot;, among whom he divided the world: Asia Minor was given to Salm, Turan to Tur and Iran to Īraj. The older brothers killed the younger, but he was avenged by his grandson, and the Iranians became the rulers of the world. However, the war continued for generations. In the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;, the word Turan appears nearly 150 times and that of Iran nearly 750 times.

Some examples from the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;:

=== Modern literature ===
==== Geography ====

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Western languages borrowed the word &quot;Turan&quot; as a general designation for modern Central Asia, although this expression has now fallen into disuse. Turan appears next to Iran on numerous maps of the 19th century to designate a region encompassing modern Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and northern parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan. This area roughly corresponds to what is called Central Asia today.

The phrase &quot;Turan Plain&quot; or &quot;Turan Depression&quot; became a geographical term referring to a part of Central Asia.

==== Linguistics ====
The term &quot;Turanian&quot;, now obsolete, formerly occurred in the classifications used by European (especially German, Hungarian, and Slovak) ethnologists, linguists, and Romantics to designate populations speaking non-Indo-European, non-Semitic, and non-Hamitic languages and specially speakers of Altaic, Dravidian, Uralic, Japanese, Korean and other languages.

Max Müller (1823–1900) identified different sub-branches within the Turanian language family:
* the Middle Altaic division branch, comprising Tungusic, Mongolic, Turkic.
* The Northern Ural Samoyedic, Ugriche and Finnic.
* the Southern branch consisted of Dravidian languages such as Tamil, Kannada, Telugu, Malayalam, and other Dravidian languages.
* the languages of the Caucasus which Müller classified as the &quot;scattered languages of the Turanian family&quot;.

Müller also began to muse whether Chinese belonged to the Northern branch or Southern branch.

The main relationships between Dravidian, Uralic, and Altaic languages were considered typological. According to Crystal &amp; Robins, &quot;Language families, as conceived in the historical study of languages, should not be confused with the quite separate classifications of languages by reference to their sharing certain predominant features of grammatical structure.&quot;
 linguists classify languages according to the method of comparative linguistics rather than using their typological features. According to &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, Max&#x27;s Müller&#x27;s &quot;efforts were most successful in the case of the Semites, whose affinities are easy to demonstrate, and probably least successful in the case of the Turanian peoples, whose early origins are hypothetical&quot;. the scholarly community no longer uses the word &quot;Turanian&quot; to denote a classification of language families. The relationship between Uralic and Altaic, whose speakers were also designated as Turanian people in 19th-century European literature, remains uncertain.

==== Ideology ====
In European discourse, the words &quot;Turan&quot; and &quot;Turanian&quot; can designate a certain mentality, i.e. the nomadic in contrast to the urbanized agricultural civilizations. This usage probably matches the Zoroastrian concept of the &quot;Tūrya&quot;, which is not primarily a linguistic or ethnic designation, but rather a name of the infidels who opposed the civilization based on the preaching of Zoroaster.

Combined with physical anthropology, the concept of the Turanian mentality has a clear potential for cultural polemic. Thus in 1838 the scholar J.W. Jackson described the &quot;Turanid&quot; or &quot;Turanian&quot; race in the following words:

Polish philosopher Feliks Koneczny claimed the existence of a distinctive Turanian civilization, encompassing both Turkic and some Slavs, such as Russians. This alleged civilization&#x27;s hallmark would be militarism, anti-intellectualism and an absolute obedience to the ruler. Koneczny saw this civilization as inherently inferior to Latin (Western European) civilization.

==== Politics ====

In the declining days of the Ottoman Empire, some Turkish nationalists adopted the word &quot;Turanian&quot; to express a pan-Turkic ideology, also called Turanism. Turanism forms an important aspect of the ideology of the Turkish Nationalist Movement Party (&quot;MHP&quot;), whose members are also known as Grey Wolves.

In recent times, the word &quot;Turanian&quot; has sometimes expressed a pan-Altaic nationalism (theoretically including Manchus and Mongols in addition to Turks), though no political organization seems to have adopted such an ambitious platform.

==== Names ====

&quot;Turandot&quot; – or &quot;Turandokht&quot; – is a female name in Iran and it means &quot;Turan&#x27;s Daughter&quot; in Persian (it is best known in the West through Puccini&#x27;s famous opera &quot;Turandot&quot; (1921–24)).

Turan is also a common name in the Middle East, and as family surnames in some countries including Bahrain, Iran, Bosnia and Turkey.

The Ayyubid ruler Saladin had an older brother with the name Turan-Shah.

Turaj, whom ancient Iranian myths depict as the ancestor of the Turanians, is also a popular name and means &quot;Son of Darkness&quot;. The name Turan according to Iranian myths derives from the homeland of Turaj. The Pahlavi pronunciation of Turaj is Tuzh, according to the Dehkhoda dictionary. Similarly, Iraj, which is also a popular name, is the brother of Turaj in the &quot;Shahnameh&quot;. An altered version of Turaj is &quot;Zaraj&quot;, which means &quot;son of gold&quot;.

== See also ==

* Scythia
* Ariana
* Bactria
* Dahistan
* Khorasan
* Khwarazm
* Margiana
* Parthia
* Sogdia
* Tokharistan
* Transoxiana
* Turkestan
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Archäologie in Iran und Turan&quot;, Verlag Philipp von Zabern GmbH. Publisher – Verlag Marie Leidorf GmbH (Volume 1–3) 

== External links ==
* Iranians and Turanians in the Avesta</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164585" start="0" end="5" title="Turan" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620908" start="22" end="39" title="historical region" label="historical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="43" end="55" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="72" end="79" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125146115" start="197" end="215" title="Turya (Avesta)" label="original Turanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="224" end="231" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117743452" start="245" end="256" title="Avestan period" label="Avestan age"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="338" end="352" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150281" start="380" end="388" title="Fereydun" label="Fereydun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="428" end="437" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q328072" start="727" end="736" title="Kopet Dag" label="Kopet Dag"/>
<link wikidata="Q283622" start="749" end="754" title="Atrek" label="Atrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="772" end="779" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="781" end="787" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154974" start="792" end="800" title="Margiana" label="Margiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="854" end="868" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="906" end="919" title="Turkification" label="Turkification"/>
<link wikidata="Q40315" start="977" end="991" title="Clifford Edmund Bosworth" label="C. E. Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="1098" end="1107" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q689581" start="1232" end="1237" title="yasht" label="yasht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1263" end="1276" title="Avestan#Forms and stages of development" label="Young Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761611" start="1357" end="1371" title="Gherardo Gnoli" label="Gherardo Gnoli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1481" end="1487" title="Iranian peoples#Name" label="Airyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="1519" end="1527" title="Sarmatians" label="Sairimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="1542" end="1548" title="Sakas" label="Sainus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852554" start="1561" end="1566" title="Dahae" label="Dahis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="1608" end="1614" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1688" end="1699" title="Zoroastrism" label="Zoroastrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q383717" start="1728" end="1736" title="Afrasiab" label="Afrāsīāb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329536" start="1778" end="1784" title="Gathas" label="Gathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988" start="2106" end="2116" title="Mary Boyce" label="Mary Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="2981" end="2985" title="Amu Darya" label="Oxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8279" start="3263" end="3272" title="Shahnameh" label="Shahnameh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="3416" end="3422" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q84591" start="3444" end="3461" title="Manfred Mayrhofer" label="Manfred Mayrhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="3582" end="3597" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="4922" end="4929" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavid"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="5228" end="5234" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="5611" end="5622" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5790" end="5800" title="Iran" label="Ērān, Īrān"/>
<link wikidata="Q124818442" start="5827" end="5831" title="Arya (Iran)" label="Ārya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8493" start="5910" end="5914" title="Amu Darya" label="Oxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150281" start="6009" end="6018" title="Fereydun" label="Θraētaona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543323" start="6036" end="6040" title="Salm (Shahnameh)" label="Salm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543320" start="6042" end="6045" title="Tur (Shahnameh)" label="Tūr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300562" start="6056" end="6060" title="Iraj" label="Iraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="6101" end="6111" title="Anatolia" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6658" end="6670" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="6747" end="6751" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="6831" end="6841" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="6843" end="6853" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="6855" end="6865" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="6867" end="6877" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="6879" end="6891" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6914" end="6925" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="6930" end="6938" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="6988" end="7000" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q575516" start="7053" end="7069" title="Turan Depression" label="Turan Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7278" end="7284" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="7286" end="7295" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="7301" end="7307" title="Slovakia" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="7309" end="7321" title="Ethnology" label="ethnologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="7323" end="7332" title="Linguistics" label="linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="7338" end="7347" title="Romanticism" label="Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="7386" end="7399" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="7405" end="7412" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="7422" end="7439" title="Hamites" label="Hamitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="7466" end="7472" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33311" start="7474" end="7483" title="Dravidian languages" label="Dravidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="7485" end="7491" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="7493" end="7501" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="7503" end="7509" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60074" start="7532" end="7542" title="Max Müller" label="Max Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="7639" end="7645" title="Altaic languages" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="7717" end="7721" title="Uralic languages" label="Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="7888" end="7913" title="languages of the Caucasus" label="languages of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="8036" end="8043" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="8184" end="8195" title="Linguistic typology" label="typological"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="8532" end="8555" title="comparative linguistics" label="comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="9306" end="9311" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="9333" end="9342" title="Urbanization" label="urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="9343" end="9355" title="Agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="9597" end="9606" title="Zoroaster" label="Zoroaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3846426" start="9873" end="9888" title="Feliks Koneczny" label="Feliks Koneczny"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="9985" end="9990" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="10000" end="10008" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q575959" start="10073" end="10093" title="anti-intellectualism" label="anti-intellectualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="10280" end="10294" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q269248" start="10406" end="10414" title="Turanism" label="Turanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="10458" end="10466" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q251077" start="10482" end="10508" title="Nationalist Movement Party" label="Nationalist Movement Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142831" start="10560" end="10571" title="Grey Wolves (organization)" label="Grey Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="10695" end="10702" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="10707" end="10714" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="10730" end="10735" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="10965" end="10972" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="11011" end="11018" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q207990" start="11045" end="11053" title="Turandot" label="Turandot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804084" start="11073" end="11078" title="Turan (name)" label="Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="11108" end="11119" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="11172" end="11179" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="11187" end="11193" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11198" end="11204" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="11211" end="11218" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="11225" end="11232" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400207" start="11268" end="11278" title="Turan-Shah" label="Turan-Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300562" start="11589" end="11593" title="Iraj" label="Iraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="11785" end="11792" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296890" start="11795" end="11801" title="Ariana" label="Ariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="11804" end="11811" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q852554" start="11814" end="11822" title="Dahae" label="Dahistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="11825" end="11833" title="Greater Khorasan" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182647" start="11836" end="11844" title="Khwarazm" label="Khwarazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q154974" start="11847" end="11855" title="Margiana" label="Margiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="11858" end="11865" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="11868" end="11874" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461501" start="11877" end="11888" title="Tokharistan" label="Tokharistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="11891" end="11902" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315785" start="11905" end="11914" title="Turkestan" label="Turkestan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85723" wikidata="Q12960427" url="?curid=85723" title="Venus Genetrix">
<text>Venus Genetrix may refer to: 

* Venus Genetrix, epithet of the goddess Venus
* Venus Genetrix (sculpture), the name for a type of sculptural depiction of the goddess
* Temple of Venus Genetrix, a ruined temple in the Forum of Caesar, Rome

== See also ==

* Genetrix (disambiguation)
* Venus (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12960427" start="0" end="14" title="Venus Genetrix" label="Venus Genetrix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33" end="47" title="Venus (mythology)#Epithets" label="Venus Genetrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181475" start="80" end="106" title="Venus Genetrix (sculpture)" label="Venus Genetrix (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459870" start="169" end="193" title="Temple of Venus Genetrix" label="Temple of Venus Genetrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q20998866" start="259" end="284" title="Genetrix (disambiguation)" label="Genetrix (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102040" start="287" end="309" title="Venus (disambiguation)" label="Venus (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85724" wikidata="Q2704046" url="?curid=85724" title="Turms">
<text>In Etruscan religion, Turms (usually written as 𐌕𐌖𐌓𐌌𐌑 &quot;Turmś&quot; in the Etruscan alphabet) was the equivalent of Roman Mercury and Greek Hermes, both gods of 
trade and the messenger god between people and gods. He was depicted with the same distinctive attributes as Hermes and Mercury: a caduceus, a petasos (often winged), and/or winged sandals. He is portrayed as a messenger of the gods, particularly Tinia (Jupiter), although he is also thought to be ‘at the service’ (&quot;ministerium&quot;) of other deities.

Etruscan artwork often depicts Turms in his role as psychopomp, conducting the soul into the afterlife. In this capacity he is sometimes shown on Etruscan sarcophagi—in one case side by side with Charun and Cerberus. In another depiction, in which the god is labelled as 𐌕𐌖𐌓𐌌𐌑 𐌀𐌉𐌕𐌀𐌑 &quot;Turmś Aitaś&quot; or ‘Turms of Hades’, he brings the shade of Tiresias to consult with Odysseus in the underworld. Turms also appears in images depicting the Judgement of Paris, as well as in scenes with Hercle (Heracles) or Perseus.

The name &quot;Turms&quot; is of distinctively Etruscan origin, like that of Fufluns but in contrast to deities such as Hercle and Apulu (Apollo), whose names were borrowed from Greek.

Turms is known more from decoration on everyday objects, such as mirrors, than from cult images, although one dedication has been taken to indicate the existence of a temple of Turms at Cortona.

Bernard Combet-Farnoux interprets comments by Servius and Macrobius as indicating that “Hermes-Turms” had the epithet &quot;Camillus&quot;, meaning ‘servant’ (i.e. of the other deities). A scholium on Callimachus adds that “Cadmilos is Hermes in Tyrrhenia”; Combet-Farnoux considers Camillus and Cadmilos to be variants of the same name.

Turms is also the name of a character in a historical novel by Mika Waltari, &quot;The Etruscan&quot;, which takes place during the end of Etruscan civilization.

==References==
===Works cited===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="20" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704046" start="22" end="27" title="Turms" label="Turms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="79" end="96" title="Old Italic script" label="Etruscan alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="126" end="133" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="144" end="150" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="297" end="305" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q910792" start="309" end="316" title="petasos" label="petasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="413" end="418" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="420" end="427" title="Jupiter (deity)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="578" end="588" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="722" end="728" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="733" end="741" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="846" end="851" title="Greek underworld" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q656881" start="877" end="885" title="Tiresias" label="Tiresias"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="902" end="910" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="911" end="928" title="Katabasis#The Odyssey" label="in the underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784308" start="973" end="991" title="Judgement of Paris" label="Judgement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="1019" end="1025" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1027" end="1035" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="1040" end="1047" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="1097" end="1105" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q613010" start="1127" end="1134" title="Fufluns" label="Fufluns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634020" start="1181" end="1186" title="Apulu" label="Apulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="1188" end="1194" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1228" end="1233" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q52080" start="1422" end="1429" title="Cortona" label="Cortona"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="1478" end="1485" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313934" start="1490" end="1499" title="Macrobius" label="Macrobius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1542" end="1549" title="Epithet#Religion" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="1621" end="1629" title="scholia" label="scholium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="1633" end="1644" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q940138" start="1656" end="1664" title="Cabeiri" label="Cadmilos"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="1678" end="1687" title="Etruria" label="Tyrrhenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193111" start="1834" end="1846" title="Mika Waltari" label="Mika Waltari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000673" start="1854" end="1866" title="The Etruscan" label="The Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="1910" end="1931" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85725" wikidata="Q438514" url="?curid=85725" title="Uni">
<text>Uni or UNI may refer to:
==Entertainment==
*Uni Records, a division of MCA, formally called Universal City Records
*&quot;U.N.I.&quot;, a song by Ed Sheeran from &quot;+&quot; (&quot;Plus&quot;)
*Uni, a species in the Neopets Trading Card Game
*Uni, a character in the anime &quot;Reborn!&quot;
*Uni, a character in the television series &quot;Dungeons and Dragons&quot;
*Uni, a fictional character in the &quot;Hyperdimension Neptunia Mk2&quot; video game
*Uni, a popular internet cat

==Organizations==
*UNI Financial Cooperation, a Canadian credit union
*Ente Nazionale Italiano di Unificazione, an Italian technical standards organization
*UNI global union, an international trade union federation
* The University of Northern Iowa, a university in the United States
* The National University of Engineering, a university in Peru
* UNI, an alternative name for the Northern Iowa Panthers, the athletic program of the University of Northern Iowa
*United News of India, an Indian news agency
*National Union of Independents (disambiguation), the name of several political parties

==Transport==
*UNI, the reporting mark of Unity Railways, a defunct Pennsylvania railroad
*UNI, the MTR station code for University station, Hong Kong

==Other uses==
* Uni, a colloquial term for university
*Uni (food), sea urchin in Japanese cuisine
*Uni (letter), a glyph in Georgian scripts
*Uni (mythology), the supreme goddess of Etruscan mythology
*Uni (inhabited locality), name of several places in Russia
*Uni language (ISO 639-3 language code: uni), a language of Papua New Guinea
*uni-ball, brand of pens and pencils made by the Mitsubishi Pencil Company
*In mathematics, the category of uniform spaces
*User–network interface, the junction from which a telecommunications service is connected between the service provider and the end user
*UNI, fashion denotes unisex clothing
*UNI, the governance token of the Uniswap cryptocurrency exchange

==See also==
*Unis (disambiguation)
*Unni (disambiguation)
*Uny</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q438514" start="0" end="3" title="Uni" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q438514" start="7" end="10" title="Uni" label="UNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q510092" start="44" end="55" title="Uni Records" label="Uni Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703155" start="162" end="194" title="Plus (Ed Sheeran album)" label="&amp;quot;+&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Plus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163425" start="218" end="243" title="Neopets Trading Card Game" label="Neopets Trading Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="252" end="294" title="List of Reborn! characters#Millefiore Family" label="character in the anime &amp;quot;Reborn!&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="344" end="364" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons (TV series)#Protagonists" label="Dungeons and Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="379" end="456" title="Hyperdimension Neptunia Mk2#CPU Candidates" label="fictional character in the &amp;quot;Hyperdimension Neptunia Mk2&amp;quot; video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="482" end="485" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933348" start="506" end="531" title="UNI Financial Cooperation" label="UNI Financial Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q773011" start="558" end="597" title="Ente Nazionale Italiano di Unificazione" label="Ente Nazionale Italiano di Unificazione"/>
<link wikidata="Q676372" start="644" end="660" title="UNI global union" label="UNI global union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781094" start="708" end="735" title="University of Northern Iowa" label="University of Northern Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202403" start="777" end="811" title="National University of Engineering" label="National University of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058442" start="869" end="891" title="Northern Iowa Panthers" label="Northern Iowa Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595676" start="950" end="970" title="United News of India" label="United News of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27790711" start="995" end="1042" title="National Union of Independents (disambiguation)" label="National Union of Independents (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1143" end="1172" title="List of Pennsylvania railroads#Defunct railroads" label="defunct Pennsylvania railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q996480" start="1204" end="1222" title="University station (MTR)" label="University station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="1279" end="1289" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="1291" end="1301" title="Uni (food)" label="Uni (food)"/>
<link wikidata="Q114475" start="1335" end="1347" title="Uni (letter)" label="Uni (letter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="1378" end="1393" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346739" start="1438" end="1462" title="Uni (inhabited locality)" label="Uni (inhabited locality)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043886" start="1498" end="1510" title="Uni language" label="Uni language"/>
<link wikidata="Q867714" start="1575" end="1583" title="uni-ball" label="uni-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="1682" end="1695" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901863" start="1698" end="1720" title="User–network interface" label="User–network interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q20727926" start="1856" end="1871" title="unisex clothing" label="unisex clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q104438477" start="1906" end="1913" title="Uniswap" label="Uniswap"/>
<link wikidata="Q59399" start="1953" end="1974" title="Unis (disambiguation)" label="Unis (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48689399" start="1976" end="1997" title="Unni (disambiguation)" label="Unni (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q985849" start="1999" end="2002" title="Uny" label="Uny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85726" wikidata="Q2738940" url="?curid=85726" title="Hercle">
<text>In Etruscan religion, Hercle (also &quot;Heracle&quot; or &quot;Hercl&quot;), the son of Tinia and Uni, was a version of the Greek Heracles, depicted as a muscular figure often carrying a club and wearing a lionskin. He is a popular subject in Etruscan art, particularly bronze mirrors, which show him engaged in adventures not known from the Greek myths of Heracles or the Roman and later classical myths of Hercules.

In the Etruscan tradition, Uni (Roman Juno) grants Hercle access to a life among the immortals by offering her breast milk to him. Hercle was the first man elevated to a godhood through his deeds and Etruscan aristocrats tried to identify with this ascension, as reflected in artwork and literature.

Hercle differed in many aspects from the Greek Heracles. He seems to have enjoyed a special status in Italy in general. In art, he is shown to be a defender of an unknown goddess against creatures on the other side of a human border, showing his status as a Liminal deity. In Etruria, he was also associated with running water. He was also the master of animals, the protector of flocks and herds, and of herdsmen.

==Worship==

Hercle was more of an oracular god in Etruria than in Greece. Several inscriptions have come to light from 1970 that show evidence of cult worship. Particularly, a sanctuary at Caere preserved many inscriptions of dedications to the god. In Toledo, a bronze weight and an attic red-figured cup created by Euphronios testify an important cult to Hercle.

==Scenes from Etruscan art==
Hercle can be recognized in Etruscan art from his attributes, or is sometimes identified by name. Since Etruscan literature has not survived, the meaning of the scenes in which he appears can only be interpreted by comparison to Greek and Roman myths, through information about Etruscan myths preserved by Greek and Latin literature, or through conjectural reconstructions based on other Etruscan representations.

==See also==
* List of Etruscan mythological figures

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="20" title="Etruscan religion" label="Etruscan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738940" start="22" end="28" title="Hercle" label="Hercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="89" end="94" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="99" end="102" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="131" end="139" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q830331" start="244" end="256" title="Etruscan art" label="Etruscan art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041984" start="271" end="284" title="bronze mirror" label="bronze mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="343" end="354" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="358" end="366" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="374" end="379" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367434" start="390" end="405" title="classical mythology" label="classical myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="409" end="417" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q650410" start="447" end="450" title="Uni (mythology)" label="Uni"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="458" end="462" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="768" end="776" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064682" start="979" end="992" title="Liminal deity" label="Liminal deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="1172" end="1180" title="oracular" label="oracular"/>
<link wikidata="Q395968" start="1637" end="1656" title="Liber Linteus" label="Etruscan literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249617" start="1963" end="2000" title="List of Etruscan mythological figures" label="List of Etruscan mythological figures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85728" wikidata="Q1235270" url="?curid=85728" title="Vanth">
<text>Vanth is a chthonic figure in Etruscan mythology shown in a variety of forms of funerary art, such as in tomb paintings and on sarcophagi.

==Background==
Vanth is a female entity in the Etruscan underworld that is often accompanied either by additional Vanth figures or by another underworld entity, Charun (later referred to as &quot;Charu&quot;). Both Vanth and Charun are only seen in iconography beginning c. 400 BC, in the middle period of Etruscan art, although some earlier inscriptions mention her name.

Vanth has no direct counterpart in Greek mythology, although her depiction as a winged figure has led to comparisons with the Greek Furies, the Erinyes, especially in older publications. This is an unlikely association since she is almost always shown in Etruscan iconography to be a benevolent guide, not an avenging spirit, which the Furies often represent. Her other attributes include the possession of a torch, key, or scroll, and she is shown often to be bare-chested with cross-straps across her breast, adorned with fur boots, a rolled short chiton, and sometimes with unattached sleeves. In fact, her dress has been attributed by Scheffer as specifically that of a huntress.

Vanth is involved in a variety of different types of scenes in Etruscan art; the most common types associate her presence with occasions of slaughter and murder, including scenes from the Trojan cycle. Occasionally she is shown rising up out of the ground in such contexts, as seen on an ash urn from Chiusi. Sometimes she is even shown as a solitary figure decorating the sides of ash urns. Other scenes in which Vanth is present involve the meeting and escort of the dead, in the role of psychopompos, who are either walking or being transported on horseback, wagon, or chariot.

In general, Vanth is associated with death and the journey of the deceased to the Underworld, but in a variety of different ways; she is present in scenes of the moment of death as well in scenes where the deceased is already fully dead and journeying to the Underworld. She is depicted as a benevolent psychopompian figure, in contrast to the menacing Charun, her occasional companion. She may even take an active role in protecting heroic figures from harm, as in an urn painting where Vanth is shown shielding Odysseus from rocks hurled by Polyphemus.

The materials that Vanth is identified as carrying, which include a torch, key, scroll, or sword, also relate to her role as a guide in the Underworld. The torch can be used to light the way for travellers to the Underworld, although some scholars interpret it as a status symbol or as an indication of office, and the key unlocks its doorway. Additionally, the scroll may reveal more about Vanth, as one instance actually displays her name inside, &quot;vanθ&quot;. Vanth has been interpreted as a goddess of fate, and using this association, the scroll may contain the destiny of the deceased. However, in total, Vanth is depicted as a young, vibrant female chthonic figure, sometimes in the company of other Vanths, and sometimes with Charun; she is a figure who assists with the journey of the deceased to the underworld.

== Etruscan chthonic figures ==
Other Etruscan chthonic (or underworld) figures include Charun, Calu, Phersipnai, Turms, Aita, and Culsu.

== See also ==
* Vanth (moon), moon of Orcus

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1235270" start="0" end="5" title="Vanth" label="Vanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="11" end="19" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="30" end="48" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="80" end="92" title="funerary art" label="funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="301" end="307" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="658" end="665" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q944031" start="1064" end="1070" title="Chiton (costume)" label="chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q578605" start="1387" end="1399" title="Trojan War Cycle" label="Trojan cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q91185" start="1500" end="1506" title="Chiusi" label="Chiusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="1689" end="1701" title="psychopompos" label="psychopompos"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="2294" end="2302" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="2324" end="2334" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067918" start="3252" end="3258" title="Charun" label="Charun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934408" start="3260" end="3264" title="Calu" label="Calu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424980" start="3266" end="3276" title="Phersipnai" label="Phersipnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704046" start="3278" end="3283" title="Turms" label="Turms"/>
<link wikidata="Q410277" start="3285" end="3289" title="Aita" label="Aita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249617" start="3295" end="3300" title="Culsu" label="Culsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q603083" start="3320" end="3332" title="Vanth (moon)" label="Vanth (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603" start="3342" end="3347" title="90482 Orcus" label="Orcus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85730" wikidata="Q2119919" url="?curid=85730" title="Voltumna">
<text>In Etruscan mythology, Voltumna or Veltha was the chthonic (relating to or inhabiting the underworld) deity, who became the supreme god of the Etruscan pantheon, the &quot;deus Etruriae princeps&quot;, according to Varro. Voltumna&#x27;s cult was centered in Volsini (modern-day Orvieto), a city of the Etruscan civilization of central Italy. Voltumna is shown with contrasting characteristics, such as a maleficent monster, a chthonic vegetation god of uncertain sex, or a mighty war god.

The bond of the twelve Etruscan &quot;populi&quot; was renewed annually at the sacred grove of Fanum Voltumnae, the sanctuary of Voltumnus sited near Volsinii (present day Bolsena), which was mentioned by Livy. At the Fanum Voltumnae &quot;ludi&quot; were held, the precise nature of which, whether athletic or artistic, is unknown.

In the Roman Forum, near the Temple of Castor and Pollux stood a shrine dedicated to Voltumna in the Vicus Tuscus.
He was the equivalent of the Roman Vertumnus.

==See also==
*Tinia

==Notes==

==References==
*Briquel, Dominique 2003 &quot;Le Fanum Voltumnae: remarques sur le culte fédéral des cités étrusques&quot;, in &quot;Dieux, fêtes, sacré dans la Grèce et la Rome antiques&quot;, edited by André Motte and Charles Ternes: 133–59. (Brepols, Turnhout). The last ten pages of this paper contain a highly technical discussion of the identity of the Etruscan god Voltumna in relation to the Latin gods Vertumnus and Janus.
*Fontana Elboj, Gonzalo, 1992. &quot;Ager: estudio etimológico y functional sobre Marte y Voltumna&quot; (University of Zaragoza) (Spanish) 
*Hederich, Benjamin. (1770) 1996. &quot;Gründliches Mythologisches Lexikon&quot; (Darmstadt) 
*Pliny 8, 20.
*Vollmer,&quot;Mythologie aller Völker&quot;, (Stuttgart) 1874. 
*L. Niebuhr, &quot;Römische Geschichte&quot; 2, 216. 
*Wissowa, &quot;Religion und Cultus des Römer&quot;, 243, 3. 
*Müller-Deecke, &quot;Die Etrusker&quot;, 1, 329 skk. 
*Theodor Mommsen, &quot;Römisches Staatsrecht&quot;, 3, 666
*Pallottino, Massimo. &quot;The Religion of the Etruscans&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="3" end="21" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119919" start="23" end="31" title="Voltumna" label="Voltumna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119919" start="35" end="41" title="Voltumna" label="Veltha"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="50" end="58" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="215" end="220" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="279" end="286" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="303" end="324" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q811600" start="570" end="582" title="sacred grove" label="sacred grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397996" start="586" end="601" title="Fanum Voltumnae" label="Fanum Voltumnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q159685" start="663" end="670" title="Bolsena" label="Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="696" end="700" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216498" start="731" end="735" title="ludi" label="ludi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="832" end="843" title="Roman Forum" label="Roman Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380530" start="854" end="881" title="Temple of Castor and Pollux" label="Temple of Castor and Pollux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229845" start="926" end="938" title="Vicus Tuscus" label="Vicus Tuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="969" end="974" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q374311" start="975" end="984" title="Vertumnus" label="Vertumnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q926518" start="1001" end="1006" title="Tinia" label="Tinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238177" start="1035" end="1053" title="Dominique Briquel" label="Briquel, Dominique"/>
<link wikidata="Q817533" start="1593" end="1611" title="Benjamin Hedericus" label="Hederich, Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1687" end="1692" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85731" wikidata="Q179718" url="?curid=85731" title="Catherine of Alexandria">
<text>Catherine of Alexandria, also spelled Katherine, was, according to tradition, a Christian saint and virgin, who was martyred in the early 4th century at the hands of the emperor Maxentius. According to her hagiography, she was both a princess and a noted scholar who became a Christian around age 14, converted hundreds of people to Christianity, and was martyred around age 18. More than 1,100 years after Catherine&#x27;s martyrdom, Joan of Arc identified her as one of the saints who appeared to and counselled her.

The Eastern Orthodox Church venerates her as a great martyr and celebrates her feast day on 24 or 25 November, depending on the regional tradition. In Catholicism, Catherine is traditionally revered as one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers, and she is commemorated in the Roman Martyrology on 25 November. Her feast was removed from the General Roman Calendar in 1969 but restored in 2002 as an optional memorial. In the Episcopal Church, St. Catherine is commemorated on 24 November, together with the martyrs Barbara of Nicomedia and Margaret of Antioch, while in the Church of England her feast day is 25 November.

Some modern scholars consider that the legend of Catherine was probably based on the life and murder of the virgin Saint Dorothea of Alexandria and the Greek philosopher Hypatia, with the reversed role of a Christian and neoplatonist in the case of the latter. On the other hand, Leon Clugnet writing in the Catholic Encyclopedia states &quot;although contemporary hagiographers look upon the authenticity of the various texts containing the legend of St. Catherine as more than doubtful, it is not therefore meant to cast even the shadow of a doubt around the existence of the saint&quot;.

==Life==
According to the traditional narrative, Catherine was the daughter of Sabinella and Constus (or Costus), the governor of Alexandria during the reign of the emperor Maximian (286–305). She was of Greek origin. From a young age she devoted herself to study. A vision of the Virgin Mary and the Child Jesus persuaded her to become a Christian. When the persecutions began under the emperor Maxentius, she went to the emperor and rebuked him for his cruelty. The emperor summoned 50 of the best pagan philosophers and orators to dispute with her, hoping that they would refute her pro-Christian arguments, but Catherine won the debate. Several of her adversaries, conquered by her eloquence, declared themselves Christians and were at once put to death.

===Torture and martyrdom===

The emperor gave orders to subject Catherine to terrible tortures and then throw her in prison. Her legend tells that during the confinement she was fed daily by a dove from heaven, and Christ also visited her, encouraging her to fight bravely, and promised her the crown of everlasting glory. Angels tended her wounds with salve.

During her imprisonment more than 200 people came to see her, including Maxentius&#x27; wife, Valeria Maximilla; all converted to Christianity and were subsequently martyred. Upon the failure of Maxentius to make Catherine yield by way of torture, he tried to win her over by proposing marriage. Catherine refused, declaring that her spouse was Jesus Christ, to whom she had consecrated her virginity.

The furious emperor condemned Catherine to death on a spiked breaking wheel, but at her touch it shattered. Maxentius ordered her to be beheaded. Catherine ordered the execution to commence. As per her legend, a milk-like substance rather than blood flowed from her neck.

===Veneration===
In the 6th century, the Eastern Emperor Justinian had established what is now Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery in Egypt, which had been originally built encircling the purported burning bush seen by Moses. Countless people make the pilgrimage to the monastery to receive miracle healing from Catherine.

==Historicity==
Sometimes cited as a possible inspiration of Catherine, Eusebius wrote around 320 that Maximinus had ordered a young Christian woman to come to his palace to become his mistress, and when she refused he had her punished by having her banished and her estates confiscated. Eusebius did not name the woman but Rufinus of Aquileia names her Dorothea () in his translation of Eusebius&#x27; work. A sixteenth century Italian historian, Caesar Baronius (c.1538-1607), suggested that Catherine and Dorothea were the same person and that Catherine (Hecaterina) was her former pagan name while Dorothea (the gift of God) was the name given to her at the time of baptism. 
The &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, while not denying her historicity, states that most of the details that embellish the narrative, as well as the long discourses attributed to Catherine, are to be rejected as later inventions. According to the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, no extant written mention of Catherine of Alexandria is known before the 9th century, and &quot;her historicity is doubtful&quot;.

Donald Attwater dismisses what he calls the &quot;legend&quot; of Saint Catherine, arguing for a lack of any &quot;positive evidence that she ever existed outside the mind of some Greek writer who first composed what he intended to be simply an edifying romance.&quot; Harold Davis writes that &quot;assiduous research has failed to identify Catherine with any historical personage&quot;.

Anna Brownell Jameson was the first to argue that the life of Catherine was confused with that of the slightly later neoplatonist philosopher Hypatia of Alexandria. Hypatia was a Greek mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher who was murdered by the Parabalani after being accused of exacerbating a conflict between two prominent figures in Alexandria, the governor Orestes and the bishop Cyril. The idea that Catherine&#x27;s life was either based on or became confused with the life of the pagan Hypatia has become a popular theory among modern scholars since. However, while Christine Walsh accepts the many parallels between Catherine and Hypatia, she does not believe there is any evidence for or against the idea that Catherine was created based on Hypatia.
The earliest surviving account of Catherine&#x27;s life comes around 600 years after the traditional date of her martyrdom, in the &quot;Menologium&quot;, a document compiled for Emperor Basil II in 976, although the alleged rediscovery of her relics at Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery at the foot of Mount Sinai was about 800 and presumably implies an existing cult at that date (though the common name of the monastery developed after the discovery).

In her book &quot;The Cult of St Katherine of Alexandria in Early Medieval Europe&quot;, Christine Walsh discusses &quot;the historical Katherine&quot;: 

==Name==
Her name appears in Greek as () or (). The etymology is debated: it could derive from (, &quot;each of two&quot;); it could derive from the name of the goddess Hecate; it could be related to Greek (, &quot;insult, outrage, suffering, torture&quot;); or it could be from a Coptic name meaning &quot;my consecration of your name&quot;. In the early Christian era, it became associated with Greek (, &quot;pure&quot;), and the Latin spelling was changed from Katerina to Katharina to reflect this.

==Medieval cult==
Catherine was one of the most important saints in the religious culture of the late Middle Ages and arguably considered the most important of the virgin martyrs, a group including Agnes of Rome, Margaret of Antioch, Barbara, Lucia of Syracuse, Valerie of Limoges and many others. Her power as an intercessor was renowned and firmly established in most versions of her hagiography, in which she specifically entreats Christ at the moment of her death to answer the prayers of those who remember her martyrdom and invoke her name.

The development of her medieval cult was spurred by the alleged rediscovery of her body around 800 (about 500 years after her death) at Mount Sinai, supposedly with hair still growing and a constant stream of healing oil issuing from her body. There are several pilgrimage narratives that chronicle the journey to Mount Sinai, most notably those of John Mandeville and Friar Felix Fabri. However, while the monastery at Mount Sinai was the best known site of Catherine pilgrimage, it was also the most difficult to reach. The most prominent Western shrine was the monastery in Rouen that claimed to house Catherine&#x27;s fingers. It was not alone in the west, however, and was accompanied by many scattered shrines and altars dedicated to Catherine throughout France and England. Some were better-known sites, such as Canterbury and Westminster, which claimed a phial of her oil, brought back from Mount Sinai by Edward the Confessor. Other shrines, such as St. Catherine&#x27;s Hill, Hampshire were the focus of generally local pilgrimage, many of which are only identified by brief mentions in various texts, rather than by physical evidence.

St. Catharine&#x27;s College, Cambridge was founded on St Catharine&#x27;s Day (25 November) 1473 by Robert Woodlark (provost of King&#x27;s College, Cambridge) who sought to create a small community of scholars who would study exclusively theology and philosophy. Woodlark may have chosen the name in homage to Catherine of Valois, mother of Henry VI of England, although it is more likely that it was named as part of the Renaissance cult of Saint Catherine, who was a patron saint of learning. St Catherine&#x27;s College, Oxford, developed from the Delegacy for Unattached Students, formed in 1868.

Catherine also had a large female following, whose devotion was less likely to be expressed through pilgrimage. The importance of the virgin martyrs as the focus of devotion and models for proper feminine behaviour increased during the Late Middle Ages. Among these, St Catherine in particular was used as an for women, a status which at times superseded her intercessory role. Both Christine de Pizan and Geoffrey de la Tour Landry point to Catherine as a paragon for young women, emphasizing her model of virginity and &quot;wifely chastity&quot;. This shows also for instance in the naming of Catalina Tomas (&quot;Catalina&quot; being the Catalan version of &quot;Catherine&quot;) whose family had a special veneration of Catherine of Alexandria. From the early 14th century the mystic marriage of Saint Catherine first appears in hagiographical literature and, soon after, in art. In the Western church, the popularity of her cult began to reduce in the 18th century.

==Veneration==

Her principal symbol is the spiked wheel, which has become known as the Catherine wheel, and her feast day is celebrated on 25 November by most denominations. In many places, her feast was celebrated with the utmost solemnity, servile work being suppressed and the devotions attended by great numbers of people. In several dioceses of France it was observed as a Holy Day of Obligation up to the beginning of the 17th century, the splendour of its ceremonial eclipsing that of the feasts of some of the apostles. Many chapels were placed under her patronage, and nearly all churches had a statue of her, representing her according to medieval iconography with a wheel, her instrument of torture.

The Russian, Serbian and Bulgarian Eastern Orthodox Churches celebrate it on 24 November. The origin of this tradition is not known. In 11th-century Kievan Rus, the feast day was celebrated on 25 November. Dimitry of Rostov in his (&quot;Book of the Lives of the Saints&quot;), T.1 (1689) places the date of celebration on 24 November. A story that Empress Catherine the Great did not wish to share her patronal feast with the Leavetaking of the feast of the Presentation of the Theotokos and hence changed the date is not supported by historical evidence. One of the first Roman Catholic churches to be built in Russia, the Catholic Church of St. Catherine, was named after Catherine of Alexandria because she was Catherine the Great&#x27;s patron. A footnote to the entry for 25 November in &quot;The Synaxarion&quot; compiled by Hieromonk Makarios of Simonos Petra states: &quot;Until the 16th century, the memory of St Catherine was observed on 24 Nov. According to a note by Bartholomew of Koutloumousiou inserted in the &quot;Menaion&quot;, the Fathers of Sinai transferred the date to 25 Nov. in order that the feast might be kept with greater solemnity.&quot;

The 1908 &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; describes her historical importance:

==Customs==

In France, unwed women who had attained the age of 25 were called &quot;catherinettes&quot;. They would wear richly decorated bonnets on the day of her feast. This custom gave rise to the French idiom (&quot;don St. Catherine&#x27;s bonnet&quot;), to describe an unmarried woman between the ages of 25 and 30.

In memory of her sacrifice in some homes, Egyptian and other Middle Eastern foods are offered for her feast, such as hummus or tabbouleh salads. Favourites also are melons cut into circles with sherbet &quot;hubs&quot;, or cookies shaped as spiked wheels with icing.

Meanwhile, owing to several circumstances in his life, Nicholas of Myra was considered the patron of young bachelors and students, and Catherine became the patroness of young maidens and female students. Looked upon as the holiest and most illustrious of the virgins of Christ after the Blessed Virgin Mary, it was deemed appropriate that she, of all others, should be worthy to watch over the virgins of the cloister and the young women of the world. The spiked wheel having become emblematic of the saint, wheelwrights and mechanics placed themselves under her patronage. Finally, as according to tradition she not only remained a virgin by governing her passions and conquered her executioners by wearying their patience, but triumphed in science by closing the mouths of sophists, her intercession was implored by theologians, apologists, pulpit orators, and philosophers. Before studying, writing, or preaching, they besought her to illumine their minds, guide their pens, and impart eloquence to their words. This devotion to Catherine which assumed such vast proportions in Europe after the Crusades, received additional in France at the beginning of the 15th century, when it was rumoured that she had spoken to Joan of Arc and, together with Margaret of Antioch, had been divinely appointed Joan&#x27;s adviser.

Devotion to Catherine remains strong amongst Eastern Catholics and Eastern Orthodox Christians. With the relative ease of travel in the modern age, pilgrimages to Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery on Mount Sinai have increased. Catherine of Alexandria is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 25 November. In 2022, Catherine was officially added to the Episcopal Church liturgical calendar with a feast day she shares with Barbara of Nicomedia, and Margaret of Antioch on 24 November.

==Legacy==

The pyrotechnic Catherine wheel, which rotates with sparks flying off in all directions, took its name from the saint&#x27;s wheel of martyrdom. The lunar impact crater Catharina is named after Saint Catherine. Santa Catarina Island in Brazil and the State of Santa Catarina are named after her. The Gulf of Santa Catalina is located in the Pacific Ocean on the west coast of North America. Santa Catalina Island off the coast of California, was named by Sebastián Vizcaíno, who arrived there on her feast day. The Santa Catalina Mountains in Arizona are her namesake.

Kaarina, Finland, is named after her. One accepted origin of the namesake of St. Catharines, Ontario, is Saint Catherine of Alexandria, but there are other proposed explanations as &quot;no definitive documentation exists to conclusively prove that the founders chose the unique spelling for any one particular reason&quot;. St Catherine of Alexandria Parish and School in Oak Lawn, Illinois, is named after her.

St. Catherine University in St. Paul, Minnesota was founded in 1905 by the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet and named for St. Catherine of Alexandria. University of Saint Katherine in San Marcos, California is the first Eastern Orthodox Christian university in the United States and the English-speaking world. St. Catherine&#x27;s School, is an independent Episcopal diocesan school in Richmond, Virginia. St Helen and St Katharine, a girls&#x27; school in Oxfordshire, England celebrates &quot;St. Katharine&#x27;s Day&quot; each November. The name of St. Catharine&#x27;s School for Girls (Kwun Tong) in Hong Kong was chosen over that of St. Anne because it sounds better when translated into Chinese. Sœur de La Chapelle was a French nun who wrote a tragedy about her martyrdom.

==In art==
Countless images of Saint Catherine are depicted in art, especially in the late Middle Ages, which is also the time that the account of Saint Catherine&#x27;s Mystical Marriage makes its first literary appearance. She can usually be easily recognised as she is richly dressed and crowned, as befits her rank as a princess, and often holds or stands next to a segment of her wheel as an attribute. She also often carries either a martyr&#x27;s palm or the sword with which she was actually executed. She often has long unbound blonde or reddish hair (unbound as she is unmarried). The vision of Saint Catherine of Alexandria usually shows the Infant Christ, held by the Virgin, placing a ring (one of her attributes) on her finger, following some literary accounts, although in the version in the &quot;Golden Legend&quot; he appears to be adult, and the marriage takes place among a great crowd of angels and &quot;all the celestial court&quot;, and these may also be shown.

She is very frequently shown attending on the Virgin and Child, and is usually prominent in scenes of the &quot;Master of the Virgo inter Virgines&quot;, showing a group of virgin saints surrounding the Virgin and Child. Notable later paintings of Catherine include single figures by Raphael in the National Gallery, and by Caravaggio (in the Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum, Madrid).

==See also==

* Cathedral of St. Catherine, Old Goa
* List of Christian women of the patristic age
* St. Catherine of Boletice
* St. Catherine&#x27;s Cathedral, Kherson, dedicated to Saint Catherine, the original name of City of Kherson was to &#x27;the Glory of Catherine&#x27;
* St. Catherine&#x27;s Day
* St. Catherine&#x27;s taffy
* Order of St. Catherine with Mount Sinai

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* Passio sanctae Katharinae– 11th century (between 1033 and 1048); at Latin Wikisource
* – Saint Catherine Orthodox Church; includes a gallery of icons of the saint
* Saint Catherine of Alexandria at the Christian Iconography web site
* &quot;The Life of St. Catherine, Virgin and Martyr&quot; from the Caxton translation of the &quot;Golden Legend&quot;
* 
* Colonnade Statue St Peter&#x27;s Square</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="0" end="23" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Catherine of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="38" end="47" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="90" end="95" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="100" end="106" title="Virginity" label="virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="116" end="122" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q182070" start="178" end="187" title="Maxentius" label="Maxentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="206" end="217" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="276" end="285" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="333" end="345" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="355" end="363" title="martyred" label="martyred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="435" end="446" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="524" end="547" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332786" start="567" end="579" title="great martyr" label="great martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="599" end="608" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="671" end="682" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q219014" start="733" end="754" title="Fourteen Holy Helpers" label="Fourteen Holy Helpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705108" start="787" end="804" title="Roman Martyrology" label="Roman Martyrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="852" end="874" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="936" end="952" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192816" start="1026" end="1046" title="Saint Barbara" label="Barbara of Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="1051" end="1070" title="Margaret the Virgin" label="Margaret of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1085" end="1102" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298263" start="1255" end="1277" title="Dorothea of Alexandria" label="Dorothea of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="1286" end="1291" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="1304" end="1311" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="1355" end="1367" title="Neoplatonism" label="neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="1442" end="1463" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1856" end="1866" title="History of Alexandria#Late Roman and Byzantine period" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46768" start="1899" end="1907" title="Maximian" label="Maximian"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="1930" end="1935" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2007" end="2018" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="2027" end="2038" title="Christ Child" label="Child Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182070" start="2122" end="2131" title="Maxentius" label="Maxentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="2226" end="2231" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004659" start="2839" end="2844" title="salve" label="salve"/>
<link wikidata="Q45535" start="2941" end="2958" title="Valeria Maximilla" label="Valeria Maximilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="3012" end="3018" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="3311" end="3325" title="breaking wheel" label="breaking wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="3580" end="3589" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="3618" end="3650" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q909215" start="3718" end="3730" title="burning bush" label="burning bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="3739" end="3744" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="3916" end="3924" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q365835" start="4168" end="4187" title="Tyrannius Rufinus" label="Rufinus of Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317900" start="4292" end="4307" title="Caesar Baronius" label="Caesar Baronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="4534" end="4555" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="4779" end="4802" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q52148664" start="4942" end="4957" title="Donald Attwater" label="Donald Attwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q274627" start="5332" end="5353" title="Anna Brownell Jameson" label="Anna Brownell Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="5449" end="5461" title="Neoplatonism" label="neoplatonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="5474" end="5495" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779820" start="5584" end="5594" title="Parabalani" label="Parabalani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556077" start="5700" end="5707" title="Orestes (prefect of Egypt)" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="5723" end="5728" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918574" start="6235" end="6245" title="Menologion of Basil II" label="Menologium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41833" start="6285" end="6293" title="Basil II" label="Basil II"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="6352" end="6384" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="6877" end="6883" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="6989" end="6995" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="7058" end="7073" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="7310" end="7326" title="late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q210096" start="7411" end="7424" title="Agnes of Rome" label="Agnes of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="7426" end="7445" title="Margaret of Antioch" label="Margaret of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192816" start="7447" end="7454" title="Saint Barbara" label="Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q183240" start="7456" end="7473" title="Saint Lucy" label="Lucia of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738108" start="7475" end="7493" title="Valerie of Limoges" label="Valerie of Limoges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266263" start="7527" end="7538" title="Intercession" label="intercessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="7599" end="7610" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="7793" end="7797" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q203635" start="7970" end="7981" title="myrrh" label="healing oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="8023" end="8033" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q169924" start="8075" end="8086" title="Mount Sinai (Bible)" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="8110" end="8125" title="John Mandeville" label="John Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q70147" start="8136" end="8147" title="Felix Fabri" label="Felix Fabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="8338" end="8343" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="8580" end="8590" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q739364" start="8595" end="8606" title="Westminster Cathedral" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="8675" end="8695" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587432" start="8720" end="8756" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q256754" start="8908" end="8947" title="St. Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St. Catharine&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114175" start="9026" end="9033" title="Provost (education)" label="provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="9037" end="9067" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q229192" start="9220" end="9239" title="Catherine of Valois" label="Catherine of Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="9251" end="9270" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706734" start="9405" end="9440" title="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q170538" start="9646" end="9652" title="virginity" label="virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234816" start="9895" end="9913" title="Christine de Pizan" label="Christine de Pizan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101115" start="9918" end="9944" title="Geoffroy IV de la Tour Landry" label="Geoffrey de la Tour Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q437427" start="10108" end="10122" title="Catalina Tomas" label="Catalina Tomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="10155" end="10162" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296527" start="10295" end="10329" title="mystic marriage of Saint Catherine" label="mystic marriage of Saint Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497116" start="10865" end="10887" title="Holy Day of Obligation" label="Holy Day of Obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="11005" end="11013" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="11145" end="11156" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="11203" end="11210" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="11212" end="11219" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="11234" end="11257" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="11348" end="11358" title="Kievan Rus" label="Kievan Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q980251" start="11405" end="11422" title="Dimitry of Rostov" label="Dimitry of Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="11548" end="11575" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Empress Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q8273332" start="11626" end="11637" title="Afterfeast" label="Leavetaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124234" start="11658" end="11687" title="Presentation of Mary" label="Presentation of the Theotokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618766" start="11824" end="11856" title="Catholic Church of St. Catherine (Saint Petersburg)" label="Catholic Church of St. Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="12383" end="12404" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q964003" start="12528" end="12553" title="Catherinette" label="&amp;quot;catherinettes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q241987" start="12890" end="12896" title="hummus" label="hummus"/>
<link wikidata="Q607690" start="12900" end="12909" title="tabbouleh" label="tabbouleh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="13096" end="13112" title="Nicholas of Myra" label="Nicholas of Myra"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="13328" end="13347" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q833418" start="13549" end="13560" title="wheelwright" label="wheelwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750514" start="13816" end="13823" title="sophist" label="sophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="14139" end="14147" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="14261" end="14272" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="14292" end="14311" title="Margaret of Antioch" label="Margaret of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="14408" end="14425" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="14430" end="14457" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="14617" end="14627" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="remembered"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="14635" end="14652" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152292" start="14660" end="14673" title="Commemoration (Anglicanism)" label="commemoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020" start="14677" end="14688" title="November 25" label="25 November"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="14737" end="14773" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192816" start="14807" end="14827" title="Saint Barbara" label="Barbara of Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q297742" start="14833" end="14852" title="Margaret the Virgin" label="Margaret of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530486" start="14898" end="14913" title="Catherine wheel (firework)" label="Catherine wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050778" start="15051" end="15060" title="Catharina (crater)" label="Catharina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191273" start="15093" end="15114" title="Santa Catarina Island" label="Santa Catarina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41115" start="15133" end="15156" title="Santa Catarina (state)" label="State of Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q11305651" start="15182" end="15204" title="Gulf of Santa Catalina" label="Gulf of Santa Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q845229" start="15273" end="15294" title="Santa Catalina Island (California)" label="Santa Catalina Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q141710" start="15337" end="15355" title="Sebastián Vizcaíno" label="Sebastián Vizcaíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q59897" start="15397" end="15421" title="Santa Catalina Mountains" label="Santa Catalina Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q735563" start="15452" end="15459" title="Kaarina" label="Kaarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q126805" start="15529" end="15543" title="St. Catharines" label="St. Catharines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444427" start="15866" end="15890" title="St. Catherine University" label="St. Catherine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48832838" start="15941" end="15976" title="Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet" label="Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900576" start="16020" end="16049" title="University of Saint Katherine" label="University of Saint Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587440" start="16180" end="16207" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s School, Richmond, Virginia" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432575" start="16276" end="16301" title="St Helen and St Katharine" label="St Helen and St Katharine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587442" start="16423" end="16472" title="St. Catharine&amp;#x27;s School for Girls (Kwun Tong)" label="St. Catharine&amp;#x27;s School for Girls (Kwun Tong)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19629973" start="16574" end="16593" title="Sœur de La Chapelle" label="Sœur de La Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="16623" end="16630" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="16744" end="16755" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296527" start="16800" end="16840" title="Mystical marriage of Saint Catherine" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Mystical Marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="17050" end="17059" title="Emblem" label="attribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q696809" start="17093" end="17111" title="martyr&amp;#x27;s palm" label="martyr&amp;#x27;s palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q129493" start="17466" end="17479" title="Golden Legend" label="Golden Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q945799" start="17752" end="17786" title="Master of the Virgo inter Virgines" label="Master of the Virgo inter Virgines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165279" start="17921" end="17931" title="Saint Catherine of Alexandria (Raphael)" label="by Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627034" start="17961" end="17974" title="Saint Catherine (Caravaggio)" label="by Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q176251" start="17983" end="18008" title="Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum" label="Thyssen-Bornemisza Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942482" start="18036" end="18062" title="Se Cathedral" label="Cathedral of St. Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q553907" start="18064" end="18071" title="Old Goa" label="Old Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876976" start="18074" end="18118" title="List of Christian women of the patristic age" label="List of Christian women of the patristic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q27989355" start="18121" end="18146" title="St. Catherine of Boletice" label="St. Catherine of Boletice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411383" start="18149" end="18188" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Kherson" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Kherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q129726" start="18301" end="18325" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587445" start="18328" end="18354" title="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s taffy" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s taffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="18357" end="18396" title="Order of St. Catherine with Mount Sinai" label="Order of St. Catherine with Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="18638" end="18642" title="icon" label="icon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85734" wikidata="Q1140774" url="?curid=85734" title="The Ring (magazine)">
<text>The Ring (often called The Ring magazine or Ring magazine) is an American boxing magazine that was first published in 1922 as a boxing and wrestling magazine. As the sporting legitimacy of professional wrestling came more into question, &quot;The Ring&quot; shifted to becoming exclusively a boxing-oriented publication. The magazine is currently owned by Turki Alalshikh, head of Riyadh Season.

&quot;Ring&quot; began publishing annual ratings of boxers in 1924. With its November/December 2022 issue, the magazine stopped publication of its regular monthly print issues and will remain a digital publication, offering occasional special interest print issues. 
==History==
&quot;The Ring&quot;, founded and published by future International Boxing Hall of Fame member Nat Fleischer, has perpetrated boxing scandals, helped make unknown fighters famous worldwide, and covered boxing&#x27;s biggest events of all time. Dan Daniel was a co-founder and prolific contributor to &quot;The Ring&quot; through most of its history. 

Another founding partner was John L. &quot;Ike&quot; Dorgan (April 15, 1879–December 27, 1960), a bookbinder, boxing manager (for Harry Ebbets and Charles Francis &quot;Frank&quot; Moran, known as &quot;The Fighting Dentist&quot;), press agent (for boxing promoter George L. &quot;Tex&quot; Rickard), and publicity manager for the Madison Square Garden. He remained with this influential publication until his retirement in 1930.

&quot;The Ring&quot; refers to itself (and is referred to by others) as &quot;The Bible of Boxing.&quot; During the Fleischer years, the contents page or indicia of every issue carried the claim: &quot;&quot;The Ring&quot; is a magazine which a man may take home with him. He may leave it on his library table safe in the knowledge that it does not contain one line of matter either in the text or the advertisements which would be offensive. The publisher of &quot;The Ring&quot; guards this reputation of his magazine jealously. It is entertaining and it is clean.&quot;

In 1972, following Fleischer&#x27;s death, his son-in-law and managing editor Nat Loubet took over as publisher. In 1977, Loubet launched three international editions of the magazine. The Spanish version, &quot;Ring En Español&quot;, was published in Venezuela and distributed to all Spanish-speaking countries and the United States (U.S.) until 1985. There was also a Japanese version published in Tokyo and a French version published in Paris.

In 1976, managing editor of &quot;The Ring&quot; Johnny Ort, fabricated records of selected boxers, and elevated their rankings, securing them lucrative fights on the American ABC television network, as part of the United States Championship Tournament orchestrated by promoter Don King. The deception was uncovered by boxing writer Malcolm &quot;Flash&quot; Gordon and ABC staffer Alex Wallau and the United States Championship tournament was cancelled by ABC.

In 1979, the magazine was purchased from Loubet by a group led by Dave DeBusschere and Bert Sugar took over as editor. In 1983 Sugar was succeeded by future New York boxing commissioner Randy Gordon. By 1984 the publication was reported to be over $1 million in debt and a number of top salaried employees, including Gordon, were let go. Nigel Collins of the Ring&#x27;s defunct sister magazine &quot;Boxing Illustrated&quot; took over as editor. In 1989 &quot;The Ring&quot; was purchased by Stanley Weston&#x27;s G.C. London Publishing (later known as Kappa Publishing Group), which also published &quot;KO Magazine&quot; and a number of wrestling publications. KO senior writer Steve Farhood became The Ring&#x27;s editor. Weston was a sentimentalist and 52 years after joining &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine as a stock boy, Weston purchased the magazine that gave him his first job. He not only resurrected the magazine from its imminent collapse, he re-established the publication as the definitive source for boxing news. An outstanding boxing artist, Weston painted 57 covers for &quot;The Ring&quot; with his first cover, a painting of Billy Conn, for the December 1939 issue. Weston was also a photographer who, according to his own estimate, shot over 100,000 boxing photosthe majority of which are housed in the archives of &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine.

Sports and Entertainment Publications, LLC, a subsidiary of Oscar De La Hoya&#x27;s Golden Boy Enterprises, acquired &quot;The Ring&quot;, &quot;KO Magazine&quot;, and &quot;World Boxing&quot; in 2007. The magazine&#x27;s rankings are recognized as &quot;official&quot; by some in the U.S. media, particularly ESPN. While some may see a conflict of interest in a boxing promoter being paymaster of what is essentially a magazine/rankings organization that awards world titles and belts, De La Hoya says that is not the case. &quot;These magazines will be held in an editorial trust where they will be operating totally independent of any influence from me or others from the Golden Boy Companies as it relates to editorial direction or content&quot;. Also there is a 35-member ratings advisory panel, which include many of the media that cover boxing, who would prevent Golden Boy Promotions from using the magazine for self gain.

&quot;The Ring&quot; was headquartered in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania until 2011 when it was relocated to Los Angeles.

The magazine had a sister publication named &quot;The Ring Wrestling&quot; which came about due to professional wrestling writer Bob Leonard contacting the magazine and expressing that it was too focused on boxing and not giving wrestling enough coverage. Nat Loubet served as the editor of the wrestling magazine as well.

In November 2024 it was sold from Golden Boy Promotions to the head of Riyadh Season Turki Alalshikh for $10 million.

==Cover art==
Some of the boxers featured on the magazine covers have included Tommy Ryan, Salvador Sánchez, Jack Dempsey, Pancho Villa, Max Schmeling, Joe Louis, Sugar Ray Robinson, Jake LaMotta, Rocky Marciano, Willie Pep, Muhammad Ali, Alexis Argüello, Wilfred Benítez, Wilfredo Gómez, Roberto Durán, Larry Holmes, Marvin Hagler, Sugar Ray Leonard, Bud Taylor, Mike Tyson, Evander Holyfield, Floyd Mayweather Jr., Thomas Hearns, Naoya Inoue, Roy Jones Jr., Bernard Hopkins, Julio César Chávez, Félix Trinidad, Manny Pacquiao, Oscar De La Hoya, Mauro Mina and Ricardo Mayorga. In 1978, boxer Cathy &quot;Cat&quot; Davis became the first woman ever to be on a cover of &quot;The Ring&quot;, and she held the distinction of being the only woman featured on the cover of the magazine until January 2016, when Ronda Rousey joined her and also became the first mixed martial arts fighter featured on its cover. &quot;The Ring&quot; has used cover artwork created by famed artists such as LeRoy Neiman and Richard T. Slone.

==World champions==
&quot;The Ring&quot; has its own championship belt in a given weight class where &quot;The Ring&quot; champion holds a lineal reign to the throne, the man who beat the man. &quot;The Ring&quot; began awarding championship belts in 1922. The first &quot;Ring&quot; world title belt was awarded to heavyweight champion Jack Dempsey and the second was awarded to flyweight champion Pancho Villa. &quot;The Ring&quot; stopped giving belts to world champions in the 1990s, then reintroduced their titles in 2002.

&quot;The Ring&quot; stated that their title was &quot;intended to reward fighters who, by satisfying rigid criteria, can justify a claim as the true and only world champion in a given weight class&quot;. It echoed many critics&#x27; arguments that the sanctioning bodies in charge of boxing championships had undermined the sport by pitting undeserving contenders against undeserving &quot;champions&quot; and forcing the boxing public to see mismatches for so-called &quot;world championships&quot;. &quot;The Ring&quot; attempts to be more authoritative and open than the sanctioning bodies&#x27; rankings, with a page devoted to full explanations for ranking changes. A fighter pays no sanctioning fees to defend or fight for the title at stake, contrary to practices of the sanctioning bodies.

However, many boxing journalists complained that &quot;The Ring&quot; ignored the world championship lineage when they started awarding titles again. A controversy described by Cliff Rold of &quot;BoxingScene.com&quot; is for example, the &quot;world&quot; light-heavyweight title was considered vacant from the time Michael Spinks went up to heavyweight in 1985 until 1996. While the &quot;Cyber Boxing Zone&quot; and the International Boxing Research Organization considers Virgil Hill&#x27;s defeat of Henry Maske (who were the two highest rated light-heavyweights) as the beginning of the new lineage, &quot;The Ring&quot; awarded their newly reintroduced title to Roy Jones. In 2002, &quot;The Ring&quot; editor, Nigel Collins, acknowledged that if their championship policy was in place in 1997, Dariusz Michalczewski, who defeated Hill, &quot;probably would have been &quot;The Ring&quot; Champion.&quot;

Under the original version of the championship policy, there were only two ways that a boxer could win &quot;The Ring&quot;″s title: defeat the reigning champion; or win a box-off between the magazine&#x27;s number-one and number-two rated contenders (or, sometimes, number-one and number-three rated). A vacant &quot;Ring&quot; championship was filled when the number-one contender in a weight-division battles the number-two contender or the number-three contender (in cases where &quot;The Ring&quot; determined that the number-two and number-three contenders were close in abilities and records). The ratings are compiled by the magazine&#x27;s editorial board, with the participation of &quot;The Ring&quot; Ratings Panel of boxing journalists from around the world. A fighter could not be stripped of the title unless he lost, decided to move to another weight division, or retired.

In May 2012, citing the number of vacancies in various weight classes as primary motivation, &quot;The Ring&quot; unveiled a new championship policy. Under the new policy, &quot;The Ring&quot; title can be awarded when the No. 1 and No. 2 fighters face one another or when the No. 1 and 2 contenders choose not to fight one another and either of them fights No. 3, No. 4 or No. 5, the winner may be awarded &quot;The Ring&quot; belt. In addition, there are now seven ways for a fighter to lose his title: 
* The champion loses a fight in the weight class in which he is champion. 
* The champion moves to another weight class. 
* The champion does not schedule a fight in any weight class for 18 months. 
* The champion does not schedule a fight at his championship weight for 18 months (even if he fights at another weight).
* The champion does not schedule a fight with a top five contender from any weight class for two years. 
* The champion retires. 
* The champion tests positive for a banned substance.

Many media outlets and members are extremely critical of the new championship policy and state that if this new policy is followed &quot;The Ring&quot; title will lose the credibility it once held. They then later changed the policy so vacant belts can only be awarded to the winner of No. 1 vs No. 2 or if No. 3 is deemed worthy by The Ring&#x27;s editorial board.

The purchase of &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine by Golden Boy Promotions in 2007, the dismissal of editor-in-chief Nigel Collins and several editorial staff in 2011 and a series of questionable ratings decisions by the new editors prompted many members of &quot;The Ring&quot; Ratings Advisory Panel to resign. This led to the formation of the Transnational Boxing Rankings Board in 2012 headed by boxing historians Springs Toledo, Cliff Rold and Tim Starks.

Golden Boy has publicized &quot;The Ring&quot;&#x27;s World Championship when the title is at stake in fights it promotes (such as Joe Calzaghe vs. Roy Jones Jr. in 2008).

==Current champions==
===Men&#x27;s===
As of February 22, 2025.

===Women&#x27;s===
As of 

==Current #1 ranked fighters per weight class==

Note: &quot;The Ring&quot; champions are also noted as No. 1 fighters

===Men&#x27;s===
===Women&#x27;s===
==List of pound for pound #1 fighters==

As of 18, 2025.

Keys:
: Current P4P #1

==Controversies==
In their book &quot;Iron Ambition: My Life With Cus D&#x27;Amato&quot;, Mike Tyson and Larry Sloman, while depicting the rise of the International Boxing Club of New York and D&#x27;Amato&#x27;s battle with the organization, allege that the magazine and its then-owner and editor-in-chief Nat Fleischer were under control of the IBC and the rankings were heavily favorable towards the fighters it controlled.

In the 1970s, managing editor of &quot;The Ring&quot; Johnny Ort fabricated records of selected boxers to elevate them, thereby securing them lucrative fights on the American ABC television network, as part of the United States Championship Tournament, orchestrated by promoter Don King. The scandal was uncovered by boxing writer Malcolm &quot;Flash&quot; Gordon and ABC staffer Alex Wallau. After Gordon and Wallau&#x27;s evidence was presented to ABC executive Roone Arledge, the United States Championship tournament was cancelled. The scandal would lead to the eventual resignation of New York State Boxing Commissioner James A. Farley Jr., who had lent his name to the Championship fights.

==See also==
* List of &quot;The Ring&quot; world champions
* List of &quot;The Ring&quot; pound for pound rankings
* List of fights between two &quot;The Ring&quot; pound for pound boxers
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Fighter of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Fight of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Knockout of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Comeback of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Round of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Upset of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Prospect of the Year (discontinued between 1989 and 2010)
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Event of the Year
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Hall of Fame
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Pound for Pound
* &quot;The Ring&quot; magazine Progress of the Year (discontinued)
* &quot;The Ring: Boxing the 20th Century&quot;
* List of professional wrestling magazines

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="32" end="40" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="49" end="57" title="The Ring (magazine)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="74" end="80" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="81" end="89" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="189" end="211" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q572227" start="730" end="763" title="International Boxing Hall of Fame" label="International Boxing Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646534" start="771" end="784" title="Nat Fleischer" label="Nat Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009536" start="920" end="930" title="Dan Daniel (sportswriter)" label="Dan Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243571" start="1057" end="1087" title="John L. Dorgan" label="John L. &amp;quot;Ike&amp;quot; Dorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870087" start="1175" end="1214" title="Frank Moran" label="Charles Francis &amp;quot;Frank&amp;quot; Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q713459" start="1293" end="1326" title="Tex Rickard" label="George L. &amp;quot;Tex&amp;quot; Rickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="1359" end="1380" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2221" end="2228" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334705" start="2244" end="2259" title="Ring En Español" label="Ring En Español"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2402" end="2407" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2432" end="2437" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2444" end="2450" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2472" end="2477" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q344977" start="2758" end="2766" title="Don King (boxing promoter)" label="Don King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717949" start="2862" end="2873" title="Alex Wallau" label="Alex Wallau"/>
<link wikidata="Q918916" start="3009" end="3025" title="Dave DeBusschere" label="Dave DeBusschere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246946" start="3030" end="3040" title="Bert Sugar" label="Bert Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3100" end="3108" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q110564781" start="3129" end="3141" title="Randy Gordon (boxing)" label="Randy Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577430" start="3281" end="3294" title="Nigel Collins (writer)" label="Nigel Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q55287093" start="3436" end="3450" title="Stanley Weston" label="Stanley Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367078" start="3497" end="3519" title="Kappa Publishing Group" label="Kappa Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937347" start="3549" end="3560" title="KO Magazine" label="KO Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612515" start="3624" end="3637" title="Steve Farhood" label="Steve Farhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q654686" start="4086" end="4096" title="Billy Conn" label="Billy Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q293534" start="4369" end="4385" title="Oscar De La Hoya" label="Oscar De La Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763567" start="4393" end="4415" title="Golden Boy Promotions" label="Golden Boy Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="4619" end="4623" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q885631" start="5283" end="5306" title="Blue Bell, Pennsylvania" label="Blue Bell, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5343" end="5354" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140774" start="5407" end="5425" title="The Ring Wrestling" label="The Ring Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q47457000" start="5486" end="5497" title="Bob Leonard (wrestling)" label="Bob Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40353584" start="5766" end="5781" title="Turki Alalshikh" label="Turki Alalshikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367745" start="5879" end="5889" title="Tommy Ryan" label="Tommy Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356418" start="5891" end="5907" title="Salvador Sánchez" label="Salvador Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q313686" start="5909" end="5921" title="Jack Dempsey" label="Jack Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q918853" start="5923" end="5935" title="Pancho Villa (boxer)" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q77102" start="5937" end="5950" title="Max Schmeling" label="Max Schmeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q273206" start="5952" end="5961" title="Joe Louis" label="Joe Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q316706" start="5963" end="5981" title="Sugar Ray Robinson" label="Sugar Ray Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335855" start="5983" end="5995" title="Jake LaMotta" label="Jake LaMotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188362" start="5997" end="6011" title="Rocky Marciano" label="Rocky Marciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337778" start="6013" end="6023" title="Willie Pep" label="Willie Pep"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="6025" end="6037" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q467944" start="6039" end="6054" title="Alexis Argüello" label="Alexis Argüello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386541" start="6056" end="6071" title="Wilfred Benítez" label="Wilfred Benítez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972279" start="6073" end="6087" title="Wilfredo Gómez" label="Wilfredo Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q471571" start="6089" end="6102" title="Roberto Durán" label="Roberto Durán"/>
<link wikidata="Q370932" start="6104" end="6116" title="Larry Holmes" label="Larry Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q560421" start="6118" end="6131" title="Marvin Hagler" label="Marvin Hagler"/>
<link wikidata="Q335798" start="6133" end="6150" title="Sugar Ray Leonard" label="Sugar Ray Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025303" start="6152" end="6162" title="Bud Taylor" label="Bud Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="6164" end="6174" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313451" start="6176" end="6193" title="Evander Holyfield" label="Evander Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q318204" start="6195" end="6215" title="Floyd Mayweather Jr." label="Floyd Mayweather Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q560409" start="6217" end="6230" title="Thomas Hearns" label="Thomas Hearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372978" start="6232" end="6243" title="Naoya Inoue" label="Naoya Inoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q955619" start="6245" end="6258" title="Roy Jones Jr." label="Roy Jones Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q531804" start="6260" end="6275" title="Bernard Hopkins" label="Bernard Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q471461" start="6277" end="6295" title="Julio César Chávez" label="Julio César Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q249478" start="6297" end="6311" title="Félix Trinidad" label="Félix Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q486359" start="6313" end="6327" title="Manny Pacquiao" label="Manny Pacquiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q293534" start="6329" end="6345" title="Oscar De La Hoya" label="Oscar De La Hoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917890" start="6347" end="6357" title="Mauro Mina" label="Mauro Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357538" start="6362" end="6377" title="Ricardo Mayorga" label="Ricardo Mayorga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053412" start="6394" end="6421" title="Cathy Davis" label="Cathy &amp;quot;Cat&amp;quot; Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q242201" start="6608" end="6620" title="Ronda Rousey" label="Ronda Rousey"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="6658" end="6676" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124601" start="6785" end="6797" title="LeRoy Neiman" label="LeRoy Neiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329370" start="6802" end="6818" title="Richard T. Slone" label="Richard T. Slone"/>
<link wikidata="Q281678" start="7137" end="7148" title="heavyweight" label="heavyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q508484" start="7201" end="7210" title="flyweight" label="flyweight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326107" start="7535" end="7547" title="List of boxing weight classes" label="weight class"/>
<link wikidata="Q708416" start="8467" end="8481" title="Michael Spinks" label="Michael Spinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341919" start="8626" end="8637" title="Virgil Hill" label="Virgil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q62285" start="8655" end="8666" title="Henry Maske" label="Henry Maske"/>
<link wikidata="Q955619" start="8819" end="8828" title="Roy Jones" label="Roy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q655728" start="8952" end="8973" title="Dariusz Michalczewski" label="Dariusz Michalczewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020814" start="11673" end="11708" title="Transnational Boxing Rankings Board" label="Transnational Boxing Rankings Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q16828774" start="11920" end="11950" title="Joe Calzaghe vs. Roy Jones Jr." label="Joe Calzaghe vs. Roy Jones Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q537666" start="12358" end="12374" title="Cus D&amp;#x27;Amato" label="Cus D&amp;#x27;Amato"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="12382" end="12392" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048807" start="12443" end="12480" title="International Boxing Club of New York" label="International Boxing Club of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646534" start="12599" end="12612" title="Nat Fleischer" label="Nat Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124830429" start="12934" end="12971" title="1977 United States Boxing Championships Series" label="United States Championship Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q344977" start="12998" end="13006" title="Don King (boxing promoter)" label="Don King"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717949" start="13100" end="13111" title="Alex Wallau" label="Alex Wallau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128961" start="13184" end="13197" title="Roone Arledge" label="Roone Arledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q110584404" start="13345" end="13364" title="James A. Farley Jr." label="James A. Farley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2884316" start="13432" end="13476" title="List of The Ring world champions" label="List of &amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; world champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q111956253" start="13479" end="13532" title="List of The Ring pound for pound rankings" label="List of &amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; pound for pound rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q112262262" start="13535" end="13605" title="List of fights between two The Ring pound for pound boxers" label="List of fights between two &amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; pound for pound boxers"/>
<link wikidata="Q929175" start="13608" end="13657" title="The Ring magazine Fighter of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Fighter of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q864793" start="13660" end="13707" title="The Ring magazine Fight of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Fight of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107923" start="13710" end="13760" title="The Ring magazine Knockout of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Knockout of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114674" start="13763" end="13813" title="The Ring magazine Comeback of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Comeback of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334719" start="13816" end="13863" title="The Ring magazine Round of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Round of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394649" start="13866" end="13913" title="The Ring magazine Upset of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Upset of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4359245" start="13916" end="13966" title="The Ring magazine Prospect of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Prospect of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334715" start="14006" end="14053" title="The Ring magazine Event of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Event of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334716" start="14056" end="14098" title="The Ring magazine Hall of Fame" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14101" end="14146" title="Boxing pound for pound rankings#The Ring" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Pound for Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334717" start="14149" end="14199" title="The Ring magazine Progress of the Year" label="&amp;quot;The Ring&amp;quot; magazine Progress of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14223" end="14256" title="The Ring: Boxing the 20th Century" label="The Ring: Boxing the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635038" start="14265" end="14305" title="List of professional wrestling magazines" label="List of professional wrestling magazines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85737" wikidata="Q230120" url="?curid=85737" title="Julia Margaret Cameron">
<text>Julia Margaret Cameron (; 11 June 1815 – 26 January 1879) was an English photographer who is considered one of the most important portraitists of the 19th century. She is known for her soft-focus close-ups of famous Victorians and for illustrative images depicting characters from mythology, Christianity, and literature.

She was born in Calcutta, and after establishing herself among the Anglo-Indian upper-class, she moved to London where she made connections with the cultural elite. She then formed her own literary salon in the seaside village of Freshwater, Isle of Wight.

Cameron took up photography at the age of 48, after her daughter gave her a camera as a present. She quickly produced a large body of portraits, and created allegorical images inspired by tableaux vivants, theatre, 15th-century Italian painters, and contemporary artists. She gathered much of her work in albums, including The Norman Album. She took around 900 photographs over a 12-year period.

Cameron&#x27;s work was contentious in her own time. Critics derided her softly focused and unrefined images, and considered her illustrative photographs amateurish. However, her portraits of artists and scientists such as Henry Taylor, Charles Darwin, and Sir John Herschel have been consistently praised. Her images have been described as &quot;extraordinarily powerful&quot; and &quot;wholly original&quot;, and she has been credited with producing the first close-ups in the medium.

== Biography ==

=== Early life and education ===
Julia Margaret Cameron was born Julia Margaret Pattle on 11 June 1815, at Garden Reach in Calcutta, India, to Adeline Marie and James Peter Pattle.

James Pattle worked in India for the East India Company. His family had been involved with the East India Company for many years. He traced his line to a 17th-century ancestor living in Chancery Lane, London. Adeline&#x27;s mother was a French aristocrat and the daughter of Chevalier Ambrose Pierre Antoine de l&#x27;Etang, who had been a page to Marie Antoinette and an officer in the Garde du Corps of King Louis XVI. After James died in Calcutta, he was shipped back to London in a barrel of rum for burial in Camberwell.

Julia was the fourth of her parents&#x27; ten children. Three children died in infancy. Julia and six of her sisters survived into adulthood, inheriting some Bengali blood through their maternal grandmother, Thérèse Josephe Blin de Grincourt. The seven sisters were known for their &quot;charm, wit and beauty&quot; and for being close, outspoken, and unconventional in behaviour and dress. They favoured Indian silks and shawls rather than the Victorian attire of other colonial woman.

The sisters were sent to France as children to be educated, Julia living there with her maternal grandmother in Versailles from 1818 to 1834, after which she returned to India.

Julia&#x27;s sisters all made advantageous matches. Older sister Adeline married Lt-General Colin Mackenzie. Sophia married Sir John Warrander Dalrymple. Louisa married Henry Vincent Bayley, a high court judge. Maria married Dr John Jackson, and among their children was Julia&#x27;s godchild Julia Stephen. Sara (Sarah) married Sir Henry Thoby Prinsep, a director of the East India Company, and made their home at Little Holland House in Kensington, which became an important intellectual centre. Virginia Pattle married Charles Somers-Cocks, Viscount Eastnor (later 3rd Earl Somers). Their eldest daughter was Lady Henry Somerset, the temperance leader, while the younger, Lady Adeline Marie, became the Duchess of Bedford.

=== Marriage and social life ===

==== South Africa and Calcutta ====
In 1835, after suffering several illnesses, Julia visited the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa with her parents to recover. It was common for Europeans living in India to visit South Africa to convalesce. While there, she met the British astronomer and photochemist Sir John Herschel, who was observing the southern celestial hemisphere. 

She also met Charles Hay Cameron, twenty years her senior and a reformer of Indian law and education who later invested in coffee plantations in what is now Sri Lanka. He was also there to convalesce, probably after a malarial fever, which often spread during the Indian monsoon season. The illness caused kidney trouble and diarrhœa for the rest of his life.

They were married in Calcutta on 1 February 1838, two years after meeting. In December, Julia gave birth to their first child; Herschel was the godfather. Between 1839 and 1852, they had six children, one of whom was adopted. In all, the Camerons raised 11 children, five of her own, five orphaned children of relatives, and an Irish girl named Mary Ryan whom they found begging on Putney Heath and whom Cameron used as a model in her photographs. Their son, Henry Herschel Hay Cameron, would also become a photographer.

Through the early 1840s—as the organiser of social engagements for the Governor-General, Lord Hardinge—Cameron became a prominent hostess in Anglo-Indian society. During this time she also corresponded with Herschel. In 1839, he told Cameron about the invention of photography. In 1842, he sent her two dozen calotypes and daguerreotypes, the first photographs she ever saw.

==== England ====
The Camerons moved to England in 1845, where they took part in London&#x27;s artistic and cultural scene. Julia often visited Little Holland House where her sister, Sara Prinsep, oversaw a literary and artistic salon &quot;of Pre-Raphaelite painters, poets, and aristocrats with artistic pretensions&quot;. Here, she met many of the subjects of her later portraits, including Henry Taylor and Alfred Tennyson.

Daphne du Maurier describes the scene:The nobilitee, the gentree, the litherathure, polithics and art of the counthree, by jasus! It&#x27;s a nest of proraphaelites, where Hunt, Millais, Rossetti, Watts, Leighton etc, Tennyson, the Brownings and Thackeray etc and tutti quanti receive dinners and incense, and cups of tea handed to them by these women almost kneeling.Benjamin Jowett echoed this when describing Cameron&#x27;s reverence to these artists and poets after a later visit to Freshwater. The same salon-like atmosphere was present. &quot;She is a sort of hero-worshipper, and the hero is not Mr Tennyson – he only occupies second place – but Henry Taylor.&quot;

In 1847, she was writing poetry, had started a novel, and published a translation of Gottfried August Bürger&#x27;s &quot;Leonora&quot;.

In 1848, Charles Cameron retired and invested in coffee and rubber plantations in Ceylon, becoming one of the island&#x27;s largest landowners. The Camerons settled in Tunbridge Wells in Kent, where they were neighbours of Taylor, then moved to East Sheen in 1850. During this time, Cameron became a member of a society for art education and appreciation. George Frederic Watts started working on a painting of Cameron (which is now in the National Portrait Gallery).
In 1860, after an extended visit to Tennyson at Freshwater, Cameron bought a house next door. The family moved there, naming the property &quot;Dimbola&quot; after one of the coffee plantations in Ceylon. A private gate connected the residences and the two families soon started entertaining famous people with music, poetry readings, and amateur plays, creating an artistic scene similar to Little Holland House. Cameron lived there until 1875.

=== Photography career ===
==== Early career ====
Cameron showed an interest in photography in the late 1850s and there are indications that she experimented with making photographs in the early 1860s. Around 1863, her daughter and son-in-law gave her a sliding-box camera for Christmas. The gift was meant to provide a diversion while her husband was in Ceylon. Her daughter said, &quot;It may amuse you, Mother, to try to photograph during your solitude at Freshwater.&quot;

Cameron converted a chicken coop into studio space. Later, in an unfinished autobiography, &quot;Annals of my Glasshouse&quot;, she wrote:I turned my coal-house into my dark room, and a glazed fowl house I had given my children became my glass house. The hens were liberated, I hope and believe not eaten. The profit of my boys upon new laid eggs was stopped, and all hands and hearts sympathised in my new labour, since the society of hens and chickens was soon changed for that of poets, prophets, painters and lovely maidens, who all in turn have immortalized the humble little farm erection. [...] I began with no knowledge of the art... I did not know where to place my dark box, how to focus my sitter, and my first picture I effaced to my consternation by rubbing my hand over the filmy side of the glass.On 29 January 1864 Cameron photographed nine‐year‐old Annie Philpot, an image she described as her &quot;first success&quot;. She sent the photograph to the subject&#x27;s father with the note:My first perfect success in the complete Photograph owing greatly to the docility &amp; sweetness of my best &amp; fairest sitter. This Photograph was taken by me at 1 p.m. Friday Jan. 29th. Printed—Toned—fixed and framed all by me &amp; given as it is now by 8 p.m. this same day.That same year, she compiled albums of her images for Watts and Herschel, registered her work and prepared it for exhibition and sale. She was elected to the Photographic Society of London, displaying work at yearly exhibitions and remaining a member until her death.

Cameron took up photography as an amateur and considered herself an artist. Although never making commissioned portraits or establishing a commercial studio, she thought of her photographic activity as a professional endeavour, copyrighting, publishing, and marketing her work. The family did not see substantial profits from their coffee plantations and Cameron may have been looking to bring in some money with her photography. The portraits of celebrities and the high volume of her photographic output also suggest commercial aspirations.

==== Mid-career ====
In 1865, she became a member of the Photographic Society of Scotland and arranged to have her prints sold through the London dealers P. &amp; D. Colnaghi. She presented a series of photographs, &quot;The Fruits of the Spirit&quot;, to the British Museum, and held her first solo exhibition in November 1865. Her prints generated robust demand and she showed her work throughout Europe, securing awards in Berlin in 1865 and 1866, and an honourable mention in Dublin.

Her photographic activity was supported by her husband. Cameron wrote: &quot;My husband from first to last has watched every picture with delight, and it is my daily habit to run to him with every glass upon which a fresh glory is newly stamped, and to listen to his enthusiastic applause.&quot;

In August 1865, the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum), purchased 80 of her photographs. Three years later, it offered her two rooms to use as a portrait studio, making her the museum&#x27;s first artist-in-residence.

She produced images of Thomas Carlyle and John Herschel in 1867. By 1868, she was generating sales through P. &amp; D. Colnaghi and a second London agent, William Spooner. In 1869, she created &quot;The Kiss of Peace&quot;, which she considered her finest work.

In the early 1870s, Cameron&#x27;s work matured. Her elaborate illustrative tableaux involving religious, literary, and classical figures peaked in a series of images for Tennyson&#x27;s &quot;Idylls of the King&quot;, published in 1874 and 1875, evidently at her expense. During this time, she also wrote &quot;Annals of my Glass House&quot;.

=== Later life ===
In October 1873, her daughter died in childbirth. Two years later, because of her husband&#x27;s ill-health, the lower cost of living, and to be near to their sons who were managing the family coffee plantations, Cameron and her husband left Freshwater for Ceylon with &quot;a cow, Cameron&#x27;s photographic equipment, and two coffins, in case such items should not be available in the East&quot;.

Henry Taylor recounts the departure:Mr. and Mrs. Cameron have taken their departure for Ceylon, there to live and die. He had bought an estate there some thirty years ago when he was serving the Crown there and elsewhere in the East, and he had a passionate love for the island, to which he had rendered an important service in providing it with a code of procedure ... he never ceased to yearn after the island as his place of abode, and thither in his eighty-first year he has betaken himself, with a strange joy. The design was kept secret, – I believe even from their dearest relatives.V.C. Scott O&#x27;Connor later wrote about their empty home in Freshwater:The house is silent now and tenantless. All its old feverish life and bustle are stilled as is the heart which beat here in true sympathy with every living creature that came within its reach needing such succor. Her pretty maids, her scholars, her poets, her philosophers, astronomers, and divines, all those men of genius who came and sat willingly to her while in a fever of artistic emotion she plied the instruments of her art, – they have all gone, and silence is the only tenant left at Dimbola.The move marked the end of Cameron&#x27;s photography career; she took few photographs afterwards, mostly of Tamil servants and workers. Fewer than 30 images survive from this period. Cameron&#x27;s output may have dropped in part because of the difficulty working with collodion in the heat and a lack of fresh water for washing prints. The botanical painter and biologist Marianne North recounted a visit to Cameron in Ceylon:The walls of the room were covered with magnificent photographs; others were tumbling about the tables, chairs, and floors with quantities of damp books, all untidy and picturesque; the lady herself with a lace veil on her head and flowing draperies. Her oddities were most refreshing . . . She also made some studies of natives while I was there, and took such a fancy to the back of one of them (which she said was absolutely superb) that she insisted on her son retaining him as her gardener, though she had no garden and he did not know even the meaning of the word. In 1875, after a short visit to England, Cameron fell ill with a dangerous chill. 

In February 1876, &quot;Macmillan&#x27;s Magazine&quot; published her poem, &quot;On a Portrait&quot;. The following year, her image &quot;The Parting of Sir Lancelot and Queen Guinevere&quot; appeared on the cover &quot;Harper&#x27;s Weekly&quot; as a wood engraving.

Cameron died on 26 January 1879 at the Glencairn estate in Ceylon. It is often reported that her last word was &quot;Beauty&quot; or &quot;Beautiful&quot;.

In her 12-year career, Cameron produced about 900 photographs.

== Photographic work ==
=== Influences ===

Cameron was an educated and cultured woman; she was a Christian thinker familiar with medieval art, the Renaissance, and the Pre-Raphaelites. She may also have been influenced by the contemporary interest in phrenology, the study of the skull as a sign of a person&#x27;s character. The Old Masters also informed her work. Her compositions and use of light have been connected to Raphael, Rembrandt, and Titian.

John Herschel, who relayed to Cameron the news of the inventions of photography by Talbot and Daguerre, was an important influence on technique and the practicalities of the medium, as indicated in a letter Cameron wrote to the astronomer, &quot;You were my first teacher and to you I owe all the first experience and insights.&quot;

It is likely that Cameron saw Reginald Southey photographing on the Isle of Wight during a holiday in 1857 when he visited the Camerons and photographed their children and the children of her neighbours, the Tennysons, before Cameron took up the camera in earnest.

Perhaps the most important photographer to influence Cameron&#x27;s work was David Wilkie Wynfield. Much like Cameron, Wynfield published soft-focus portraits of friends dressed up as characters from history or literature. The press compared their photographic work and noted the similarities in style and their consideration of the medium as fine art. Cameron&#x27;s style of close-up portraits resembling Titian may well have been learned from Wynfield, since she took a lesson from him and later wrote &quot;I consult him in correspondence whenever I am in difficulty&quot;. The Arts Council booklet to accompany the 1951 Festival of Britain photography exhibition quoted from an 11-page &quot;holograph letter&quot; (exhibit 471) to William Michael Rossetti in which she states: &quot;To [Wynfield&#x27;s] beautiful photography I owed &quot;all&quot; my attempts and indeed consequently all my success.&quot;

==== Concept of genius and beauty ====
Cameron&#x27;s portraits are partly the product of her intimacy and regard for the subject, but also intend to capture &quot;particular qualities or essences—typically, genius in men and beauty in women&quot;. Mike Weaver, a scholar who wrote about Cameron&#x27;s photography in work published in 1984, framed her idea of genius and beauty &quot;within a specifically Christian framework, as indicative of the sublime and the sacred&quot;. Weaver supposes that Cameron&#x27;s myriad influences informed her concept of beauty: &quot;the Bible, classical mythology, Shakespeare&#x27;s plays, and Tennyson&#x27;s poems were fused into a single vision of ideal beauty.&quot;

Cameron herself indicated her desire to capture beauty. She wrote, &quot;I longed to arrest all the beauty that came before me and at length the longing has been satisfied&quot; and &quot;My aspirations are to ennoble Photography and to secure for it the character and uses of High Art by combining the real &amp; Ideal &amp; sacrificing nothing of Truth by all possible devotion to poetry and beauty.&quot;

Her female subjects were typically chosen for their beauty, particularly the &quot;long-necked, long-haired, immature beauty familiar in Pre-Raphaelite paintings&quot;. In Virginia Woolf&#x27;s farcical play &quot;Freshwater&quot;, which described the cultural scene at Freshwater, Cameron&#x27;s character comically expresses her commitment to beauty:I have sought the beautiful in the most unlikely places. I have searched the police force at Freshwater, and not a man have I found with calves worthy of Sir Galahad. But, as I said to the Chief Constable, &quot;Without beauty, constable, what is order? Without life, what is law?&quot; Why should I continue to have my silver protected by a race of men whose legs are aesthetically abhorrent to me? If a burgler came and he were beautiful, I should say to him: Take my fish knives! Take my cruets, my bread baskets and my soup tureens. What you take is nothing to what you give, your calves, your beautiful calves.

=== Portraits ===
Cameron&#x27;s photographs are generally placed into three categories: distinguished portraits of men, delicate portraits of women, and illustrative allegories based on religious and literary works.

==== Men ====
Cameron&#x27;s portraits of men were a kind of hero-worship. To Thomas Carlyle, Cameron wrote &quot;When I have had such men before my camera my whole soul has endeavoured to do its duty towards them in recording faithfully the greatness of the inner as well as the features of the outer man. The photograph thus taken has been almost the embodiment of a prayer.&quot;

Most of these men are well-known scientists, writers, or clergymen. Cameron turned to Old Master paintings and the contemporary idea —based in phrenology— of the ideal &quot;type&quot; to capture the greatness that she perceived in these eminent Victorian individuals. Her aspiration to record this greatness resulted in powerful images displaying a masterly command of chiaroscuro that resulted in &quot;the finest and most revealing gallery of eminent Victorians in existence&quot;.

Janet Malcom notes the attention Cameron paid to facial hair as an expressive element in her portraits, writing that &quot;Her close-ups of Tennyson, Carlyle, Darwin, Longfellow, Taylor, Watts, and Charles Cameron are as much celebrations of beards as of Victorian eminence.&quot;

==== Women ====
Her images of women are decidedly softer than those of men. With less dramatic lighting and a more typical distance between the sitter and the camera, these images are less dynamic and more conventional.

Cameron almost exclusively photographed younger women, never making a portrait even of her neighbour and good friend Emily Tennyson. According to a biographer of Darwin, Cameron refused to take a picture of the biologist&#x27;s wife, saying that &quot;no woman must be photographed between the ages of eighteen and seventy&quot;.

Her mature photographs of women are noted for their subtle but suggestive representation of the obscurity and malleability of female identity. Many of her images of young women obscure their individuality and represent their identity as multifaceted and changeable by showing them &quot;in pairs, or reflected in a mirror... frequently expressive of a deep ambiguity and anxiety.&quot;

Janet Malcolm again notes Cameron&#x27;s attention to the hair of her subjects, writing that &quot;Like the little girls whose hair was mussed to rid it of its prim nursery look, the bigger girls were made to undo their buns and chignons so that their hair would poetically stream or flow or twist around their faces&quot;.

==== Children ====
Children – her own children, those of relatives, and young locals – were often models for Cameron. Children were popular subjects in the Victorian era and Cameron kept with the prevailing notion of them as innocent, kind, and noble. She regularly depicted them as angels or as children from Bible stories.

The children in her images were not always cooperative, and her attempts to cast them as allegorical figures were often frustrated by the child&#x27;s boredom, indignation, or distraction – moods which are often seen in her images.

=== Allegories and illustrations ===
Cameron may have found these illustrative group portraits more challenging than her other images. With more people in the image, the chances were greater that someone would move during the long exposures, so more light was needed to shorten the exposure time and arrest the motion. More sitters also meant a greater depth of field was necessary to put everyone in focus, further complicating the compositions.

Cameron&#x27;s narrative portraits of women were influenced by tableaux vivants and amateur theatre. The women in her images are typically depicted in the idealised Victorian roles of mother and wife.

==== Religion ====
Cameron made over 50 images representing the Madonna, often played by her household servant Mary Hillier. These images present &quot;an ideal of femininity that combines wholesomeness with qualities of sensuality and vulnerability&quot;. She represented the Virgin Mary in various scenes from the Bible, such as the Annunciation and the Salutation, but also illustrated more obscure figures.

==== Literature ====

Cameron took literature as inspiration, representing characters from Shakespeare, Elizabethan poems, novels, plays, and the work of her contemporaries: Tennyson, Henry Taylor, Christina Rossetti, Robert Browning, and George Eliot.

==== &quot;Idylls of the King&quot; ====
In 1874, Tennyson asked Cameron to create illustrations for a new edition of his &quot;Idylls of the King&quot;, a popular series of poems about Arthurian legends. Cameron worked on this commission for three months. However, she was unhappy with the final publication, and complained that the small size of her images depleted their significance. This prompted Cameron to issue a deluxe version of the &quot;Idylls of the King&quot; which featured twelve photographs as full-size prints. This series of images, influenced by Watts, was her last large-scale project and is considered the peak of her illustrative work. 

== Reception and legacy ==
=== Contemporary reception ===
In her own time, Cameron&#x27;s photographs found a contentious audience, with many criticising her use of soft focus and her unretouched prints.

In 1865, &quot;The Photographic Journal&quot; reviewed her images, commenting:
Mrs. Cameron exhibits her series of out-of-focus portraits of celebrities. We must give this lady credit for daring originality, but at the expense of all other photographic qualities. A true artist would employ all the resources at his disposal, in whatever branch of art he might practise. In these pictures, all that is good in photography has been neglected and the shortcomings of the art are prominently exhibited. We are sorry to have to speak thus severely on the works of a lady, but we feel compelled to do so in the interest of the art.&quot;The Photographic News&quot; echoed this sentiment:
What in the name of all the nitrate of silver that ever turned white into black have these pictures in common with good photography? Smudged, torn, dirty, undefined, and in some cases almost unreadable, there is hardly one of them that ought not to have been washed off the plate as soon as it appeared. We cannot but think that this lady&#x27;s highly imaginative and artistic efforts might be supplemented by the judicious employment of a small boy with a wash leather, and a lens screwed a trifle less out of accurate definition.
&quot;The Illustrated London News&quot; provided an alternative perspective, writing that her images were &quot;the nearest approach to art, or rather the most bold and successful applications of the principles of fine-art to photography&quot;.

=== Early impact ===
Cameron&#x27;s niece, Julia Prinsep Stephen (née Jackson; 1846–1895), wrote a biography of Cameron that appeared in the first edition of the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, 1886.

A few years later, George Bernard Shaw reviewed a posthumous exhibition of Cameron&#x27;s, writing:While the portraits of Herschel, Tennyson and Carlyle beat hollow anything I have ever seen, right on the same wall, and virtually in the same frame, there are photographs of children with no clothes on, or else the underclothes by way of propriety, with palpably paper wings, most inartistically grouped and artlessly labelled as angels, saints or fairies. No-one would imagine that the artist who produced the marvellous Carlyle would have produced such childish trivialities.Virginia Woolf wrote a comic portrayal of the &quot;Freshwater circle&quot; in her only play &quot;Freshwater&quot;. Later, in collaboration with Roger Fry, Woolf also edited the first major collection of Cameron&#x27;s photographs, &quot;Victorian Photographs of Famous Men and Fair Women,&quot; published in 1926. In the introduction to this collection, Fry wrote that Cameron&#x27;s allegorical photographs &quot;must all be judged as failures from an aesthetic viewpoint&quot;. He was more charitable toward her other work, writing that she had &quot;a wonderful perception of character as it is expressed in form&quot; and that her work was superior to the portraits of James Abbott McNeill Whistler and Watts.

Despite the publication of this collection, Cameron&#x27;s work remained obscure until the 1940s.

=== Mid-century rediscovery ===
Helmut Gernsheim, after seeing photographs that Cameron had donated hanging in the waiting room of a Hampshire railway station, published a book on her work that helped re-establish her reputation. Gernsheim&#x27;s review echoed the sentiments of Shaw and Fry, criticising her allegorical and illustrative photos while praising her portraits:If the majority of Mrs. Cameron&#x27;s subject pictures seem to us affected, ludicrous and amateurish, and appear in our opinion to be failures, how masterly, on the other hand, are her straightforward, truthful portraits, which are entirely free from false sentiment, and which compensate for the errors of taste in her studies.In 1984, Mike Weaver disputed this analysis in his book &quot;Julia Margaret Cameron 1815–1879&quot;, where he elevated Cameron&#x27;s tableaux as sincere religious interpretations. Weaver also criticised the characterisations of Cameron&#x27;s personality that focused on her supposed eccentricities.

Gernsheim wrote &quot;Masterpieces of Victorian Photography 1840–1900&quot; to accompany the Festival of Britain event that marked the centenary of &quot;the first important exhibition of photography ever held [at the 1851 Great Exhibition]&quot;. In selecting photographs from his collection for the event, Gernsheim chose Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Florence Fisher&quot; as the frontispiece of the catalogue. Also, her 1867 portrait of Sir Henry Taylor was one of the 16 images reproduced in the central section of photographs. Only one other photographer has more than one image in the booklet: two of P. H. Delamotte&#x27;s scenes of the Crystal Palace in 1859. In the entry for Cameron, Gernsheim writes: &quot;Her brilliant portraits of [the great Victorians] rank with those off Hill and Adamson, and Nadar, as the finest produced in the nineteenth century ... Mrs Cameron&#x27;s large head studies are purely photographic in style, and far in advance of her time.&quot; Twenty-six of her portraits were exhibited. 

=== 21st century reception ===
Colin Ford, in the &quot;Encyclopedia of Nineteenth-Century Photography&quot; calls her images &quot;extraordinarily powerful&quot; and &quot;arguably the first &#x27;close-up&#x27; photographs in history&quot;. He continues:Her visualisations of poetry are different in style and achievement from those of any other photographer of the time. Her contemporaries decorated books of poetry by Burns, Gray, Milton, Scott, Shakespeare and others with picturesque landscapes, occasionally peopling these with attractively disposed figures in the scenery, but rarely illustrating actual characters or incidents from the story.For the Metropolitan Museum of Art&#x27;s &quot;Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History&quot;, Malcolm Daniel writes:Her artistic goals for photography, informed by the outward appearance and spiritual content of fifteenth-century Italian painting, were wholly original in her medium. She aimed for neither the finish and formalized poses common in the commercial portrait studios, nor for the elaborate narratives of other Victorian &quot;high art&quot; photographers such as H. P. Robinson and O. G. Rejlander.Janet Malcolm, in &quot;The Genius of the Glass House&quot; writes that &quot;Cameron&#x27;s compositions have more connection to the family album pictures of recalcitrant relatives who have been herded together for the obligatory group picture than they do to the masterpieces of Western painting&quot; but that &quot;The beauty that Cameron found, and in a surprising number of cases was able to arrest, among the aging and aged men of the Victorian literary and art establishment is a cornerstone of her achievement&quot;.

In 2003, the J. Paul Getty Museum published a catalogue of Cameron&#x27;s known surviving photographs. One caption of a portrait of Alice Liddell (whom Cameron photographed as Alethea, Pomona, Ceres, and St. Agnes in 1872) claims that &quot;Cameron&#x27;s photographic portraits are considered among the finest in the early history of photography&quot;.

In 2018, Cameron&#x27;s &quot;Norman Album&quot; from 1869 was deemed by the UK government&#x27;s advisory committee on the export of works of art to be of &quot;outstanding aesthetic importance and significance to the study of the history of photography and, in particular, the work of Julia Margaret Cameron—one of the most significant photographers of the 19th century&quot;.

In 2019 Cameron was inducted into the International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum.

===Museum and Trust===
Dimbola on the Isle of Wight houses the Dimbola Museum and Galleries owned and run by the Julia Margaret Cameron Trust, a registered charity that promotes her life and work.

== Retrospective exhibitions ==
Major retrospectives include the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York (2013); the Victoria and Albert Museum (2015) for a 200th anniversary (this travelled to Sydney, Australia); and the National Portrait Gallery (2018) placed her work in relationship to the work of her contemporaries, Lady Clementina Hawarden, Oscar Rejlander, and Lewis Carroll.

Retrospective exhibitions include:
== Albums ==
== List of selected publications ==
* Cameron, J. M. P. (1875). Illustrations by Julia Margaret Cameron of Alfred Tennyson&#x27;s Idylls of the King and other poems 
* Cameron, J. M. P. (1889). Unfinished autobiography &quot;Annals of my glass house&quot; by Julia Margaret Cameron, written 1874, first published 1889
* Cameron, J. M. (1975). The Herschel album: an album of photographs . London (2 St Martin&#x27;s Place, WC2H 0HE): National Portrait Gallery
* Cameron, J. M., &amp; Ford, C. (1975). The Cameron Collection: an album of photographs . Wokingham: Van Nostrand Reinhold for the National Portrait Gallery
* Cameron, J. M. P., &amp; Weaver, M. (1986). Whisper of the muse: the Overstone album &amp; other photographs . Malibu: J. Paul Getty Museum
* Cameron, J. M. P., &amp; Rosen, J. (2024). Julia Margaret Cameron: The Colonial Shadows of Victorian Photography.Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in Britich Art, distributed by Yale University Press
== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Rosen, Jeff (2016). &quot;Julia Margaret Cameron&#x27;s &#x27;Fancy Subjects&quot;&#x27; Manchester University Press
* Rosen, Jeff (2024). &quot;Julia Margaret Cameron: The Colonial Shadows of Victorian Photography&quot;&#x27; 
Distributed by Yale University Press for the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art 
* &quot;also available through MOMA&quot; &quot;here&quot;


== External links ==

* Julia Margaret Cameron Trust
*Julia Margaret Cameron at the National Gallery of Victoria (NGV), Melbourne, Australia
*Julia Margaret Cameron at The Museum of Modern Art
*Julia Margaret Cameron at The J. Paul Getty Museum
* at the Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles, Accession No. 850858.
*Julia Margaret Cameron at the National Portrait Gallery
*Julia Margaret Cameron at the National Gallery of Art
*Julia Margaret Cameron at the Art Institute of Chicago
*Julia Margaret Cameron at the National Galleries of Scotland
*Alfred Tennyson&#x27;s &quot;Idylls of the King&quot; , illustrated by Julia Margaret Cameron</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230120" start="0" end="22" title="Julia Margaret Cameron" label="Julia Margaret Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074440" start="185" end="195" title="Soft focus" label="soft-focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="216" end="226" title="Victorian era" label="Victorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="339" end="347" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428909" start="553" end="578" title="Freshwater, Isle of Wight" label="Freshwater, Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q546808" start="769" end="785" title="tableau vivant" label="tableaux vivants"/>
<link wikidata="Q48133816" start="904" end="920" title="The Norman Album" label="The Norman Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607302" start="1201" end="1213" title="Henry Taylor (dramatist)" label="Henry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="1215" end="1229" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="1235" end="1252" title="John Herschel" label="Sir John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11923781" start="1590" end="1602" title="Garden Reach" label="Garden Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1606" end="1614" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1702" end="1720" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="2013" end="2029" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q442404" start="2052" end="2066" title="Garde du Corps (France)" label="Garde du Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="2075" end="2084" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="2792" end="2802" title="Versailles, Yvelines" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912649" start="3151" end="3164" title="Julia Stephen" label="Julia Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729109" start="3191" end="3210" title="Henry Thoby Prinsep" label="Henry Thoby Prinsep"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650333" start="3273" end="3293" title="Little Holland House" label="Little Holland House"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="3297" end="3307" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082570" start="3380" end="3418" title="Charles Somers-Cocks, 3rd Earl Somers" label="Charles Somers-Cocks, Viscount Eastnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470230" start="3470" end="3489" title="Lady Henry Somerset" label="Lady Henry Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526315" start="3533" end="3551" title="Adeline Marie Russell, Duchess of Bedford" label="Lady Adeline Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="3717" end="3734" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q14278" start="3922" end="3939" title="Sir John Herschel" label="Sir John Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078857" start="4009" end="4028" title="Charles Hay Cameron" label="Charles Hay Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="4153" end="4162" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4214" end="4221" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511672" start="4816" end="4842" title="Henry Herschel Hay Cameron" label="Henry Herschel Hay Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q332793" start="4968" end="4981" title="Henry Hardinge, 1st Viscount Hardinge" label="Lord Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q372431" start="5188" end="5196" title="calotype" label="calotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="5202" end="5215" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650333" start="5399" end="5419" title="Little Holland House" label="Little Holland House"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="5499" end="5513" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="5666" end="5681" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="5684" end="5701" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q817565" start="6052" end="6067" title="Benjamin Jowett" label="Benjamin Jowett"/>
<link wikidata="Q213675" start="6443" end="6466" title="Gottfried August Bürger" label="Gottfried August Bürger"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="6578" end="6584" title="British Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="6664" end="6679" title="Royal Tunbridge Wells" label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="6683" end="6687" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q183245" start="6852" end="6873" title="George Frederic Watts" label="George Frederic Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277183" start="7108" end="7115" title="Dimbola Lodge" label="Dimbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="9333" end="9363" title="Royal Photographic Society" label="Photographic Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="10248" end="10262" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="10827" end="10853" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="11042" end="11056" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227196" start="11475" end="11493" title="Idylls of the King" label="Idylls of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="13322" end="13327" title="Tamils" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q271648" start="13587" end="13601" title="Marianne North" label="Marianne North"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="14956" end="14971" title="Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood" label="Pre-Raphaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="15039" end="15049" title="phrenology" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q435989" start="15118" end="15128" title="Old Master" label="Old Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="15211" end="15218" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="15220" end="15229" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="15235" end="15241" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q299565" start="15327" end="15333" title="Henry Fox Talbot" label="Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405" start="15338" end="15346" title="Louis Daguerre" label="Daguerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308871" start="15609" end="15625" title="Reginald Southey" label="Reginald Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231122" start="15922" end="15943" title="David Wilkie Wynfield" label="David Wilkie Wynfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801520" start="16427" end="16439" title="Arts council" label="Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663784" start="16470" end="16489" title="Festival of Britain" label="Festival of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q719428" start="16582" end="16606" title="William Michael Rossetti" label="William Michael Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="18051" end="18065" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q831462" start="18385" end="18396" title="Galahad" label="Sir Galahad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="19593" end="19603" title="phrenology" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219540" start="19820" end="19831" title="chiaroscuro" label="chiaroscuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="20103" end="20113" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052396" start="20556" end="20570" title="Emily Tennyson, Lady Tennyson" label="Emily Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215932" start="22394" end="22408" title="depth of field" label="depth of field"/>
<link wikidata="Q926743" start="22755" end="22762" title="Madonna (art)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="23026" end="23038" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q929304" start="23207" end="23224" title="Elizabethan literature" label="Elizabethan poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q236596" start="23301" end="23319" title="Christina Rossetti" label="Christina Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="23321" end="23336" title="Robert Browning" label="Robert Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="23342" end="23354" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="23543" end="23552" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074440" start="24183" end="24193" title="soft focus" label="soft focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864049" start="24238" end="24262" title="The Photographic Journal" label="The Photographic Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912649" start="25728" end="25749" title="Julia Prinsep Stephen" label="Julia Prinsep Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="25919" end="25938" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q547470" start="26623" end="26632" title="Roger Fry" label="Roger Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q203643" start="27152" end="27181" title="James Abbott McNeill Whistler" label="James Abbott McNeill Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q72139" start="27325" end="27341" title="Helmut Gernsheim" label="Helmut Gernsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="28522" end="28538" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183721" start="28898" end="28920" title="Philip Henry Delamotte" label="P. H. Delamotte&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15212123" start="28935" end="28949" title="Crystal Palace Park" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678920" start="29079" end="29095" title="Hill &amp;amp; Adamson" label="Hill and Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40116" start="29101" end="29106" title="Nadar" label="Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="29739" end="29744" title="Robert Burns" label="Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="29976" end="30002" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q574144" start="30439" end="30453" title="Henry Peach Robinson" label="H. P. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q725390" start="30458" end="30473" title="Oscar Gustave Rejlander" label="O. G. Rejlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q731126" start="31014" end="31034" title="J. Paul Getty Museum" label="J. Paul Getty Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610604" start="31177" end="31184" title="Alethea" label="Alethea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171239" start="31186" end="31192" title="Pomona (mythology)" label="Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="31194" end="31199" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q210096" start="31205" end="31214" title="Agnes of Rome" label="St. Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48133816" start="31386" end="31398" title="The Norman Album" label="Norman Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318398" start="31433" end="31502" title="Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art" label="UK government&amp;#x27;s advisory committee on the export of works of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060764" start="31774" end="31823" title="International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum" label="International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277183" start="31889" end="31917" title="Dimbola Museum and Galleries" label="Dimbola Museum and Galleries"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="31971" end="31989" title="Charitable organization" label="registered charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="32245" end="32270" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143075" start="32345" end="32369" title="Lady Clementina Hawarden" label="Lady Clementina Hawarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q725390" start="32371" end="32386" title="Oscar Rejlander" label="Oscar Rejlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="32392" end="32405" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="33829" end="33833" title="MOMA" label="MOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464509" start="33943" end="33971" title="National Gallery of Victoria" label="National Gallery of Victoria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85738" wikidata="Q44112" url="?curid=85738" title="Cyrene, Libya">
<text>Cyrene, also sometimes anglicized as Kyrene, was an ancient Greek colony and Roman city near present-day Shahhat in northeastern Libya in North Africa. It was part of the Pentapolis, an important group of five cities in the region, and gave the area its classical and early modern name Cyrenaica.

Cyrene lies on a ridge of the Jebel Akhdar uplands. The archaeological remains cover several hectares and include several monumental temples, stoas, theatres, bathhouses, churches, and palatial residences. The city is surrounded by the Necropolis of Cyrene. Since 1982, it has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The city&#x27;s port was Apollonia (Marsa Sousa), located about to the north.

The city was attributed to Apollo and the legendary etymon Cyrene by the Greeks themselves but it was probably actually colonized by settlers from Thera (modern Santorini) in the late seventh century BC. It was initially ruled by a dynasty of monarchs called the Battiads, who grew rich and powerful as a result of successive waves of immigration and the export of horses and silphium, a medicinal plant. By the fifth century BC, they had expanded their control over the other cities of Cyrenaica. It became the seat of the Cyrenaics, a school of philosophy in the fourth century BC, founded by Aristippus, a disciple of Socrates. In the Hellenistic Age, the city alternated between being part of Ptolemaic Egypt and the capital of an independent kingdom. It was also an important Jewish hub. In 96 BC, it passed to the Roman Republic and became part of the province of Crete and Cyrenaica. The city was destroyed by Jewish fighters in AD 115 during the Diaspora revolt, and slowly rebuilt over the following century. Earthquakes in 262 and 365 devastated the city, but some habitation continued through the early Byzantine period and the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb in 642, after which the site was abandoned until the establishment of an Italian military base on the site in 1913. Excavations have been ongoing since that time.
==Name==
 is the latinized form of the Greek name () of uncertain origin. The Greeks themselves attributed the name to the legendary Thessalian princess Cyrene who supposedly founded the city with help from the sun god Apollo. Some modern scholars sometimes attribute the name to its spring Cyra (, ), which was considered sacred to Apollo by the city&#x27;s Greco-Roman inhabitants. The legend of Thessalian Cyrene seems to long predate attestation of the spring, however, and Janko instead suggests that the existing legend and name were adopted by the early Theran settlers for this specific location after some unattested but similar local name in the Libu or Garamantian language. Although both the Greek and Latin forms of the name were pronounced something like , they are more often read in modern English as or, in its Latin form, .

==History==
People have lived in Cyrenaica since the Palaeolithic. There is some evidence for settlement in the caves below the Acropolis which may pre-date Greek settlement. It is possible that Minoans and Mycenaeans visited Cyrene in the Bronze Age, since it is on the easiest sea route from the Aegean to Egypt, but the only archaeological evidence for this are separate finds of a small Minoan altar and a Minoan seal, which might have been brought over at a later date. 

===Foundation===

A Greek myth first recorded by Pindar in the early fifth century BC reports that the god Apollo fell in love with the huntress Cyrene and brought her to Libya, where she gave birth to a son Aristaeus. Greek historical traditions, reported in Herodotus&#x27; &quot;Histories&quot; and in a fourth-century BC inscription found at Cyrene, say that a group of Cretan Greeks, who had been expelled from Sparta and settled on the island of Thera, founded Cyrene in 631 BC, under the leadership of Battus I, at the prompting of the Oracle of Delphi. Some traditions say that the settlers left Thera because of a famine, others because of a civil war. Most say that the colonists first settled on an island at Aziris (east of Derna) before relocating to Cyrene. The historicity of these narratives is uncertain, particularly the idea that Thera was Cyrene&#x27;s sole &quot;mother city.&quot; Relationships with other cities, such as Sparta and Samos, mentioned in the foundation narratives, are uncertain. 

Archaeological evidence from the site, especially ceramic finds, confirm that Greek settlement began in the mid-seventh century BC. This early pottery derves from Thera, Sparta, and Samos, but also Rhodes. The initial area of habitation was a ridge stretching eastwards from the Acropolis to the Agora, but the city rapidly expanded eastwards. The sanctuary of Apollo to the north of the Acropolis, of Demeter to the south, and of Zeus to the east all go back to the seventh or sixth centuries BC. Archaeological evidence shows that several other sites in Cyrenaica, such as Apollonia, Euesperides, and Taucheira (modern Benghazi and Tocra) were settled at the same time as Cyrene.

===Archaic period===
After its foundation, the city was ruled by a series of monarchs descended from Battus I. Over the course of the sixth century BC, Cyrene grew to become the most powerful city in the region. In the first half of the sixth century BC, Battus II encouraged further Greek settlement in the city, especially from the Peloponnese and Crete. This sparked conflict with the indigenous Libyans, whose king Adicran appealed to Egypt for help around 570 BC. The pharaoh Apries launched a military expedition against Cyrene, but was decisively defeated at the Battle of Irasa. 

According to Herodotus, conflict with king Arcesilaus II &quot;the Cruel&quot; (ca. 560-550 BC) led his brothers to leave the city and found the city of Barca to the west. Archaeological evidence shows that Greek presence at Barca predates this foundation, going back to the seventh century. Arcesilaus was defeated by the Barcans and Libyans at the Battle of Leuco, killed by his brother and succeeded by his infant son Battus III (ca. 550-530 BC), under whom Cyrene continued to suffer from continued internal conflict. This was resolved through a reform of the city&#x27;s laws by Demonax of Mantinea. These reforms appear to have limited the authority of the king to religious matters, vested political power in the Cyrenaean people, and divided the Cyreneans into three tribes. He may also have mediated a peace with Barca and introduced trial by combat. 

Battus III&#x27;s son Arcesilaus III (ca. 530-515 BC) attempted to revoke Demonax&#x27;s constitution and was driven into exile. He returned with an army from Samos and regained control but forced out once more and was assassinated at Barca. His mother Pheretime appealed to the Achaemenid governor of Egypt, Aryandes, who besieged and sacked Barca in 515 BC. According to Herodotus, Aryandes marched his troops through Cyrene and then, regretting that he had not taken the opportunity to conquer Cyrene, attempted to get back in, but was prevented. The story is strange; it may be that the city was actually conquered by the Persians. Remains of an extramural temple destroyed by the Persians at this time have been found.

===Classical period===

In the fifth century BC, perhaps as a consequence of the Persian intervention, Cyrene&#x27;s influence over the other Greek cities in Cyrenaica seems to have solidified into institutionalised political control. The city was prosperous and construction of the Temple of Apollo, Temple of Zeus, Temple of Demeter, and structures in the Agora date to this time. Cyrene&#x27;s chief local export through much of its early history was the medicinal herb silphium, which may have been used as an abortifacient; the herb was pictured on most Cyrenian coins. Silphium was in such demand that it was harvested to extinction by the end of the first century BC. Cyrene also made money from raising of horses and the transhipment trade between Egypt, the Aegean, and Carthage. It was a landing point for Greeks seeking to visit the oracle of Ammon at Siwah. 

Arcesilaus IV won the chariot race at the Pythian Games in 462 BC and at the Olympic Games in 460 BC, in celebration of which Pindar wrote the &quot;Fourth&quot; and &quot;Fifth Pythian Odes&quot;. Following this victory, he organised a new wave of Greek settlement at Euesperides. Some time after this however, the Cyreneans monarchy was abolished in obscure circumstances and the tomb of his ancestor Battus I was destroyed. In 454 BC, Cyrene gave refuge to the remnants of an Athenian army that had been defeated by the Persians in Egypt. In the following years, Barca seems to have become the dominant city in the region and Cyrene was regularly in conflict with the other Greek cities of Cyrenaica and with the Libyans. In 414 BC, during the Peloponnesian War, Spartan forces travelling to Sicily were driven to Cyrenaica by adverse winds and Cyrene provided them with two triremes and pilots to lead them to Sicily. 

Towards the end of the fifth century BC, one Ariston took control of the city, put five hundred leading Cyreneans to death and exiled others. It is possible that he attempted to establish a radical democracy on the Athenian model. A group of 3,000 Messenians who had been expelled from Naupactus by the Spartans arrived in Cyrene in 404 BC and joined forces with the exiles, but were almost all killed in a battle, after which the Cyrenean exiles and the followers of Ariston reconciled. The surviving Messenians settled at Euhesperides. There are some signs that civic conflict continued over the following century.

During the fourth century BC, Cyrene clashed with Carthage over the Syrtis and the trans-Saharan trade routes that ended there. The border was established at the Altars of the Phileni. Cyrene may also have extended its control eastwards to Catabathmus Magnus. Cyrene constructed a treasury at Delphi between 350 and 325 BC. When Alexander the Great conquered Egypt in 331 BC and marched west to visit the oracle at Siwah, the Cyreneans sent an embassy to declare their friendship; they did not come under Macedonian control. An inscription records that during a famine in the late 320s, Cyrene sent over 800,000 medimni of grain (ca. 40,000,000 litres) to the cities of Greece and the Macedonian royal family.

===Hellenistic period===

In 324 BC, a Spartan mercenary leader, Thibron, joined forces with Cyrenean and Barcan exiles on Crete and invaded Cyrenaica, capturing Cyrene&#x27;s port and forcing Cyrene to accept his rule. However, one of his officers, Mnasicles, defected to the Cyreneans and helped them to expel Thibron&#x27;s troops and recapture the port. Cyrene allied with the Libyans and Carthaginians, but Thibron returned in 322 BC and defeated them. A democratic revolution took place in Cyrene and the exiled aristocrats appealed to Ptolemy I Soter for help. Ptolemy sent his general Ophellas to occupy the city and established a new constitution for the city, which is recorded on a large inscription, which was heavily oligarchic and reserved a permanent role for himself in the city&#x27;s administration. The city was accepted by the other Macedonian leaders as part of the Ptolemaic realm in the Treaty of Triparadisus in 321 BC. Cyrenean rebels attempted to expel the Ptolemaic garrison in 313 BC, but Ptolemy sent reinforcements who suppressed the revolt. In 308 BC, Ophellas led Cyrenaean and Athenian troops west to join Agathocles of Syracuse&#x27;s attack on Carthage and was immediately murdered.
Cyrene rebelled against Ptolemy again around 305 BC. Control was re-established in 300 BC by Ptolemy&#x27;s step-son Magas. After Ptolemy&#x27;s death in 282 BC, Magas refused to submit to his half-brother Ptolemy II and had crowned himself king by 276 BC. He married Apama the daughter of the Seleucid king Antiochus I and assisted him in an unsuccessful invasion of Egypt during the First Syrian War. Inscribed accounts indicate severe inflation of food prices and a large fundraising campaign, possibly for repairs to the city walls. After his death, Apama invited a Macedonian prince, Demetrius the Fair, to marry her daughter Berenice and take the throne, but he was murdered after a short conflict with Berenice. She married Ptolemy III in 246 BC, bringing Cyrene back under Ptolemaic control. In the process, the city of Euesperides was destroyed and re-founded as Berenice and the cities of Cyrenaica formed a federation, called the Pentapolis, which minted its own coinage. Constitutional reforms by a pair of Arcadians, Ecdelus and Demophanes, may also belong in this period. 

Cyrene was reduced to subject status, a garrison was installed, and a succession of Ptolemaic courtiers were appointed to the city&#x27;s priesthood of Apollo. Cyrene was established as a separate kingdom once more for Ptolemy VIII in 163 BC after his siblings expelled him from Egypt. The city rebelled against him but was defeated. It is possible that he granted Cyrene&#x27;s port, Apollonia, independence from Cyrene at this time, as a reward for remaining loyal. Ptolemy engaged in a wide-ranging construction project in the city, including the construction of a monumental gymnasium. He also had a will inscribed, promising Cyrene to the Roman Republic in the event that he died without heirs. However, he regained control of Egypt in 145 BC. In the dynastic conflicts that followed, Cyrene probably remained under the control of Ptolemy VIII and then of Ptolemy IX. It was apparently given to Ptolemy VIII&#x27;s illegitimate son Ptolemy Apion as a separate kingdom ca. 105-101 BC. Apion made a similar will to that of his father and the territory passed to Rome when he died without heirs in 96 BC.

The city became an important Jewish centre during the Hellenistic period. The deuterocanonical book 2 Maccabees, is said by its author to be an abridgment of a five-volume work by a Hellenized Jew by the name of Jason of Cyrene who lived around 100 BC.

===Roman period===

After 96 BC, the Romans initially ignored the new territory. Plutarch mentions a tyrant of Cyrene, Nicocrates, who was deposed by his wife Aretaphila of Cyrene and succeeded by his brother Learchus, who was murdered in turn. Lucullus visited the city in 87 BC, suppressed the tyranny and granted Cyrene a new constitution. But it was only in 74 BC that the Romans first sent a governor, Publius Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus. At some point between 67 and 30 BC, Cyrenaica became part of the Roman province of Crete and Cyrenaica. The provincial capital was on Crete, but Cyrene remained the chief city in Cyrenaica and enjoyed a highly prosperous period and much construction dates to the first century AD. In the mid-first century AD, the Roman authorities launched an extensive surveying campaign to reclaim the public land around Cyrene that had slipped into private control and stopped paying dividends to the fisc. 

Because of its large Jewish population, Cyrene was an early centre of Christianity. A Cyrenian named Simon carried the cross of Jesus. &quot;Acts&quot; claims that Jews from Cyrene heard the disciples speaking in their own language in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost and later says that Christians from Cyrene and Cyprus were among the assembled. According to the tradition of the Coptic Orthodox Church, its founder, Saint Mark was a native of Cyrene and ordained the first bishop of Cyrene.
A massive Jewish revolt, the Diaspora revolt, broke out in Cyrenaica, Egypt, Mesopotamia, Cyprus and Judaea in 115 AD. Cyrene was sacked and almost all of the city&#x27;s buildings were destroyed. Literary sources claim that 220,000 people were killed before the revolt was quelled by Marcius Turbo. According to Eusebius of Caesarea, the Jewish rebellion left Libya depopulated to such an extent that a few years later new colonies had to be established there by the emperor Hadrian to maintain the viability of continued settlement. Restoration work is recorded in inscriptions and visible archaeologically; it was not completed until the reign of Commodus. The city was an early member of Hadrian&#x27;s Panhellenion and a long inscription records its attempts to block membership for one of its neighbours. Cyrene was once again prosperous by the third quarter of the second century AD and several palaces date to this period, including the House of Jason Magnus.

In the mid-third century AD, Cyrene&#x27;s economy began to decline. This was hastened by an earthquake of 262, which destroyed much of the city. After the disaster, the city was raided by the Marmaritae, Libyan nomads, who were defeated in 269 by Tenagino Probus, prefect of Egypt. The emperor Claudius Gothicus restored Cyrene, naming it &quot;Claudiopolis&quot;. Many buildings were subsequently rebuilt, but a hurriedly built new defensive wall enclosed only the western half of the city. The civic hub shifted north from the street of Battus to the Valley street and many of the old public spaces were filled in with housing and shops. In the reforms of Diocletian, Cyrene became part of the new province of Libya Superior (also called Pentapolis). The Roman Martyrology mentions under 4 July a tradition that in the persecution of Diocletian a bishop Theodorus of Cyrene was scourged and had his tongue cut out. Earlier editions of the Martyrology mentioned what may be the same person also under 26 March.

===Byzantine period===
Another earthquake destroyed the city on 21 July 365. Skeletons crushed by falling masonry have been found and one tomb inscription mentions the earthquake. A contemporary historian, Ammianus Marcellinus, describes Cyrene as &quot;an ancient but deserted city.&quot; However, the damage may have been over-emphasised. Archaeology shows that most buildings were damaged, but also that many were rebuilt, including many temples, which were only closed by the Theodosian decrees in 395. Settlement seems to have expanded east beyond Claudius Gothicus&#x27; fortification wall and a generation after the earthquake, Cyrene was a significant centre. Synesius, a wealthy magnate who became bishop of Ptolemais and whose letters are preserved, grew up in Cyrene in the generation after the earthquake. Letter 67 of Synesius tells of an irregular episcopal ordination carried out by a bishop Philo of Cyrene, which was condoned by Athanasius. The same letter mentions that a nephew of this Philo, who bore the same name, also became bishop of Cyrene. 

The Central and East Churches were built in the fifth or sixth century AD and renovated several times. A bishop of Cyrene name Rufus attended the Robber Council of Ephesus in 449 and there was still a bishop of Cyrene, named Leontius, at the time of Patriarch Eulogius of Alexandria (580–607). The city fell under Arab conquest in 643. At some point thereafter it was abandoned, but the ancient name lived on as &quot;Grennah&quot; in the 19th century.

===Modern history===
The site was totally abandoned in the early modern period. Frederick and Richard Beechey visited and produced the first site plans in 1821-1822. The French consul at Benghazi looted part of a tomb later in the century for the Louvre. The first systematic excavations were undertaken by Robert Murdoch Smith and E. A. Porcher in 1860 and 1861; their findings mostly went to the British Museum. They include the Apollo of Cyrene and a unique bronze head of an African man. The American Richard Norton began more scientific excavations in 1910, which were halted by the Italian invasion of Libya in 1911. The tomb of the excavation&#x27;s epigrapher, Herbert de Cou, who was shot in mysterious circumstances, is located on the site. 

The Italian colonial government established a military base at the site in 1913. In the course of building the base, Italian soldiers found the &quot;Venus of Cyrene&quot;, a headless marble statue representing the goddess Venus, a Roman copy of a Greek original, which prompted them to restrict their base to the Acropolis. The statue was transported to Rome, where it remained until 2008, when it was returned to Libya. The village of Shahat grew up on the site as a result of the Italian presence.

The Italians created an antiquities service and, after the discovery of the Venus of Cyrene, carried out excavations at Cyrene on a very large scale, which were closely connected with the regime&#x27;s propaganda. The Italian archaeologists were expelled in 1943 when the Allies captured Cyrenaica. Richard Goodchild, controller of antiquities from 1955 to 1966 moved the village of Shahat off the site and re-established it to the south; it has since expanded over much of the southern necropolis. He also restored control of excavations at the site to the Italians, under . Goodchild also The Italian mission has excavated much of the site and restored several buildings through the process of anastylosis. 

The site was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982. Beginning in 2006, the Global Heritage Fund, in partnership with the Second University of Naples (SUN, Italy), the Libyan Department of Antiquities, and the Libyan Ministry of Culture, worked to preserve the ancient site through a combination of holistic conservation practices and training of local skilled and unskilled labor. The GHF-led team conducted ongoing emergency conservation on the theater inside the Sanctuary of Apollo.

In 2017 UNESCO added Cyrene to its List of World Heritage in Danger.

==Archaeological site==
Cyrene is now an archaeological site north of the village of Shahhat and east of Bayda, on a ridge of the Jabal Akhdar, about 600 metres above sea level. The southern edge of the ridge and the city is formed by the Wadi Bil Ghadir and the northern edge by the Wadi Bu Turqiyah. The Acropolis, at the western edge of the ridge, was the original centre of Greek occupation. From there, a road referred to by modern scholars as the &quot;Street of Battus&quot; or &quot;Skyrotà&quot; runs along the ridge to the southeast for around 1 kilometre, past the Agora, the House of Jason Magnus and a number of other palatial residences, the Stoa of Hermes and Heracles, the Caesareum, two theatres, a sacred area, and the caravanserai until it reaches the gates of the city. Below the Acropolis to the north, the Springs of Apollo and Cyra emerge from the cliff-face onto a triangular plateau at the base of the Wadi Bu Turqiyah. This plateau contains the Greek Theatre, the Sanctuary of Apollo, and the Baths of Trajan. From the sanctuary, a road known as &quot;Valley Street&quot; leads southeast up the Wadi Bu Turqiyah, roughly parallel to the &quot;Street of Battus&quot;, lined by a stepped portico and the Aqua Augusta, past the Baths of Paris to the Market Theatre and the Central Quarter, which contains several public buildings and palatial residences. To the northeast, on another ridge, but still inside the city walls, is the largely unexcavated northeastern quarter, containing the Temple of Zeus, the hippodrome, and the East Church. Outside the city walls to the south is the Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone. The necropolis of Cyrene covers about 20 km² to the south and north of the city. 

Archaeological finds are stored and displayed in a temporary museum in the eastern portion of the site. In 2005, Italian archaeologists from the University of Urbino discovered 76 intact Roman statues at Cyrene from the 2nd century AD. The statues remained undiscovered for so long because &quot;during the earthquake of 375 AD, a supporting wall of the temple fell on its side, burying all the statues. They remained hidden under stone, rubble and earth for 1,630 years. The other walls sheltered the statues, so we were able to recover all the pieces, even works that had been broken.&quot;

===Acropolis===

===Agora===

===House of Jason Magnus===

===Caesareum and Stoa of Hermes and Heracles===

===Caravanserai===
===Sanctuary of Apollo===
One of its more significant features is the temple of Apollo, which was originally constructed as early as 7th century BC. Other ancient structures include a temple to Demeter. There is a large necropolis approximately 10 km between Cyrene and its ancient port of Apollonia. 
===Central Quarter===
===Temple of Zeus===
The Temple of Zeus was the largest ancient Greek temple at Cyrene, and one of the largest Greek temples ever built. The original Doric octastyle peripteral temple was constructed around 500-480 BC, It faced east and stood atop a three-stepped crepidoma, with a length of 68.3 metres and a width of 30.4 metres, making it roughly the same size as the Temple of Zeus at Olympia and the Parthenon at Athens. The front porch (pronaos) was supported by two columns in antis; the back porch (opisthodomos) by three columns in antis. The cella was two stories high and two rows of columns divided it into three aisles. The external colonnade (peripteros) has eight columns at the front and rear and seventeen columns on each of the long sides. It was destroyed in 115 AD during the Jewish sack of the city. Around 172-175 AD it was partially rebuilt as a non-peripteral temple. Between 185 and 192 AD, a colossal cult statue, modelled on the Statue of Zeus at Olympia was installed. The temple was destroyed once more in 365 AD by an earthquake and then burnt by Christians.

===East Church===
=== Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone ===

The sanctuary to Demeter and Persephone, which includes a temple and theater complex, is located south of the Wadi Bil Ghadir ravine, outside the city walls. The Sanctuary comprised structures sprawled out over twenty miles and are divided into three terraces: the Lower, Middle and Upper Sanctuaries. The archaeological remains date from the late seventh century BC to the mid-third century AD. During the time of this sacred activity at the Sanctuary a voluminous amount of votive material was accumulated in its interior: pottery, lamps, coinage, stone sculpture, jewellery, inscriptions, glass, as well as bronze and terracotta figurines. The pottery excavated at the Sanctuary provides useful evidence concerning both the question of its foundation and type of religious activity.
=== Necropolis===
The necropolis consists of graves, rock-cut tombs, temple-tombs, and sarcophagi, dating from the sixth century BC until the fifth century AD. It covers about 20 km² to the south and north of the city, making it one of the largest known Greek necropoleis. The southern section has been encroached upon by the growing city of Shahat, especially after 2013, when many tombs were bulldozed. The northern portion is better preserved. Several of the tombs of the Roman period have niches for portrait busts of the deceased. A common find are statues of the so-called &quot;Goddess of Death&quot;, a female bust - often faceless - depicted in the process of unveiling herself.

=== Water system ===
In October 2023, a flood exposed a water canal, possibly dating back to the Roman era.

==Philosophy==
Cyrene contributed to the intellectual life of the Greeks, through renowned philosophers and mathematicians. The School of Cyrene, known as the Cyrenaics, developed here as a minor Socratic school founded by Aristippus (perhaps the friend of Socrates, though according to some accounts a grandson of Aristippus with the same name). French Neo-Epicurean philosopher Michel Onfray has called Cyrene &quot;a philosophical Atlantis&quot; thanks to its huge importance in the birth and initial development of the ethics of pleasure.

==Notable people==
* Aretaphila of Cyrene, noblewoman
* Arete of Cyrene, philosopher
* Aristippus (c. 435 – c. 356 BC), philosopher and founder of the Cyrenaic School.
* Carneades, Academic skeptic philosopher
* Callicratidas, a general
* Callimachus (310/305 – 240 BC), poet, critic, and scholar at the Library of Alexandria
* Cratisthenes of Cyrene, an Olympic winner at chariot-race. There was a statue of him at Olympia, created by Pythagoras
* Eratosthenes (276 – 194 BC), mathematician, geographer, astronomer; librarian at the Library of Alexandria. First to calculate the circumference of the Earth.
* Eugammon (fl. 6th century BC), epic poet
* Idaeus of Cyrene, an ancient Olympic winner at foot-race. He won at 275 B.C.
* Lacydes (3rd century BC), philosopher
* Philostephanus, Hellenistic writer 
* Ptolemais, philosopher of music
* Simon of Cyrene, the man who helped carry the cross of Jesus
* Synesius (c. 373 – c. 414 AD), author and bishop of Ptolemais
* Theodorus (c. 5th century BC), mathematician
* Theaetetus of Cyrene, poet
===List of bishops===
Known bishops of the town include
*Saint Luke by tradition
*Theodoro (fl. 302)
*Filo I (fl. 370 circa)
*Filo II (fl.370 circa)
*Rufo (fl.449)
*Leontius (fl.600 circa)

No longer a residential bishopric, Cyrene is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see. The Greek Orthodox Church has also treated it as a titular see.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* Cyrenaica
* Cyrenaics
* List of Kings of Cyrene
* Priest of Apollo (Cyrene)
* Extramural Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone at Cyrene, Libya

==References==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
* Poli Fabrice, Vottéro Guy, &quot;De Cyrène à Catherine : trois mille ans de libyennes&quot;, Nancy, ADRA, 2005, 464p.
*
*Sachs, Gerd (2019). &quot;Alt-Thera und Kyrene – zwei verwandte griechische Städte. Mythos, Geschichte, Kultur.&quot; Antiquitates, vol 71. Hamburg: Verlag Dr. Kovač, .
*

; Excavation reports
*
*
*
*

==External links==

*Cyrene project summary at Global Heritage Fund
*Explore Cyrene with Google Earth on Global Heritage Network
*Cyrene and the Cyrenaica by Jona Lendering
*University of Pennsylvania Museum excavations at Cyrene
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="0" end="6" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763564" start="23" end="33" title="anglicization of names" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="37" end="43" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Kyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="52" end="65" title="ancient Greeks" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="66" end="72" title="Greek colonization" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="77" end="82" title="ancient Romans" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884402" start="83" end="87" title="Cities of the Roman Empire" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217718" start="105" end="112" title="Shahhat" label="Shahhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="129" end="134" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="138" end="150" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="171" end="181" title="Pentapolis (North Africa)" label="Pentapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="286" end="295" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q310342" start="328" end="340" title="Jebel Akhdar (Libya)" label="Jebel Akhdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740746" start="534" end="554" title="Necropolis of Cyrene" label="Necropolis of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="582" end="608" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q45826" start="635" end="658" title="Apollonia, Cyrenaica" label="Apollonia (Marsa Sousa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="716" end="722" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="741" end="747" title="etymology" label="etymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q393261" start="748" end="754" title="Cyrene (mythology)" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="836" end="841" title="Thera" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="850" end="859" title="Santorini" label="Santorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570745" start="1065" end="1073" title="silphium" label="silphium"/>
<link wikidata="Q750192" start="1213" end="1222" title="Cyrenaics" label="Cyrenaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="1226" end="1246" title="Greek philosophy" label="school of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189506" start="1284" end="1294" title="Aristippus" label="Aristippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="1310" end="1318" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1327" end="1342" title="Hellenistic Age" label="Hellenistic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="1386" end="1401" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1470" end="1476" title="Ancient Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1509" end="1523" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692775" start="1559" end="1578" title="Crete and Cyrenaica" label="Crete and Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="1643" end="1658" title="Diaspora revolt" label="Diaspora revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="1828" end="1858" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2039" end="2048" title="latinization of names" label="latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2061" end="2066" title="ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="2118" end="2137" title="folk etymology" label="attributed the name"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="2155" end="2165" title="Thessaly" label="Thessalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q393261" start="2175" end="2181" title="Cyrene (mythology)" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="2233" end="2240" title="sun god" label="sun god"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="2241" end="2247" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q124714" start="2306" end="2312" title="spring (hydrology)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326826" start="2500" end="2505" title="Richard Janko" label="Janko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456520" start="2678" end="2682" title="Libu" label="Libu"/>
<link wikidata="Q839034" start="2686" end="2697" title="Garamantes" label="Garamantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="2918" end="2930" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="3060" end="3067" title="Minoans" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="3072" end="3082" title="Mycenaeans" label="Mycenaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3105" end="3115" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="3163" end="3169" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3362" end="3372" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="3391" end="3397" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="3449" end="3455" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q393261" start="3487" end="3493" title="Cyrene (mythology)" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q392435" start="3550" end="3559" title="Aristaeus" label="Aristaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3602" end="3611" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="3624" end="3633" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3716" end="3722" title="Crete" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="3758" end="3764" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="3794" end="3799" title="Santorini" label="Thera"/>
<link wikidata="Q409834" start="3851" end="3859" title="Battus I of Cyrene" label="Battus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="3885" end="3901" title="Oracle of Delphi" label="Oracle of Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="4078" end="4083" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="4559" end="4565" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="4657" end="4662" title="Agora" label="Agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q12201915" start="4947" end="4958" title="Euesperides" label="Euesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788306" start="4964" end="4973" title="Taucheira" label="Taucheira"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="4982" end="4990" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788306" start="4995" end="5000" title="Tocra" label="Tocra"/>
<link wikidata="Q705386" start="5299" end="5308" title="Battus II of Cyrene" label="Battus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="5378" end="5389" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5463" end="5470" title="Adicran" label="Adicran"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="5517" end="5524" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q349291" start="5525" end="5531" title="Apries" label="Apries"/>
<link wikidata="Q673458" start="5676" end="5689" title="Arcesilaus II of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q807913" start="5786" end="5791" title="Barca (ancient city)" label="Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q811035" start="6054" end="6064" title="Battus III" label="Battus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256238" start="6217" end="6224" title="Demonax (lawmaker)" label="Demonax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160195" start="6228" end="6236" title="Mantinea" label="Mantinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q607608" start="6408" end="6414" title="phyle" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q788874" start="6476" end="6491" title="trial by combat" label="trial by combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q673451" start="6517" end="6531" title="Arcesilaus III of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="6654" end="6659" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181463" start="6748" end="6757" title="Pheretime" label="Pheretime"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="6774" end="6784" title="Achaemenid" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q717941" start="6804" end="6812" title="Aryandes" label="Aryandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12243758" start="7521" end="7535" title="Temple of Zeus, Cyrene" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422218" start="7537" end="7554" title="Temple of Demeter, Cyrene" label="Temple of Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570745" start="7693" end="7701" title="Silphium (antiquity)" label="silphium"/>
<link wikidata="Q323047" start="7734" end="7747" title="abortifacient" label="abortifacient"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="7999" end="8007" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q473353" start="8074" end="8079" title="Ammon" label="Ammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="8083" end="8088" title="Siwah" label="Siwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q673475" start="8092" end="8105" title="Arcesilaus IV" label="Arcesilaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="8134" end="8147" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="8169" end="8182" title="Ancient Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="8571" end="8579" title="Ancient Athens" label="Athenian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8599" end="8632" title="Wars_of_the_Delian_League#Egypt" label="defeated by the Persians in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="8839" end="8856" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418190" start="8858" end="8872" title="Spartan army" label="Spartan forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="8887" end="8893" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="8970" end="8977" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q475604" start="8983" end="8989" title="maritime pilot" label="pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="9214" end="9223" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723843" start="9264" end="9272" title="Messenia" label="Messenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q782278" start="9302" end="9311" title="Naupactus" label="Naupactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="9684" end="9692" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q187274" start="9702" end="9708" title="Gulf of Sidra" label="Syrtis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9796" end="9817" title="Altars of the Phileni" label="Altars of the Phileni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245502" start="9874" end="9892" title="Sallum" label="Catabathmus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9915" end="9923" title="Treasury of the Cyreneans" label="treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="9963" end="9982" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="10049" end="10054" title="Siwah" label="Siwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101932" start="10246" end="10253" title="medimni" label="medimni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11582" start="10279" end="10284" title="litre" label="litre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370184" start="10410" end="10417" title="Thibron (mercenary commander, died 322 BC)" label="Thibron"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="10887" end="10902" title="Ptolemy I Soter" label="Ptolemy I Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q975639" start="10938" end="10946" title="Ophellas" label="Ophellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="11232" end="11247" title="Ptolemaic kingdom" label="Ptolemaic realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271334" start="11255" end="11277" title="Treaty of Triparadisus" label="Treaty of Triparadisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312326" start="11484" end="11506" title="Agathocles of Syracuse" label="Agathocles of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q878392" start="11680" end="11685" title="Magas of Cyrene" label="Magas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="11769" end="11779" title="Ptolemy II" label="Ptolemy II"/>
<link wikidata="Q451066" start="11831" end="11836" title="Apama II" label="Apama"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="11857" end="11865" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211488" start="11871" end="11882" title="Antiochus I" label="Antiochus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330607" start="11948" end="11964" title="First Syrian War" label="First Syrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="12001" end="12010" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q878405" start="12152" end="12170" title="Demetrius the Fair" label="Demetrius the Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q40010" start="12194" end="12202" title="Berenice II of Egypt" label="Berenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39602" start="12294" end="12305" title="Ptolemy III" label="Ptolemy III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="12582" end="12589" title="Arcadia (region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122909360" start="12789" end="12809" title="Priest of Apollo (Cyrene)" label="priesthood of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350" start="12870" end="12882" title="Ptolemy VIII" label="Ptolemy VIII"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13230" end="13239" title="Caesareum, Cyrene" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="13295" end="13309" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3340" start="13512" end="13522" title="Ptolemy IX" label="Ptolemy IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q886894" start="13588" end="13601" title="Ptolemy Apion" label="Ptolemy Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="13837" end="13853" title="Deuterocanonical books" label="deuterocanonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q209748" start="13859" end="13870" title="2 Maccabees" label="2 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163861" start="13971" end="13986" title="Jason of Cyrene" label="Jason of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="14094" end="14102" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14132" end="14142" title="Nicocrates" label="Nicocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789092" start="14172" end="14192" title="Aretaphila of Cyrene" label="Aretaphila of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q242819" start="14258" end="14266" title="Lucullus" label="Lucullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="14525" end="14539" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q692775" start="14543" end="14562" title="Crete and Cyrenaica" label="Crete and Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454371" start="14948" end="14952" title="fisc" label="fisc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15010" end="15038" title="Early centers of Christianity#Cyrene" label="early centre of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q328739" start="15057" end="15062" title="Simon of Cyrene" label="Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="15084" end="15089" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="15097" end="15101" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="15215" end="15224" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="15339" end="15361" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="15376" end="15386" title="Saint Mark" label="Saint Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254" start="15480" end="15495" title="Diaspora revolt" label="Diaspora revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284490" start="15736" end="15749" title="Marcius Turbo" label="Marcius Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="15764" end="15784" title="Eusebius of Caesarea" label="Eusebius of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="15927" end="15934" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="16101" end="16109" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q587905" start="16158" end="16170" title="Panhellenion" label="Panhellenion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16396" end="16417" title="House of Jason Magnus" label="House of Jason Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="16513" end="16523" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q429466" start="16613" end="16623" title="Marmarica" label="Marmaritae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454593" start="16668" end="16683" title="Tenagino Probus" label="Tenagino Probus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46762" start="16715" end="16732" title="Claudius II" label="Claudius Gothicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="17079" end="17089" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="17133" end="17147" title="Libya Superior" label="Libya Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705108" start="17178" end="17195" title="Roman Martyrology" label="Roman Martyrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265674" start="17242" end="17267" title="persecution of Diocletian" label="persecution of Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348954" start="17465" end="17475" title="365 Crete earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q172198" start="17640" end="17660" title="Ammianus Marcellinus" label="Ammianus Marcellinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110359" start="17914" end="17932" title="Persecution of pagans under Theodosius I" label="Theodosian decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="18102" end="18110" title="Synesius" label="Synesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="18380" end="18390" title="Athanasius" label="Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18506" end="18513" title="Central Church, Cyrene" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18518" end="18529" title="East Church, Cyrene" label="East Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258045" start="18648" end="18673" title="Robber Council of Ephesus" label="Robber Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259657" start="18752" end="18761" title="List of Greek Orthodox Patriarchs of Alexandria" label="Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358257" start="18762" end="18784" title="Eulogius of Alexandria" label="Eulogius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="18816" end="18829" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="Arab conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q510721" start="19036" end="19045" title="Frederick William Beechey" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233896" start="19050" end="19065" title="Richard Brydges Beechey" label="Richard Beechey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="19203" end="19209" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994753" start="19263" end="19283" title="Robert Murdoch Smith" label="Robert Murdoch Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="19354" end="19368" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328095" start="19461" end="19475" title="Richard Norton (archaeologist)" label="Richard Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18352449" start="19544" end="19569" title="Italian invasion of Libya" label="Italian invasion of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19859" end="19874" title="Venus of Cyrene" label="Venus of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="20483" end="20489" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723095" start="20510" end="20527" title="Richard Goodchild" label="Richard Goodchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q487227" start="20907" end="20918" title="anastylosis" label="anastylosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="20946" end="20952" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="20953" end="20972" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558237" start="21005" end="21025" title="Global Heritage Fund" label="Global Heritage Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551649" start="21051" end="21078" title="Second University of Naples" label="Second University of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="21097" end="21102" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558237" start="21315" end="21318" title="Global Heritage Fund" label="GHF"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21376" end="21383" title="Greek theatre of Cyrene" label="theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q619242" start="21395" end="21414" title="Sanctuary of Apollo" label="Sanctuary of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="21425" end="21431" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q222384" start="21452" end="21484" title="List of World Heritage in Danger" label="List of World Heritage in Danger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217718" start="21572" end="21579" title="Shahhat" label="Shahhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="21592" end="21597" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22063" end="22068" title="Agora of Ancient Cyrene" label="Agora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22074" end="22095" title="House of Jason Magnus" label="House of Jason Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22143" end="22170" title="Stoa of Hermes and Heracles" label="Stoa of Hermes and Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22176" end="22185" title="Caesareum, Cyrene" label="Caesareum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22224" end="22236" title="Caravanserai, Cyrene" label="caravanserai"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974184" start="22458" end="22471" title="Greek Theatre of Cyrene" label="Greek Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="22477" end="22496" title="Sanctuary of Apollo, Cyrene" label="Sanctuary of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22506" end="22521" title="Baths of Trajan, Cyrene" label="Baths of Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22715" end="22727" title="Aqua Augusta, Cyrene" label="Aqua Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22738" end="22752" title="Baths of Paris" label="Baths of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22760" end="22774" title="Market Theatre (Cyrene)" label="Market Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22783" end="22798" title="Central Quarter, Cyrene" label="Central Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422218" start="23094" end="23129" title="Extramural Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone, Cyrene" label="Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740746" start="23135" end="23155" title="necropolis of Cyrene" label="necropolis of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119752" start="23359" end="23379" title="University of Urbino" label="University of Urbino"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="24005" end="24011" title="Greek temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="24015" end="24021" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="24129" end="24136" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="24155" end="24165" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="24409" end="24414" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="24415" end="24424" title="octastyle" label="octastyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60138" start="24425" end="24435" title="peripteral" label="peripteral"/>
<link wikidata="Q743919" start="24523" end="24532" title="crepidoma" label="crepidoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="24630" end="24644" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="24648" end="24655" title="Ancient Olympia" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="24664" end="24673" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="24677" end="24683" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q185600" start="24702" end="24709" title="pronaos" label="pronaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q571527" start="24740" end="24748" title="in antis" label="in antis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232034" start="24766" end="24778" title="opisthodomos" label="opisthodomos"/>
<link wikidata="Q827125" start="24811" end="24816" title="cella" label="cella"/>
<link wikidata="Q60138" start="24916" end="24926" title="peripteros" label="peripteros"/>
<link wikidata="Q46239" start="25215" end="25240" title="Statue of Zeus at Olympia" label="Statue of Zeus at Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="25470" end="25476" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="25888" end="25894" title="votive" label="votive"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="26033" end="26043" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="26044" end="26052" title="figurine" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q750192" start="27155" end="27164" title="Cyrenaics" label="Cyrenaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q839475" start="27192" end="27200" title="Socratic method" label="Socratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189506" start="27219" end="27229" title="Aristippus" label="Aristippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="27253" end="27261" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060" start="27376" end="27389" title="Michel Onfray" label="Michel Onfray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789092" start="27561" end="27581" title="Aretaphila of Cyrene" label="Aretaphila of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q262225" start="27596" end="27611" title="Arete of Cyrene" label="Arete of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q189506" start="27627" end="27637" title="Aristippus" label="Aristippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q750192" start="27691" end="27706" title="Cyrenaics" label="Cyrenaic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q284994" start="27710" end="27719" title="Carneades" label="Carneades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345153" start="27721" end="27737" title="Academic skepticism" label="Academic skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="27779" end="27790" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="27844" end="27865" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="27895" end="27902" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="27956" end="27963" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269322" start="27976" end="27986" title="Pythagoras (sculptor)" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="27989" end="28001" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="28074" end="28095" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28120" end="28146" title="History of geodesy#Hellenic world" label="circumference of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372356" start="28150" end="28158" title="Eugammon of Cyrene" label="Eugammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q386261" start="28272" end="28279" title="Lacydes of Cyrene" label="Lacydes"/>
<link wikidata="Q332744" start="28312" end="28326" title="Philostephanus" label="Philostephanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q525814" start="28350" end="28359" title="Ptolemais of Cyrene" label="Ptolemais"/>
<link wikidata="Q328739" start="28384" end="28399" title="Simon of Cyrene" label="Simon of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q357027" start="28447" end="28455" title="Synesius" label="Synesius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45829" start="28499" end="28508" title="Ptolemais (Cyrenaica)" label="Ptolemais"/>
<link wikidata="Q712328" start="28511" end="28520" title="Theodorus of Cyrene" label="Theodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16524026" start="28558" end="28578" title="Theaetetus of Cyrene" label="Theaetetus of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q128538" start="28642" end="28652" title="Saint Luke" label="Saint Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="28677" end="28680" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="28695" end="28698" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28840" end="28855" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217609" start="28861" end="28872" title="titular see" label="titular see"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="28878" end="28899" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="28968" end="28977" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q750192" start="28980" end="28989" title="Cyrenaics" label="Cyrenaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q882680" start="28992" end="29015" title="List of Kings of Cyrene" label="List of Kings of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q122909360" start="29018" end="29043" title="Priest of Apollo (Cyrene)" label="Priest of Apollo (Cyrene)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422218" start="29046" end="29109" title="Extramural Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone at Cyrene, Libya" label="Extramural Sanctuary of Demeter and Persephone at Cyrene, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558237" start="29526" end="29546" title="Global Heritage Fund" label="Global Heritage Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558237" start="29584" end="29607" title="Global Heritage Network" label="Global Heritage Network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85746" wikidata="Q216635" url="?curid=85746" title="Stoma">
<text>In botany, a stoma (: stomata, from Greek &quot;στόμα&quot;, &quot;mouth&quot;), also called a stomate (: stomates), is a pore found in the epidermis of leaves, stems, and other organs, that controls the rate of gas exchange between the internal air spaces of the leaf and the atmosphere. The pore is bordered by a pair of specialized parenchyma cells known as guard cells that regulate the size of the stomatal opening.

The term is usually used collectively to refer to the entire stomatal complex, consisting of the paired guard cells and the pore itself, which is referred to as the stomatal aperture. Air, containing oxygen, which is used in respiration, and carbon dioxide, which is used in photosynthesis, passes through stomata by gaseous diffusion. Water vapour diffuses through the stomata into the atmosphere as part of a process called transpiration.

Stomata are present in the sporophyte generation of the vast majority of land plants, with the exception of liverworts, as well as some mosses and hornworts. In vascular plants the number, size and distribution of stomata varies widely. Dicotyledons usually have more stomata on the lower surface of the leaves than the upper surface. Monocotyledons such as onion, oat and maize may have about the same number of stomata on both leaf surfaces. In plants with floating leaves, stomata may be found only on the upper epidermis and submerged leaves may lack stomata entirely. Most tree species have stomata only on the lower leaf surface. Leaves with stomata on both the upper and lower leaf surfaces are called &quot;amphistomatous&quot; leaves; leaves with stomata only on the lower surface are &quot;hypostomatous&quot;, and leaves with stomata only on the upper surface are epistomatous or &quot;hyperstomatous&quot;. Size varies across species, with end-to-end lengths ranging from 10 to 80 μm and width ranging from a few to 50 μm.

==Function==
===CO2 gain and water loss===
Carbon dioxide, a key reactant in photosynthesis, is present in the atmosphere at a concentration of about 400 ppm. Most plants require the stomata to be open during daytime. The air spaces in the leaf are saturated with water vapour, which exits the leaf through the stomata in a process known as transpiration. Therefore, plants cannot gain carbon dioxide without simultaneously losing water vapour.

===Alternative approaches===
Ordinarily, carbon dioxide is fixed to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) by the enzyme RuBisCO in mesophyll cells exposed directly to the air spaces inside the leaf. This exacerbates the transpiration problem for two reasons: first, RuBisCo has a relatively low affinity for carbon dioxide, and second, it fixes oxygen to RuBP, wasting energy and carbon in a process called photorespiration. For both of these reasons, RuBisCo needs high carbon dioxide concentrations, which means wide stomatal apertures and, as a consequence, high water loss.

Narrower stomatal apertures can be used in conjunction with an intermediary molecule with a high carbon dioxide affinity, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPcase). Retrieving the products of carbon fixation from PEPCase is an energy-intensive process, however. As a result, the PEPCase alternative is preferable only where water is limiting but light is plentiful, or where high temperatures increase the solubility of oxygen relative to that of carbon dioxide, magnifying RuBisCo&#x27;s oxygenation problem.

===C.A.M. plants===
A group of mostly desert plants called &quot;C.A.M.&quot; plants (crassulacean acid metabolism, after the family Crassulaceae, which includes the species in which the CAM process was first discovered) open their stomata at night (when water evaporates more slowly from leaves for a given degree of stomatal opening), use PEPcase to fix carbon dioxide and store the products in large vacuoles. The following day, they close their stomata and release the carbon dioxide fixed the previous night into the presence of RuBisCO. This saturates RuBisCO with carbon dioxide, allowing minimal photorespiration. This approach, however, is severely limited by the capacity to store fixed carbon in the vacuoles, so it is preferable only when water is severely limited.

===Opening and closing===

However, most plants do not have CAM and must therefore open and close their stomata during the daytime, in response to changing conditions, such as light intensity, humidity, and carbon dioxide concentration. When conditions are conducive to stomatal opening (e.g., high light intensity and high humidity), a proton pump drives protons (H+) from the guard cells. This means that the cells&#x27; electrical potential becomes increasingly negative. The negative potential opens potassium voltage-gated channels and so an uptake of potassium ions (K+) occurs. To maintain this internal negative voltage so that entry of potassium ions does not stop, negative ions balance the influx of potassium. In some cases, chloride ions enter, while in other plants the organic ion malate is produced in guard cells. This increase in solute concentration lowers the water potential inside the cell, which results in the diffusion of water into the cell through osmosis. This increases the cell&#x27;s volume and turgor pressure. Then, because of rings of cellulose microfibrils that prevent the width of the guard cells from swelling, and thus only allow the extra turgor pressure to elongate the guard cells, whose ends are held firmly in place by surrounding epidermal cells, the two guard cells lengthen by bowing apart from one another, creating an open pore through which gas can diffuse.

When the roots begin to sense a water shortage in the soil, abscisic acid (ABA) is released. ABA binds to receptor proteins in the guard cells&#x27; plasma membrane and cytosol, which first raises the pH of the cytosol of the cells and cause the concentration of free Ca2+ to increase in the cytosol due to influx from outside the cell and release of Ca2+ from internal stores such as the endoplasmic reticulum and vacuoles. This causes the chloride (Cl−) and organic ions to exit the cells. Second, this stops the uptake of any further K+ into the cells and, subsequently, the loss of K+. The loss of these solutes causes an increase in water potential, which results in the diffusion of water back out of the cell by osmosis. This makes the cell plasmolysed, which results in the closing of the stomatal pores.

Guard cells have more chloroplasts than the other epidermal cells from which guard cells are derived. Their function is controversial.

===Inferring stomatal behavior from gas exchange===
The degree of stomatal resistance can be determined by measuring leaf gas exchange of a leaf. The transpiration rate is dependent on the diffusion resistance provided by the stomatal pores and also on the humidity gradient between the leaf&#x27;s internal air spaces and the outside air. Stomatal resistance (or its inverse, stomatal conductance) can therefore be calculated from the transpiration rate and humidity gradient. This allows scientists to investigate how stomata respond to changes in environmental conditions, such as light intensity and concentrations of gases such as water vapor, carbon dioxide, and ozone. Evaporation (&quot;E&quot;) can be calculated as

: formula_1

where &quot;e&quot;i and &quot;e&quot;a are the partial pressures of water in the leaf and in the ambient air respectively, &quot;P&quot; is atmospheric pressure, and &quot;r&quot; is stomatal resistance.
The inverse of &quot;r&quot; is conductance to water vapor (&quot;g&quot;), so the equation can be rearranged to

: formula_2

and solved for &quot;g&quot;:

: formula_3

Photosynthetic CO2 assimilation (&quot;A&quot;) can be calculated from

: formula_4

where &quot;C&quot;a and &quot;C&quot;i are the atmospheric and sub-stomatal partial pressures of CO2 respectively. The rate of evaporation from a leaf can be determined using a photosynthesis system. These scientific instruments measure the amount of water vapour leaving the leaf and the vapor pressure of the ambient air. Photosynthetic systems may calculate water use efficiency (&quot;A&quot;/&quot;E&quot;), &quot;g&quot;, intrinsic water use efficiency (&quot;A&quot;/&quot;g&quot;), and &quot;C&quot;i. These scientific instruments are commonly used by plant physiologists to measure CO2 uptake and thus measure photosynthetic rate.

==Evolution==

There is little evidence of the evolution of stomata in the fossil record, but they had appeared in land plants by the middle of the Silurian period. They may have evolved by the modification of conceptacles from plants&#x27; alga-like ancestors.
However, the evolution of stomata must have happened at the same time as the waxy cuticle was evolving – these two traits together constituted a major advantage for early terrestrial plants.

==Development==
There are three major epidermal cell types which all ultimately derive from the outermost (L1) tissue layer of the shoot apical meristem, called protodermal cells: trichomes, pavement cells and guard cells, all of which are arranged in a non-random fashion.

An asymmetrical cell division occurs in protodermal cells resulting in one large cell that is fated to become a pavement cell and a smaller cell called a meristemoid that will eventually differentiate into the guard cells that surround a stoma. This meristemoid then divides asymmetrically one to three times before differentiating into a guard mother cell. The guard mother cell then makes one symmetrical division, which forms a pair of guard cells. Cell division is inhibited in some cells so there is always at least one cell between stomata.

Stomatal patterning is controlled by the interaction of many signal transduction components such as &quot;EPF&quot; (Epidermal Patterning Factor), &quot;ERL&quot; (ERecta Like) and &quot;YODA&quot; (a putative MAP kinase kinase kinase). Mutations in any one of the genes which encode these factors may alter the development of stomata in the epidermis. For example, a mutation in one gene causes more stomata that are clustered together, hence is called Too Many Mouths (&quot;TMM&quot;). Whereas, disruption of the &quot;SPCH&quot; (SPeecCHless) gene prevents stomatal development all together.  Inhibition of stomatal production can occur by the activation of EPF1, which activates TMM/ERL, which together activate YODA. YODA inhibits SPCH, causing SPCH activity to decrease, preventing asymmetrical cell division that initiates stomata formation. Stomatal development is also coordinated by the cellular peptide signal called stomagen, which signals the activation of the SPCH, resulting in increased number of stomata.

Environmental and hormonal factors can affect stomatal development. Light increases stomatal development in plants; while, plants grown in the dark have a lower amount of stomata. Auxin represses stomatal development by affecting their development at the receptor level like the ERL and TMM receptors. However, a low concentration of auxin allows for equal division of a guard mother cell and increases the chance of producing guard cells.

Most angiosperm trees have stomata only on their lower leaf surface. Poplars and willows have them on both surfaces. When leaves develop stomata on both leaf surfaces, the stomata on the lower surface tend to be larger and more numerous, but there can be a great degree of variation in size and frequency about species and genotypes. White ash and white birch leaves had fewer stomata but larger in size. On the other hand sugar maple and silver maple had small stomata that were more numerous.

== Types ==
Different classifications of stoma types exist. One that is widely used is based on the types that Julien Joseph Vesque introduced in 1889, was further developed by Metcalfe and Chalk, and later complemented by other authors. It is based on the size, shape and arrangement of the subsidiary cells that surround the two guard cells.
They distinguish for dicots: 
* (meaning &quot;star-celled&quot;) stomata have guard cells that are surrounded by at least five radiating cells forming a star-like circle. This is a rare type that can for instance be found in the family Ebenaceae.
* (meaning &quot;unequal celled&quot;) stomata have guard cells between two larger subsidiary cells and one distinctly smaller one. This type of stomata can be found in more than thirty dicot families, including Brassicaceae, Solanaceae, and Crassulaceae. It is sometimes called &quot;cruciferous type&quot;.
* (meaning &quot;irregular celled&quot;) stomata have guard cells that are surrounded by cells that have the same size, shape and arrangement as the rest of the epidermis cells. This type of stomata can be found in more than hundred dicot families such as Apocynaceae, Boraginaceae, Chenopodiaceae, and Cucurbitaceae. It is sometimes called &quot;ranunculaceous type&quot;.
* (meaning &quot;cross-celled&quot;) stomata have guard cells surrounded by two subsidiary cells, that each encircle one end of the opening and contact each other opposite to the middle of the opening. This type of stomata can be found in more than ten dicot families such as Caryophyllaceae and Acanthaceae. It is sometimes called &quot;caryophyllaceous type&quot;.
* stomata are bordered by just one subsidiary cell that differs from the surrounding epidermis cells, its length parallel to the stoma opening. This type occurs for instance in the Molluginaceae and Aizoaceae.
* (meaning &quot;parallel celled&quot;) stomata have one or more subsidiary cells parallel to the opening between the guard cells. These subsidiary cells may reach beyond the guard cells or not. This type of stomata can be found in more than hundred dicot families such as Rubiaceae, Convolvulaceae and Fabaceae. It is sometimes called &quot;rubiaceous type&quot;.

In monocots, several different types of stomata occur such as: 
* gramineous or graminoid (meaning &quot;grass-like&quot;) stomata have two guard cells surrounded by two lens-shaped subsidiary cells. The guard cells are narrower in the middle and bulbous on each end. This middle section is strongly thickened. The axis of the subsidiary cells are parallel stoma opening. This type can be found in monocot families including Poaceae and Cyperaceae.
* (meaning &quot;six-celled&quot;) stomata have six subsidiary cells around both guard cells, one at either end of the opening of the stoma, one adjoining each guard cell, and one between that last subsidiary cell and the standard epidermis cells. This type can be found in some monocot families.
* (meaning &quot;four-celled&quot;) stomata have four subsidiary cells, one on either end of the opening, and one next to each guard cell. This type occurs in many monocot families, but also can be found in some dicots, such as &quot;Tilia&quot; and several Asclepiadaceae.

In ferns, four different types are distinguished:
* stomata have two guard cells in one layer with only ordinary epidermis cells, but with two subsidiary cells on the outer surface of the epidermis, arranged parallel to the guard cells, with a pore between them, overlying the stoma opening.
* stomata have two guard cells that are entirely encircled by one continuous subsidiary cell (like a donut).
* stomata have two guard cells that are entirely encircled by one subsidiary cell that has not merged its ends (like a sausage).
* stomata have two guard cells that are largely encircled by one subsidiary cell, but also contact ordinary epidermis cells (like a U or horseshoe).
A catalogue of leaf epidermis prints showing stomata from a wide range of species can be found in Wikimedia commons https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Leaf_epidermis_and_stomata_prints

== Stomatal crypts ==
Stomatal crypts are sunken areas of the leaf epidermis which form a chamber-like structure that contains one or more stomata and sometimes trichomes or accumulations of wax. Stomatal crypts can be an adaption to drought and dry climate conditions when the stomatal crypts are very pronounced. However, dry climates are not the only places where they can be found. The following plants are examples of species with stomatal crypts or antechambers: &quot;Nerium oleander&quot;, conifers, &quot;Hakea&quot; and &quot;Drimys winteri&quot; which is a species of plant found in the cloud forest.

==Stomata as pathogenic pathways==
Stomata are holes in the leaf by which pathogens can enter unchallenged. However, stomata can sense the presence of some, if not all, pathogens. However, pathogenic bacteria applied to &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; plant leaves can release the chemical coronatine, which induce the stomata to reopen.
==Stomata and climate change==
===Response of stomata to environmental factors===
Photosynthesis, plant water transport (xylem) and gas exchange are regulated by stomatal function which is important in the functioning of plants.

Stomata are responsive to light with blue light being almost 10 times as effective as red light in causing stomatal response. Research suggests this is because the light response of stomata to blue light is independent of other leaf components like chlorophyll. Guard cell protoplasts swell under blue light provided there is sufficient availability of potassium. Multiple studies have found support that increasing potassium concentrations may increase stomatal opening in the mornings, before the photosynthesis process starts, but that later in the day sucrose plays a larger role in regulating stomatal opening. Zeaxanthin in guard cells acts as a blue light photoreceptor which mediates the stomatal opening. The effect of blue light on guard cells is reversed by green light, which isomerizes zeaxanthin.

Stomatal density and aperture (length of stomata) varies under a number of environmental factors such as atmospheric CO2 concentration, light intensity, air temperature and photoperiod (daytime duration).
Decreasing stomatal density is one way plants have responded to the increase in concentration of atmospheric CO2 ([CO2]atm). Although changes in [CO2]atm response is the least understood mechanistically, this stomatal response has begun to plateau where it is soon expected to impact transpiration and photosynthesis processes in plants.

Drought inhibits stomatal opening, but research on soybeans suggests moderate drought does not have a significant effect on stomatal closure of its leaves. There are different mechanisms of stomatal closure. Low humidity stresses guard cells causing turgor loss, termed hydropassive closure. Hydroactive closure is contrasted as the whole leaf affected by drought stress, believed to be most likely triggered by abscisic acid.

===Future adaptations during climate change===
It is expected that [CO2]atm will reach 500–1000 ppm by 2100. 96% of the past 400,000 years experienced below 280 ppm CO2. From this figure, it is highly probable that genotypes of today’s plants have diverged from their pre-industrial relatives.

The gene &quot;HIC&quot; (high carbon dioxide) encodes a negative regulator for the development of stomata in plants. Research into the &quot;HIC&quot; gene using&quot; Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; found no increase of stomatal development in the dominant allele, but in the ‘wild type’ recessive allele showed a large increase, both in response to rising CO2 levels in the atmosphere. These studies imply the plants response to changing CO2 levels is largely controlled by genetics.

===Agricultural implications===

The CO2 fertiliser effect has been greatly overestimated during Free-Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (FACE) experiments where results show increased CO2 levels in the atmosphere enhances photosynthesis, reduce transpiration, and increase water use efficiency (WUE). Increased biomass is one of the effects with simulations from experiments predicting a 5–20% increase in crop yields at 550 ppm of CO2. Rates of leaf photosynthesis were shown to increase by 30–50% in C3 plants, and 10–25% in C4 under doubled CO2 levels. The existence of a feedback mechanism results a phenotypic plasticity in response to [CO2]atm that may have been an adaptive trait in the evolution of plant respiration and function.

Predicting how stomata perform during adaptation is useful for understanding the productivity of plant systems for both natural and agricultural systems. Plant breeders and farmers are beginning to work together using evolutionary and participatory plant breeding to find the best suited species such as heat and drought resistant crop varieties that could naturally evolve to the change in the face of food security challenges.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="3" end="9" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="13" end="18" title="Stoma" label="stoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="22" end="29" title="Stoma" label="stomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="36" end="41" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="95" end="102" title="Stoma" label="stomate"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="106" end="114" title="Stoma" label="stomates"/>
<link wikidata="Q796482" start="140" end="149" title="Epidermis (botany)" label="epidermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146120" start="212" end="224" title="gas exchange" label="gas exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="335" end="345" title="Ground tissue#Parenchyma" label="parenchyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q241368" start="361" end="371" title="guard cell" label="guard cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="622" end="628" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="647" end="658" title="cellular respiration" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="664" end="678" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="697" end="711" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="747" end="756" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="758" end="770" title="Water vapour" label="Water vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="848" end="861" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q647173" start="891" end="901" title="sporophyte" label="sporophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="937" end="948" title="land plants" label="land plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q189808" start="972" end="982" title="Marchantiophyta" label="liverworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="1000" end="1006" title="mosses" label="mosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q191156" start="1011" end="1020" title="hornworts" label="hornworts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="1101" end="1112" title="Dicotyledon" label="Dicotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="1199" end="1212" title="Monocotyledon" label="Monocotyledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="1222" end="1227" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="1229" end="1232" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1237" end="1242" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="1857" end="1859" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1943" end="1957" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="1977" end="1991" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2140" end="2144" title="leaf" label="leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q190120" start="2164" end="2176" title="water vapour" label="water vapour"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="2241" end="2254" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q418860" start="2414" end="2439" title="ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate" label="ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422516" start="2461" end="2468" title="RuBisCO" label="RuBisCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2472" end="2481" title="mesophyll" label="mesophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q842275" start="2748" end="2764" title="photorespiration" label="photorespiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q908180" start="3042" end="3073" title="phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase" label="phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q858313" start="3517" end="3545" title="crassulacean acid metabolism" label="crassulacean acid metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q412272" start="4547" end="4558" title="proton pump" label="proton pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="4566" end="4572" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55451" start="4633" end="4653" title="electrical potential" label="electrical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="4767" end="4776" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190143" start="5006" end="5012" title="malate" label="malate"/>
<link wikidata="Q473195" start="5090" end="5105" title="water potential" label="water potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="5185" end="5192" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193135" start="5236" end="5251" title="osmotic pressure" label="turgor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q417913" start="5289" end="5301" title="microfibrils" label="microfibrils"/>
<link wikidata="Q796482" start="5485" end="5494" title="epidermis (botany)" label="epidermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332211" start="5679" end="5692" title="abscisic acid" label="abscisic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="5830" end="5837" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q473195" start="6257" end="6272" title="water potential" label="water potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="6338" end="6345" title="osmosis" label="osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q898668" start="6367" end="6378" title="plasmolysed" label="plasmolysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="6719" end="6732" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="6758" end="6767" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="6826" end="6834" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618701" start="6946" end="6966" title="stomatal conductance" label="stomatal conductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="7238" end="7243" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187912" start="7947" end="7968" title="photosynthesis system" label="photosynthesis system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551340" start="8131" end="8151" title="water use efficiency" label="water use efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158405" start="8621" end="8633" title="conceptacles" label="conceptacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146493" start="8755" end="8762" title="Plant cuticle" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207604" start="8996" end="9017" title="shoot apical meristem" label="shoot apical meristem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125215" start="9045" end="9053" title="trichome" label="trichome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874410" start="9056" end="9070" title="pavement cells" label="pavement cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="9749" end="9768" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714442" start="9898" end="9922" title="MAP kinase kinase kinase" label="MAP kinase kinase kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q190022" start="10892" end="10897" title="Auxin" label="Auxin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11158" end="11174" title="angiosperm trees" label="angiosperm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="11222" end="11229" title="Populus" label="Poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="11234" end="11241" title="willows" label="willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193369" start="11487" end="11496" title="Fraxinus americana" label="White ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q76971" start="11501" end="11512" title="white birch" label="white birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q214733" start="11576" end="11587" title="sugar maple" label="sugar maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q158301" start="11592" end="11604" title="silver maple" label="silver maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367321" start="11760" end="11780" title="Julien Joseph Vesque" label="Julien Joseph Vesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8316" start="12014" end="12020" title="Dicotyledon" label="dicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q156669" start="12230" end="12239" title="Ebenaceae" label="Ebenaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="12453" end="12465" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134172" start="12467" end="12477" title="Solanaceae" label="Solanaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155938" start="12483" end="12495" title="Crassulaceae" label="Crassulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q173756" start="12806" end="12817" title="Apocynaceae" label="Apocynaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26568" start="12819" end="12831" title="Boraginaceae" label="Boraginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155931" start="12833" end="12847" title="Chenopodiaceae" label="Chenopodiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="12853" end="12866" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25995" start="13200" end="13215" title="Caryophyllaceae" label="Caryophyllaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53475" start="13220" end="13231" title="Acanthaceae" label="Acanthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q144259" start="13472" end="13485" title="Molluginaceae" label="Molluginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156219" start="13490" end="13499" title="Aizoaceae" label="Aizoaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q156569" start="13774" end="13783" title="Rubiaceae" label="Rubiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q145777" start="13785" end="13799" title="Convolvulaceae" label="Convolvulaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q44448" start="13804" end="13812" title="Fabaceae" label="Fabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78961" start="13870" end="13878" title="Monocotyledon" label="monocots"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="14292" end="14299" title="Poaceae" label="Poaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="14304" end="14314" title="Cyperaceae" label="Cyperaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="14847" end="14852" title="Tilia" label="Tilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8206302" start="14871" end="14885" title="Asclepiadaceae" label="Asclepiadaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="14891" end="14895" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074799" start="15953" end="15956" title="epicuticular wax" label="wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q155833" start="16231" end="16258" title="Nerium" label="&amp;quot;Nerium oleander&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q775529" start="16298" end="16312" title="Drimys winteri" label="Drimys winteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q214469" start="16360" end="16372" title="cloud forest" label="cloud forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="16595" end="16618" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="&amp;quot;Arabidopsis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172198" start="16657" end="16667" title="coronatine" label="coronatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="16787" end="16801" title="Photosynthesis" label="Photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q122811" start="16826" end="16831" title="xylem" label="xylem"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="16972" end="16982" title="Visible spectrum" label="blue light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="17021" end="17030" title="Red" label="red light"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="17184" end="17195" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126500" start="17208" end="17219" title="protoplasts" label="protoplasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="17288" end="17297" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="17491" end="17498" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q169337" start="17551" end="17561" title="Zeaxanthin" label="Zeaxanthin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216635" start="17747" end="17763" title="Stomatal density" label="Stomatal density"/>
<link wikidata="Q167980" start="18236" end="18249" title="transpiration" label="transpiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q844863" start="18541" end="18547" title="turgor" label="turgor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332211" start="18703" end="18716" title="abscisic acid" label="abscisic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="18934" end="18942" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="19183" end="19203" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="19268" end="19274" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="19299" end="19315" title="recessive allele" label="recessive allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386667" start="19594" end="19628" title="Free-air concentration enrichment" label="Free-Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551340" start="19766" end="19786" title="Water-use efficiency" label="water use efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="19804" end="19811" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q286954" start="19995" end="19997" title="C3 carbon fixation" label="C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q283604" start="20020" end="20022" title="C4 carbon fixation" label="C4"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="20068" end="20086" title="feedback mechanism" label="feedback mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q295130" start="20097" end="20118" title="phenotypic plasticity" label="phenotypic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20365" end="20385" title="agricultural systems" label="agricultural systems"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85747" wikidata="Q550046" url="?curid=85747" title="Reduced mass">
<text>In physics, reduced mass is a measure of the effective inertial mass of a system with two or more particles when the particles are interacting with each other. Reduced mass allows the two-body problem to be solved as if it were a one-body problem. Note, however, that the mass determining the gravitational force is &quot;not&quot; reduced. In the computation, one mass &quot;can&quot; be replaced with the reduced mass, if this is compensated by replacing the other mass with the sum of both masses. The reduced mass is frequently denoted by formula_1 (mu), although the standard gravitational parameter is also denoted by formula_1 (as are a number of other physical quantities). It has the dimensions of mass, and SI unit kg.

Reduced mass is particularly useful in classical mechanics.

== Equation ==

Given two bodies, one with mass &quot;m&quot;1 and the other with mass &quot;m&quot;2, the equivalent one-body problem, with the position of one body with respect to the other as the unknown, is that of a single body of mass
formula_3
where the force on this mass is given by the force between the two bodies.

=== Properties ===

The reduced mass is always less than or equal to the mass of each body:
formula_4
and has the reciprocal additive property:
formula_5
which by re-arrangement is equivalent to half of the harmonic mean.

In the special case that formula_6:
formula_7

If formula_8, then formula_9.

== Derivation ==

The equation can be derived as follows.

=== Newtonian mechanics ===
Using Newton&#x27;s second law, the force exerted by a body (particle 2) on another body (particle 1) is:
formula_10

The force exerted by particle 1 on particle 2 is:
formula_11

According to Newton&#x27;s third law, the force that particle 2 exerts on particle 1 is equal and opposite to the force that particle 1 exerts on particle 2:
formula_12

Therefore:
formula_13

The relative acceleration arel between the two bodies is given by:
formula_14

Note that (since the derivative is a linear operator) the relative acceleration formula_15 is equal to the acceleration of the separation formula_16 between the two particles.
formula_17

This simplifies the description of the system to one force (since formula_18), one coordinate formula_16, and one mass formula_20. Thus we have reduced our problem to a single degree of freedom, and we can conclude that particle 1 moves with respect to the position of particle 2 as a single particle of mass equal to the reduced mass, formula_20.

=== Lagrangian mechanics ===

Alternatively, a Lagrangian description of the two-body problem gives a Lagrangian of
formula_22
where formula_23 is the position vector of mass formula_24 (of particle &quot;formula_25&quot;). The potential energy &quot;V&quot; is a function as it is only dependent on the absolute distance between the particles. If we define 
formula_26
and let the centre of mass coincide with our origin in this reference frame, i.e. 
formula_27
then
formula_28

Then substituting above gives a new Lagrangian
formula_29
where
formula_30
is the reduced mass. Thus we have reduced the two-body problem to that of one body.

== Applications ==

Reduced mass can be used in a multitude of two-body problems, where classical mechanics is applicable.

=== Moment of inertia of two point masses in a line ===

In a system with two point masses formula_31 and formula_32 such that they are co-linear, the two distances formula_33 and formula_34 to the rotation axis may be found with 
formula_35
formula_36
where formula_37 is the sum of both distances formula_38.

This holds for a rotation around the center of mass.
The moment of inertia around this axis can be then simplified to
formula_39

=== Collisions of particles ===

In a collision with a coefficient of restitution &quot;e&quot;, the change in kinetic energy can be written as 
formula_40
where &quot;v&quot;rel is the relative velocity of the bodies before collision.

For typical applications in nuclear physics, where one particle&#x27;s mass is much larger than the other the reduced mass can be approximated as the smaller mass of the system. The limit of the reduced mass formula as one mass goes to infinity is the smaller mass, thus this approximation is used to ease calculations, especially when the larger particle&#x27;s exact mass is not known.

=== Motion of two massive bodies under their gravitational attraction ===

In the case of the gravitational potential energy 
formula_41
we find that the position of the first body with respect to the second is governed by the same differential equation as the position of a body with the reduced mass orbiting a body with a mass (M) equal to the one particular sum equal to the sum of these two masses , because
formula_42
but all those other pairs whose sum is M would have the wrong product of their masses.

=== Non-relativistic quantum mechanics ===

Consider the electron (mass &quot;m&quot;e) and proton (mass &quot;m&quot;p) in the hydrogen atom. They orbit each other about a common centre of mass, a two body problem. To analyze the motion of the electron, a one-body problem, the reduced mass replaces the electron mass
formula_43

This idea is used to set up the Schrödinger equation for the hydrogen atom.

== See also ==

* Parallel (operator) - the general operation, of which reduced mass is just one case
* Center-of-momentum frame
* Momentum conservation
* Harmonic oscillator
* Chirp mass, a relativistic equivalent used in the post-Newtonian expansion

== References ==

== External links ==

* &quot;Reduced Mass&quot; on HyperPhysics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3" end="10" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q550046" start="12" end="24" title="Reduced mass" label="reduced mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="55" end="68" title="inertial mass" label="inertial mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="74" end="107" title="two-body problem" label="system with two or more particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="230" end="246" title="one-body problem" label="one-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="293" end="312" title="gravitational force" label="gravitational force"/>
<link wikidata="Q9902" start="554" end="556" title="Mu (letter)" label="mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q579338" start="572" end="604" title="standard gravitational parameter" label="standard gravitational parameter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="642" end="679" title="Mu (letter)#Physics and engineering" label="a number of other physical quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q217113" start="693" end="703" title="dimensional analysis" label="dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="717" end="724" title="SI unit" label="SI unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="769" end="788" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188347" start="1325" end="1338" title="harmonic mean" label="harmonic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="1512" end="1536" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s second law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s second law"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="1699" end="1722" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s third law" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s third law"/>
<link wikidata="Q324669" start="2597" end="2607" title="Lagrangian mechanics" label="Lagrangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165618" start="3629" end="3646" title="moment of inertia" label="moment of inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143011" start="3757" end="3783" title="coefficient of restitution" label="coefficient of restitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q238053" start="3927" end="3936" title="collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="4897" end="4905" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="4932" end="4938" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="4968" end="4981" title="hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="5203" end="5223" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051612" start="5266" end="5285" title="Parallel (operator)" label="Parallel (operator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639491" start="5352" end="5376" title="Center-of-momentum frame" label="Center-of-momentum frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="5379" end="5400" title="Momentum conservation" label="Momentum conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190070" start="5403" end="5422" title="Harmonic oscillator" label="Harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16916558" start="5425" end="5435" title="Chirp mass" label="Chirp mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002299" start="5475" end="5499" title="post-Newtonian expansion" label="post-Newtonian expansion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85748" wikidata="Q1460885" url="?curid=85748" title="Royal Society of Arts">
<text>The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, commonly known as the Royal Society of Arts (RSA), is an organisation that champions innovation and progress across a multitude of sectors by fostering creativity, social progress, and sustainable development. Through its extensive network of changemakers, thought leadership, and projects, the RSA seeks to drive transformative change, enabling “people, places, and the planet to thrive in harmony.” Committed to social change and creating progress, the RSA embodies a philosophy that values the intersection of arts, industry, and societal well-being to address contemporary challenges and enrich communities worldwide.

From its &quot;beginnings in a coffee house in the mid-eighteenth century&quot;, the RSA, which began as a UK institution, is now an international society for the improvement of &quot;everything and anything&quot;. An &quot;ambitious&quot; organisation, the RSA has &quot;evolved and adapted, constantly reinventing itself to keep in step with changing times&quot;. This journey reflects its commitment to &quot;social reform and competing visions of a better world&quot;.

Notable Fellows (before 1914, Members) include Charles Dickens, Benjamin Franklin, Stephen Hawking, Karl Marx, Adam Smith, Marie Curie, Nelson Mandela, David Attenborough, Judi Dench, William Hogarth, John Diefenbaker, and Tim Berners-Lee. Today, the RSA has fellows elected from 80 countries worldwide.

==History==

Founded in 1754 by William Shipley as the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce, it was granted a Royal Charter in 1847, and the right to use the term &quot;Royal&quot; in its name by King Edward VII in 1908. Members of the society became known as &#x27;Fellows&#x27; from 1914.

In the nineteenth century, The Great Exhibition of the Works of Industry of All Nations was organised by Prince Albert, Henry Cole, Francis Henry, George Wallis, Charles Dilke and other members of the society as a celebration of modern industrial technology and design.

In September 2023, RSA workers voted to strike for the first time in the organisation&#x27;s 270 year history, saying management had entered into pay negotiations in &quot;bad faith&quot;.

==Leadership==
The RSA&#x27;s patron is Anne, Princess Royal (who replaced her father, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, in 2011), its chairman is Tim Eyles, and its chief executive since September 2021 is former Bank of England Chief Economist Andy Haldane.

===Presidents===
==Fellowship==

Fellowship is granted to applicants &quot;who are aligned with the RSA&#x27;s vision and share in our values.&quot; Some prospective fellows are approached by the RSA and invited to join in recognition of their work; some are nominated or &quot;fast-tracked&quot; by existing fellows and RSA staff, or by partner organisations such as the Churchill Fellowship; others make their own applications with accompanied references, which are reviewed by a formal admissions panel consisting of RSA trustees and fellowship councillors. 

Fellows of the RSA are entitled to use the post-nominal letters FRSA. They also gain access to the RSA Library and to other premises in central London. Fellows pay an annual charitable subscription to the RSA. Alongside this, all new Fellows pay a one-off registration fee.

==Prizes==

Originally modelled on the Dublin Society for improving Husbandry, Manufacturers and other Useful Arts, the RSA, from its foundation, offered &quot;prizes&quot; through a Premium Award Scheme that continued for 100 years. Medals and, in some cases, money were awarded to individuals who achieved success in published challenges within the categories of Agriculture, Polite Arts, Manufacture, Colonies and Trade, Chemistry and Mechanics. Successful submission included agricultural improvements in the cultivation of crops and reforestation, devising new forms of machinery, including an extendable ladder to aid firefighting that has remained in use relatively unchanged, and artistic skill, through submissions by young students, many of whom developed into famous artists such as Edwin Landseer who at the age of 10 was awarded a silver medal for his drawing of a dog.

The RSA originally specifically precluded premiums for patented solutions. Today the RSA continues to offer premiums.

In 1823, Augustus Siebe won the Vulcan medal from the Royal Society of Arts for an improved screw threading tool.&lt;ref name=&quot;gracesguide/Augustus-Siebe&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

The RSA awards three medals – the Albert Medal, the Benjamin Franklin Medal, and the Bicentenary Medal. Medal winners have included Nelson Mandela, Sir Frank Whittle, and Professor Stephen Hawking.

=== Royal Designers for Industry ===
In 1936, the RSA awarded the first distinctions of Royal Designers for Industry (RDI or HonRDI), reserved for &quot;those very few who in the judgment of their peers have achieved &#x27;sustained excellence in aesthetic and efficient design for industry.

In 1937, &quot;The Faculty of Royal Designers for Industry&quot; was established as an association with the object of &quot;furthering excellence in design and its application to industrial purposes&quot;: membership of the Faculty is automatic for (and exclusive to) all RDIs and HonRDIs. The Faculty currently has 120 Royal Designers (RDI) and 45 Honorary Royal Designers (non-British citizens who are awarded the accolade of HonRDI): the number of designers who may hold the distinction of RDI at any one time is strictly limited.

The Faculty consists of practitioners from fields as disparate as engineering, graphics, interaction, product, furniture, fashion, interiors, landscape, and urban design. Past and present members include Eric Gill, Enid Marx, Sir Frank Whittle, Sir Jonathan Ive, Dame Vivienne Westwood, Sir James Dyson, Sir Tim Berners-Lee, Manolo Blahnik, Naoto Fukasawa, Rei Kawakubo, Issey Miyake, Dieter Rams, Sergio Pininfarina, Alvar Aalto, Vico Magistretti, Walter Gropius, Charles Eames, Richard Buckminster Fuller, Saul Bass, Raymond Loewy, George Nelson, Paul Rand, Carlo Scarpa, Vuokko Nurmesniemi, Massimo Vignelli, Yohji Yamamoto, Peter Zumthor, and more.

==Activities==
In Great Britain and Ireland, the RSA offers regional activities to encourage Fellows to address local topics of interest and to connect with other Fellows in their locality. The British Regions are: London, Central, North, Scotland, South East, South West, Wales and, Ireland. The RSA has a presence around the world under its RSA Global scheme with a notable presence in Australia, New Zealand and the United States.

===Events===

The RSA&#x27;s public events programme is a key part of its charitable mission to make world-changing ideas and debate freely available to all. Over 100 keynote lectures, panel discussions, debates, and documentary screenings are held each year, many of which are live-streamed over the web. Events are free and open to the public, and mp3 audio files and videos are made available on the RSA&#x27;s website and YouTube page.

Speakers on the RSA&#x27;s stage have included Ken Robinson, Al Gore, Sir David Attenborough, Alain de Botton, Michael Sandel, Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Martha Nussbaum, Desmond Tutu, Steven Pinker, Susan Cain, Dan Pink, Dan Ariely, Brene Brown, Slavoj Zizek, David Cameron, Yuval Noah Harari and Dambisa Moyo.

The choice of speaker for the recent annual Presidential lecture has been a matter of interest in the press. Danish professor Björn Lomborg, was chosen; his latest book, &quot;Cool It&quot;, suggests that the imminent demise of polar bears is a myth. As president of the RSA, Prince Philip&#x27;s first choice of speaker was Ian Plimer, professor of mineral geology at Adelaide University, but this was rejected as too controversial, as Plimer argues that the theory of Anthropogenic Global Warming is unproven.

On 14 January 2010, the RSA in partnership with Arts Council England hosted a one-day conference in London called &quot;State of the Arts&quot;. A number of speakers from various disciplines from art to government gathered to talk about the state of the arts industry in the United Kingdom. Notable speakers included Jeremy Hunt MP, Shadow Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, and his counterpart, Ben Bradshaw MP, who was then the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.

====RSA Animate (animation series)====
Excerpts from the events programme form the basis for the 10-minute whiteboard animations as shown on the theRSAorg YouTube channel. The series was created as a way of making important, socially-beneficial ideas as accessible, clear, engaging and universal as possible. The series is produced and audio-edited at the RSA, and the animations are created by RSA Fellow Andrew Park at Cognitive.

The first 14 of these had gained 46 million views as of 2011, making it the no.1 nonprofit YouTube channel worldwide. The first animation in the RSA Animate series was based on Renata Salecl&#x27;s speech delivered for RSA on her book about choice.

===Projects===

The society offered the first national public examinations in 1882 that led to the formation of the RSA Examinations Board now included in the Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations Board.

In 1876, a predecessor of the Royal College of Music, the &quot;National Training School for Music&quot;, was founded by the RSA.

The RSA devised a scheme for commemorating the links between famous people and buildings, by placing plaques on the walls – these continue today as &quot;blue plaques&quot; which have been administered by a range of government bodies. The first of these plaques was, in fact, of red terracotta erected outside a former residence of Lord Byron (since demolished). The society erected 36 plaques until, in 1901, responsibility for them was transferred to the London County Council (which changed the colour of the plaques to the current blue) and, later, the Greater London Council (the G.L.C.) and, most recently, English Heritage. Similar schemes are now operated in all the constituent countries of the United Kingdom.

In 1929, the society purchased the entire village of West Wycombe. After extensive repairs, the village was legally conveyed by deed to the National Trust.

During the 1980s, the RSA worked with the Comino Foundation and established a Comino Fellowship Committee &#x27;to change the cultural attitude to industry from one of lack of interest or dislike to one of concern and esteem&#x27;. This eventually led to a joint government/industry initiative to promote 1986 as &quot;Industry Year&quot;, with the RSA and the Comino Foundation providing core funding of £250,000 – which persuaded the Confederation of British Industry to raise £1 million and government departments to provide £3 million.

In July 2008, the RSA became a sponsor of an academy in Tipton, The RSA Academy, which opened in September 2008. A New building for the school was completed in September 2010. In 2021 it was announced that the school would no longer be associated with the RSA. Projects include Arts and Ecology, Citizen Power, Connected Communities, Design and Society, Education, Public Services, Social Brain, and Technology in a Cold Climate. There are six schools in the RSA Family of Academies, all in the West Midlands, including Whitley Academy. The former RSA Academy in Tipton was also a member, until its disassociation in 2021.

Past projects include delivering fresh drinking water to the developing world, rethinking intellectual property from first principles to produce a Charter (published as the Adelphi Charter), investigating schemes to manage international migration and exploring the feasibility of a UK-wide personal carbon trading system. It still promotes the practice of inclusive design, and is working with artists to communicate ideas about environmental sustainability (for example, through one of the RSA&#x27;s past projects, WEEE Man, and currently through the Arts and Ecology project).

The RSA has been home to TEDxLambeth, a TEDx conference based in Lambeth, since October 2019.

==RSA House==

The RSA moved to its current home in 1774. The House, situated in John Adam Street, near the Strand in central London, had been purpose-designed by the Adam Brothers (James Adam and Robert Adam) as part of their innovative Adelphi scheme. The original building (6–8 John Adam Street) includes the Great Room, which features a magnificent sequence of paintings by Irish artist James Barry titled &quot;The Progress of Human Knowledge and Culture&quot; and portraits of the society&#x27;s first and second presidents, painted by Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds respectively. On the RSA building&#x27;s rear frieze, the words &quot;The Royal Society of Arts&quot; are displayed (see photograph at right), although its full name is &quot;The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce&quot;.

The RSA has expanded into adjacent buildings, and now includes 2 and 4 John Adam Street and 18 Adam Street. The first occupant of 18 Adam Street was the Adelphi Tavern, which is mentioned in Dickens&#x27;s &quot;The Pickwick Papers&quot;. The former private dining room of the Tavern contains a magnificent Adam ceiling with painted roundels by the school of Kauffman and Zucchi.

A major refurbishment in 2012 by Matthew Lloyd Architects won a RIBA London Award in 2013, and a RIBA English Heritage Award for Sustaining the Historic Environment, also in 2013.

==Associated organisations==
The origin of London&#x27;s Royal Academy of Arts lies in an attempt in 1755 by members of the RSA (then simply known as the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce), principally the sculptor Henry Cheere, to found an autonomous academy of arts to teach painting and sculpture. Prior to this a number of artists were members of the RSA, including Cheere and William Hogarth, or were involved in small-scale private art academies, such as the St Martin&#x27;s Lane Academy. Although Cheere&#x27;s attempt failed, the eventual charter, called an &#x27;Instrument&#x27;, used to establish the Royal Academy of Arts over a decade later was almost identical to that drawn up by Cheere and the RSA in 1755. The RSA also hosted the first &quot;exhibition of contemporary art&quot; in 1760. Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds were among those who exhibited at this first exhibition, and were subsequently founder members of the Royal Academy of Arts in 1768.

An 1852 photography exhibition led to the creation of the Photographic Society of London in 1853.

==Arms==

==See also==
* First Exhibition (1760)
* List of fellows of the Royal Society of Arts
* Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce

==References==
==Further reading==
* Wood, Henry Trueman. &quot;A history of the Royal Society of Arts&quot; (London: Murray, 1913).
* Lloyd, Matthew and Schilling, Mikael. &quot;The Royal Society of Arts&quot;, Journal of Architectural Conservation (Routledge, Taylor &amp; Francis Group, 2014)

==External links==
*Journal of the Society of Arts (1783–1843)
*Journal of the Society of Arts (1852–1908)
*Journal of the Royal Society of Arts (1908–1987)
*RSA Journal (1987–2019) ()</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="4" end="74" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="98" end="119" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="121" end="124" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="1220" end="1235" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="1237" end="1254" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="1256" end="1271" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="1273" end="1282" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="1284" end="1294" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="1296" end="1307" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="1309" end="1323" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="1325" end="1343" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q28054" start="1345" end="1355" title="Judi Dench" label="Judi Dench"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="1357" end="1372" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="1374" end="1390" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="1396" end="1411" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018398" start="1510" end="1525" title="William Shipley" label="William Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118864" start="1533" end="1597" title="Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce" label="Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="1616" end="1629" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="1707" end="1717" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="1825" end="1845" title="The Great Exhibition" label="The Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="1903" end="1916" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q537906" start="1918" end="1928" title="Henry Cole (inventor)" label="Henry Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545846" start="1945" end="1958" title="George Wallis" label="George Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q338188" start="1960" end="1973" title="Sir Charles Dilke, 1st Baronet" label="Charles Dilke"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="2034" end="2044" title="Industrial sector" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q151754" start="2299" end="2319" title="Anne, Princess Royal" label="Anne, Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="2346" end="2378" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2406" end="2415" title="Tim Eyles" label="Tim Eyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="2472" end="2487" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760755" start="2504" end="2516" title="Andy Haldane" label="Andy Haldane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026069" start="2891" end="2911" title="Churchill Fellowship" label="Churchill Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330404" start="3125" end="3145" title="post-nominal letters" label="post-nominal letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q934417" start="3396" end="3471" title="Royal Dublin Society" label="Dublin Society for improving Husbandry, Manufacturers and other Useful Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q328369" start="4151" end="4165" title="Edwin Landseer" label="Edwin Landseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="4296" end="4302" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q76692" start="4369" end="4383" title="Augustus Siebe" label="Augustus Siebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="4414" end="4435" title="Royal Society of Arts" label="Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710826" start="4576" end="4588" title="Albert Medal (RSA)" label="Albert Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q817363" start="4594" end="4617" title="Benjamin Franklin Medal (Royal Society of Arts)" label="Benjamin Franklin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903550" start="4627" end="4644" title="Bicentenary Medal of the Royal Society of Arts" label="Bicentenary Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="4674" end="4688" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="4694" end="4707" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="4723" end="4738" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445914" start="4829" end="4857" title="Royal Designers for Industry" label="Royal Designers for Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q551426" start="5773" end="5782" title="Eric Gill" label="Eric Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378882" start="5784" end="5793" title="Enid Marx" label="Enid Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q312547" start="5799" end="5812" title="Frank Whittle" label="Frank Whittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164750" start="5818" end="5830" title="Jonathan Ive" label="Jonathan Ive"/>
<link wikidata="Q158067" start="5837" end="5854" title="Vivienne Westwood" label="Vivienne Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346101" start="5860" end="5871" title="James Dyson" label="James Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="5877" end="5892" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q334412" start="5894" end="5908" title="Manolo Blahnik" label="Manolo Blahnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q636724" start="5910" end="5924" title="Naoto Fukasawa" label="Naoto Fukasawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q268033" start="5926" end="5938" title="Rei Kawakubo" label="Rei Kawakubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q469027" start="5940" end="5952" title="Issey Miyake" label="Issey Miyake"/>
<link wikidata="Q76427" start="5954" end="5965" title="Dieter Rams" label="Dieter Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q286469" start="5967" end="5985" title="Sergio Pininfarina" label="Sergio Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="5987" end="5998" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362985" start="6000" end="6016" title="Vico Magistretti" label="Vico Magistretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q61071" start="6018" end="6032" title="Walter Gropius" label="Walter Gropius"/>
<link wikidata="Q170411" start="6034" end="6047" title="Charles Eames" label="Charles Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="6049" end="6075" title="Richard Buckminster Fuller" label="Richard Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q536884" start="6077" end="6086" title="Saul Bass" label="Saul Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q435509" start="6088" end="6101" title="Raymond Loewy" label="Raymond Loewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507993" start="6103" end="6116" title="George Nelson (designer)" label="George Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q468160" start="6118" end="6127" title="Paul Rand" label="Paul Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q51137" start="6129" end="6141" title="Carlo Scarpa" label="Carlo Scarpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381110" start="6143" end="6161" title="Vuokko Nurmesniemi" label="Vuokko Nurmesniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317903" start="6163" end="6179" title="Massimo Vignelli" label="Massimo Vignelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q707890" start="6181" end="6195" title="Yohji Yamamoto" label="Yohji Yamamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q123179" start="6197" end="6210" title="Peter Zumthor" label="Peter Zumthor"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="7084" end="7091" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q718012" start="7146" end="7158" title="Ken Robinson (educationalist)" label="Ken Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="7160" end="7167" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="7173" end="7191" title="David Attenborough" label="David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q123273" start="7193" end="7208" title="Alain de Botton" label="Alain de Botton"/>
<link wikidata="Q381044" start="7210" end="7224" title="Michael Sandel" label="Michael Sandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q333521" start="7226" end="7247" title="Nassim Nicholas Taleb" label="Nassim Nicholas Taleb"/>
<link wikidata="Q235470" start="7249" end="7264" title="Martha Nussbaum" label="Martha Nussbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="7266" end="7278" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="7280" end="7293" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036370" start="7295" end="7305" title="Susan Cain" label="Susan Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q978171" start="7307" end="7315" title="Dan Pink" label="Dan Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q731905" start="7317" end="7327" title="Dan Ariely" label="Dan Ariely"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961808" start="7329" end="7340" title="Brene Brown" label="Brene Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q184750" start="7342" end="7354" title="Slavoj Zizek" label="Slavoj Zizek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="7356" end="7369" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484404" start="7371" end="7388" title="Yuval Noah Harari" label="Yuval Noah Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q466993" start="7393" end="7405" title="Dambisa Moyo" label="Dambisa Moyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q318511" start="7534" end="7547" title="Björn Lomborg" label="Björn Lomborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q945385" start="7733" end="7743" title="Ian Plimer" label="Ian Plimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400795" start="7969" end="7989" title="Arts Council England" label="Arts Council England"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="8238" end="8249" title="Jeremy Hunt (politician)" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460591" start="8254" end="8308" title="Shadow Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport" label="Shadow Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q264618" start="8331" end="8343" title="Ben Bradshaw" label="Ben Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125824" start="8522" end="8542" title="whiteboard animation" label="whiteboard animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758201" start="8821" end="8832" title="Andrew Park (animator)" label="Andrew Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118610" start="9025" end="9038" title="Renata Salecl" label="Renata Salecl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115200" start="9257" end="9301" title="OCR (examination board)" label="Oxford, Cambridge and RSA Examinations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q304985" start="9334" end="9356" title="Royal College of Music" label="Royal College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="9589" end="9600" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="9767" end="9777" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q739384" start="9892" end="9913" title="London County Council" label="London County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476542" start="9992" end="10014" title="Greater London Council" label="Greater London Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336843" start="10110" end="10153" title="constituent countries of the United Kingdom" label="constituent countries of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366839" start="10209" end="10221" title="West Wycombe" label="West Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="10296" end="10310" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151989" start="10355" end="10372" title="Comino Foundation" label="Comino Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992409" start="10749" end="10782" title="Confederation of British Industry" label="Confederation of British Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671329" start="10899" end="10906" title="Academy (English school)" label="academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684337" start="10910" end="10916" title="Tipton" label="Tipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q109657165" start="10922" end="10933" title="RSA Academy" label="RSA Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996547" start="11374" end="11389" title="Whitley Academy" label="Whitley Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682064" start="11651" end="11666" title="Adelphi Charter" label="Adelphi Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722388" start="11768" end="11791" title="personal carbon trading" label="personal carbon trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q621820" start="11995" end="12003" title="WEEE Man" label="WEEE Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12084" end="12095" title="TEDxLambeth" label="TEDxLambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q756819" start="12262" end="12268" title="Strand, London" label="Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618073" start="12336" end="12346" title="James Adam (architect)" label="James Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q312635" start="12351" end="12362" title="Robert Adam" label="Robert Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579847" start="12392" end="12399" title="Adelphi, London" label="Adelphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042892" start="12545" end="12556" title="James Barry (painter)" label="James Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192720" start="12696" end="12715" title="Thomas Gainsborough" label="Thomas Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q194402" start="12720" end="12735" title="Joshua Reynolds" label="Joshua Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="12782" end="12788" title="frieze" label="frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="13185" end="13199" title="Charles Dickens" label="Dickens&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="13206" end="13225" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="The Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067943" start="13439" end="13443" title="Royal Institute of British Architects" label="RIBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="13477" end="13493" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="13613" end="13634" title="Royal Academy of Arts" label="Royal Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527118" start="13802" end="13814" title="Henry Cheere" label="Henry Cheere"/>
<link wikidata="Q171344" start="13968" end="13983" title="William Hogarth" label="William Hogarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321354" start="14052" end="14081" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Lane Academy" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Lane Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="14135" end="14142" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160137" start="14570" end="14597" title="Exhibition of Recent Specimens of Photography" label="1852 photography exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q969196" start="14625" end="14655" title="Royal Photographic Society" label="Photographic Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452986" start="14691" end="14714" title="First Exhibition (1760)" label="First Exhibition (1760)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570777" start="14717" end="14761" title="List of fellows of the Royal Society of Arts" label="List of fellows of the Royal Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118864" start="14764" end="14828" title="Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce" label="Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85749" wikidata="Q401466" url="?curid=85749" title="Leave">
<text>Leave may refer to:

* Permission (disambiguation)
** Permitted absence from work
*** Leave of absence, a period of time that one is to be away from one&#x27;s primary job while maintaining the status of employee
*** Annual leave, allowance of time away from work while continuing to be paid
*** Leave (military), a period of time in which a soldier is allowed to be away from his or her assigned unit
** Leave to enter, permission for entry to the United Kingdom granted by British immigration officers
** Leave to remain, permanent residency in the United Kingdom
** Leave to appeal, granted to the loser in a court case to appeal the verdict
** Leave to prosecute, permission to bring a private prosecution of a criminal case
** &quot;Leave of the house/senate&quot;, the term used to describe unanimous consent in Westminster system parliaments
* The pro-Brexit side of the Brexit debate (opposite of &quot;Remain&quot;)

== Arts, entertainment, and media==
* &quot;Leave&quot; (film), a 2010 film by Robert Celestino
* &quot;Leave&quot; (2022 film), a 2022 film by Alex Herron

===Music===
* &quot;Leave&quot; (album), a 2002 Mandopop album
* &quot;Leave&quot; (Get Out), a 2004 R&amp;B song by JoJo
* &quot;Leave!&quot;, a 2009 soul song performed by the English singer VV Brown
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Sertab Erener
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Lula and Bela B.
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Marieme from her self-titled EP
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Matchbox Twenty from the album &quot;Mad Season&quot;
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Post Malone from the album &quot;Stoney&quot;
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by R.E.M. from the album &quot;New Adventures in Hi-Fi&quot;
* &quot;LEAVE&quot;, a song by Susumu Hirasawa from the album &quot;Detonator Orgun 2&quot;
* &quot;Leave&quot;, a song by Wavves from the album &quot;Welcome to Los Santos&quot;

== People ==
* Leave (gamer), gamertag of Xin Huang, professional esports player

== Sports ==
* Leave (cricket), the deliberate action of not hitting the ball

== See also ==
* Leaf
* Leaver (disambiguation)
* Leaves (disambiguation)
* Leaving (disambiguation)
* Left (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401466" start="0" end="5" title="Leave" label="Leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175919" start="23" end="50" title="Permission (disambiguation)" label="Permission (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13561011" start="86" end="102" title="Leave of absence" label="Leave of absence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338673" start="217" end="229" title="Annual leave" label="Annual leave"/>
<link wikidata="Q702380" start="296" end="312" title="Leave (military)" label="Leave (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510649" start="405" end="419" title="Leave to enter" label="Leave to enter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510646" start="507" end="522" title="Leave to remain" label="Leave to remain"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="569" end="584" title="Leave to appeal" label="Leave to appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q564163" start="648" end="666" title="Leave to prosecute" label="Leave to prosecute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882284" start="797" end="814" title="unanimous consent" label="unanimous consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="859" end="865" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="964" end="988" title="Leave (film)" label="&amp;quot;Leave&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247287" start="1005" end="1021" title="Robert Celestino" label="Robert Celestino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1024" end="1053" title="Leave (2022 film)" label="&amp;quot;Leave&amp;quot; (2022 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18924338" start="1070" end="1081" title="Alex Herron" label="Alex Herron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493418" start="1097" end="1122" title="Leave (album)" label="&amp;quot;Leave&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q428651" start="1148" end="1175" title="Leave (Get Out)" label="&amp;quot;Leave&amp;quot; (Get Out)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510519" start="1213" end="1219" title="Leave!" label="Leave!"/>
<link wikidata="Q193534" start="1316" end="1329" title="Sertab Erener" label="Sertab Erener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877147" start="1361" end="1365" title="Lula (singer)" label="Lula"/>
<link wikidata="Q52784693" start="1409" end="1416" title="Marieme" label="Marieme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348008" start="1509" end="1519" title="Mad Season (Matchbox Twenty album)" label="Mad Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228892" start="1584" end="1602" title="Stoney (album)" label="&amp;quot;Stoney&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508334" start="1662" end="1685" title="New Adventures in Hi-Fi" label="New Adventures in Hi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q930143" start="1723" end="1738" title="Susumu Hirasawa" label="Susumu Hirasawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943071" start="1843" end="1864" title="Welcome to Los Santos" label="Welcome to Los Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q109171642" start="1887" end="1900" title="Leave (gamer)" label="Leave (gamer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q810903" start="1969" end="1984" title="Leave (cricket)" label="Leave (cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2050" end="2054" title="Leaf" label="Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510678" start="2057" end="2080" title="Leaver (disambiguation)" label="Leaver (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q403156" start="2083" end="2106" title="Leaves (disambiguation)" label="Leaves (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510708" start="2109" end="2133" title="Leaving (disambiguation)" label="Leaving (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485002" start="2136" end="2157" title="Left (disambiguation)" label="Left (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85750" wikidata="Q426763" url="?curid=85750" title="Knud Jeppesen">
<text>Knud Jeppesen (15 August 1892 – 14 June 1974) was a Danish musicologist and composer. He was the leading scholar of the composer Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, about whose life and music he wrote numerous studies.

==Biography==
Jeppesen demonstrated early musical talent at age 10 when he was first encouraged by Hakon Andersen and Paul Hellmuth, although he was largely self-taught. Completing primary education in 1911, he first worked in Elbing and Liegnitz (Eastern Germany) as an opera coach and conductor. He found employment in Berlin in 1914, but returned to Denmark because of the outbreak of war. In Copenhagen he became a pupil of prominent Danish composers Carl Nielsen and Thomas Laub, and studied musicology at Copenhagen University with Angul Hammerich. He passed the organist exam at the Royal Danish Conservatory of music in 1916. Owing to Hammerich&#x27;s retirement, there was nobody on the faculty of the university to examine Jeppesen&#x27;s work; therefore, he submitted his dissertation to the University of Vienna, where it was reviewed by Guido Adler and Jeppesen was awarded a doctorate in 1922.

He was organist at Copenhagen&#x27;s St. Stephens church from 1917 to 1932 and at the Holmen Church from 1932 to 1947. He taught music theory at the Royal Danish Academy of Music from 1920 to 1947, also serving on its board of directors. In 1946, he was appointed to the new post of professor of musicology at Aarhus University, where he founded (in 1950) an Institute of Musicology which he directed until 1957. His students included the composers Vagn Holmboe (in Copenhagen) and Bent Lorentzen (in Aarhus).

Following his retirement in 1957, Jeppesen resided in Italy, enabling him to make several discoveries in Italian libraries culminating in his magnum opus, &quot;La frottola&quot; (1968–70), a detailed study and bibliography of frottole, the leading genre of Italian popular, secular songs in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth century. From 1927 until his death he was active in the International Musicological Society, serving as president from 1949 to 1952. He was also a member (from 1963) of the Italian Accademia dei Lincei.

==Musicology==
Jeppesen&#x27;s name is invariably associated with the study of musical counterpoint, particularly in the style of Palestrina, of whom he was the leading scholar of his day. His 1930 work &quot;Counterpoint: The Polyphonic Vocal Style of the Sixteenth Century&quot; has been a standard textbook since its appearance in German (1935) and English (1939), and remains in print today (the third and final edition remains untranslated). His doctoral thesis was expanded in 1923 and appeared in English in 1927 as &quot;The Style of Palestrina and the Dissonance&quot; – a work which &quot;The New Grove&quot; cites as being the &quot;most distinguished and influential example of stylistic analysis at this time&quot;.

His published writings mostly regard music by Italian and Danish composers from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Jeppesen engaged in much primary research – locating early manuscript and print copies of old scores and preparing editions with annotations and commentary. In 1962, he finished the first complete thematic catalog of Palestrina&#x27;s oeuvre. Among his accomplishments were the discovery of ten previously unknown masses by Palestrina in 1949.

==Music==
Jeppesen&#x27;s early efforts at composition were poorly received and he turned away from composition in 1919, only to resume after a fifteen-year hiatus. He is known for well-crafted songs set to Danish texts, church music, and motets. He also wrote cantatas, organ music, and an opera, &quot;Rosaura,&quot; which was performed by the Royal Danish Theatre on September 20, 1950. He also made many contributions to Danish hymnology, and his &quot;Bygen flygter, Forunderligt så sødt et smil&quot; is a classic with Danish church choirs. His style incorporates his knowledge of early counterpoint but also the style of late Viennese romantics including Gustav Mahler, to whom he was introduced by Guido Adler. From 1916 to 1931, Jeppesen was Nielsen&#x27;s closest associate, and Jeppesen wrote several important articles about that composer.

===Compositions===
* 1906 &quot;Nordisk Festmarche&quot; for 3 violins, cello, harmonium or piano
* 1911 &quot;Staka&quot;, Symphonic poem (tenor and piano)
* 1912 &quot;Foraar&quot; for soloists and orchestra (text: Johannes Jørgensen)
* 1915 String quartet in F (student composition)
* 1919 Violin sonata
* 1925 Kantate for Rungsted Kostskoles Samfund
* 1930 Sonatine in C major (piano)
* 1934 Gud, vend Øren til min Bøn (Motet 4-part mixed choir)
* 1935 Hvad er et Menneske? (Motet for 4-part mixed choir)
* 1936 Reformation Cantata
* 1937 Domine, refugium factus es nobis – Cantata for soprano, and flute or violin solo
* 1938 Sjællandsfar (symphony)
* 1940 To Patetiske sange
* 1941 Horn concerto
* 1941 Lille Sommertrio (Little Summer Trio) (for flute, cello and piano)
* 1942 Prelude and fugue in E minor (organ)
* 1942/45 Te Deum Danicum (for the opening of the Danish Radio concert hall)
* 1944 Lille trio (La primavera)
* 1944 Haglskyen (8 part male chorus. Text: Knud Wiinstedt)
* 1945 Dronning Dagmar Messe
* 1946 
* 1949 Ørnen og skarnbassen (for the Københavns Drengekors 25 year jubilee)
* 1950 &quot;Rosaura&quot;, opera in three acts after texts by the composer and Carlo Goldoni
* 1951 Kantate ved genindvielsen af Haderslev Domkirke
* 1951 &quot;Du gav mig o herre en lod af din jord&quot; (C. R. Sundell)
* 1951 &quot;Dagen viger og gaar bort&quot;, cantata for alto soloist, mixed chorus, string orchestra or organ (text: Dorothea Engelbretsdatter)
* 1952 Kantate ved Det Jyske Musikkonservatoriums 25-års jubilæum
* 1953 Vintergæk er brudt af mulden (Hymn)
* 1957 50 choral preludes for organ
* 1965 (?) Passacaglia (organ)
* Intonazione boreale (organ)
* Landsbymusik (small orchestra)

===Discography===
* 1996 &quot;Musik ved Susåen&quot; Storstrøms Kammerensemble (Lille Sommertrio) (Helikon – HCD1023)
* 2003 &quot;Monteverdi – Knud Jeppesen&quot; Musikstuderendes Kammerkor, conductor: Finn Mathiassen (Point – PCD5161/2)

==Editions==

*with V. Brøndal: &quot;Der Kopenhagener Chansonnier&quot; (Copenhagen, 1927, 2 cd edition 1965)
*&quot;Vaerker af Mogens Pedersøn&quot;, Dania sonans, i (Copenhagen, 1933)
* with V. Brøndal: &quot;Die mehrstimmige italienische Laude um 1500&quot; (Leipzig and Copenhagen, 1935 (revised))
* &quot;Die italienische Orgelmusik am Anfang des Cinquecento&quot; (Copenhagen, 1943, enlarged 2 cd edition 1960)
*Dietrich Buxtehude: &quot;Min Gud er med mig (Der Herr ist mit mir)&quot;, Samfundet til udgivelse af dansk musik, 3rd ser., lxxxix (Copenhagen, 1946)
*&quot;La flora, arie &amp;c. antiche italiane&quot; (Copenhagen, 1949)
*&quot;Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina: Le messe di Mantova&quot;, Le opere complete, xviii–xix (Rome, 1954)
* &quot;Balli antichi veneziani per cembalo&quot; (Copenhagen, 1962)
* &quot;Italia sacra musica: musiche corali italiane sconosciute della prima metà del Cinquecento&quot; (Copenhagen, 1962)
* Founding editor of &quot;Dania Sonans&quot;, issuing editions of early Danish music.

==Writings==

*&quot;Die Dissonanzbehandlung bei Palestrina&quot; (diss., University of Vienna, 1922; enlarged Copenhagen, 1923, as &quot;Palestrinastil med saerligt henblik paa dissonansbehandlingen&quot;; Ger. trans., 1925; Eng. trans. as &quot;The Style of Palestrina and the Dissonance&quot;, 1927, 2/1946 (revised))
*&quot;Das &#x27;Sprunggesetz&#x27; des Palestrinastils bei betonten Viertelnoten (halben Taktzeiten)&quot;, Musikwissenschaftlicher Kongress: Basel 1924, pp. 211–19
*&quot;Johann Joseph Fux und die moderne Kontrapunkttheorie&quot;, Deutsche Musikgesellschaft: Kongress I: Leipzig 1925, pp. 187–8
*&quot;Das isometrische Moment in der Vokalpolyphonie&quot;, Festschrift Peter Wagner, ed. K. Weinmann (Leipzig, 1926), pp. 87–100
*&quot;Über einen Brief Palestrinas&quot;, Festschrift Peter Wagner, ed. K. Weinmann (Leipzig, 1926), pp. 100–07
*&quot;Die Textlegung in der Chansonmusik des späteren 15. Jahrhunderts&quot;, Beethoven-Zentenarfeier: Vienna 1927, pp. 155–7
*&quot;Die neuentdeckten Bücher der Lauden des Ottaviano dei Petrucci und andere musikalische Seltenheiten der Biblioteca Colombina zu Sevilla&quot;, &quot;Zeitschrift für Musikwissenschaft&quot;, xii (1929–30), pp. 73–89.
*Kontrapunkt (vokalpolyfoni) [Counterpoint] (Copenhagen, 1930, 3rd ed. 1962; Ger. trans., 1935, 5/1970; Eng. trans., 1939, 2 cd edition)
*&quot;Wann entstand die Marcellus-Messe?&quot;, Studien zur Musikgeschichte: Festschrift für Guido Adler (Vienna, 1930), pp. 126–36
*&quot;Die 3 Gafurius-Kodizes der Fabbrico del Duomo, Milano&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, iii (1931), 14–28
*&quot;Ein venezianisches Laudenmanuskript&quot;, Theodor Kroyer: Festschrift, ed. H. Zenck, H. Schultz and W. Gerstenberg (Regensburg, 1933), 
*&quot;Diderik Buxtehude&quot; (Dieterich Buxtehude), &quot;Dansk musiktidsskrift&quot;, xii (1937), 
*&quot;Rom og den danske musik&quot;, Rom og Danmark gennem tiderne, ii, ed. L. Bobé (Copenhagen, 1937), pp. 153–76
*&quot;Über einige unbekannte Frottolenhandschriften&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, xi (1939), pp. 81–114
*&quot;Venetian Folk-Songs of the Renaissance&quot;, papers of the American Musicological Society, 1939, pp. 62–75
*&quot;Eine musiktheoretische Korrespondenz des früheren Cinquecento&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, xiii (1941), pp. 3–39
*&quot;Das Volksliedgut in den Frottolenbüchern des Octavio Petrucci (1504–1514)&quot;, Emlékkönyv Kodály Zoltán hatvanadik születésnapjára, ed. B. Gunda (Budapest, 1943), pp. 265–74
*&quot;Marcellus-Probleme&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, xvi–xvii (1944–5), pp. 11–38
*&quot;Choralis Constantinus som liturgisk dokument&quot;, Festskrift til O.M. Sandvik, ed. O. Gurvin (Oslo, 1945), pp. 52–82
*&quot;Et nodefund paa Konservatoriet&quot;, &quot;Dansk musiktidsskrift&quot;, xx (1945), pp. 41–7, pp. 67–70
*&quot;Carl Nielsen, a Danish Composer&quot;, &quot;Music Review&quot;, vii (1946), pp. 170–77
*&quot;Zur Kritik der klassischen Harmonielehre&quot;, International Musicological Society Congress Report IV: Basel 1949, pp. 23–34
*&quot;The Recently Discovered Mantova Masses of Palestrina: a Provisional Communication&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, xxii (1950), pp. 36–47
*&quot;Pierluigi da Palestrina, Herzog Gugliemo Gonzaga und die neugefundenen Mantovaner-Messen Palestrinas: ein ergänzender Bericht&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologia&quot;, xxv (1953), pp. 132–79
*&quot;Cavazzoni-Cabezón&quot;, &quot;Journal of the American Musicological Society&quot;, viii (1955), pp. 81–5
*&quot;Eine frühe Orgelmesse aus Castell&#x27;Arquato&quot;, &quot;Archiv für Musikwissenschaft&quot;, xii (1955), pp. 187–205
*&quot;Palestriniana: ein unbekanntes Autogramm und einige unveröffentlichte Falsibordoni des Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina&quot;, Miscelánea en homenaje a Monseñor Higinio Anglés (Barcelona, 1958–61), pp. 417–30
*&quot;Et par notationstekniske problemer i det 16. aarhundredes musik og nogle dertil knyttede iagttagelser (taktindelling partitur)&quot;, &quot;Svensk tidskirft för musikforskning&quot;, xliii (1961), pp. 171–93
*&quot;Ein altvenetianisches Tanzbuch&quot;, Festschrift Karl Gustav Fellerer zum sechzigsten Geburtstag, ed. H. Hüschen (Regensburg, 1962), pp. 245–63
*&quot;Über italienische Kirchenmusik in der ersten Hälfte des 16. Jahrhunderts&quot;, &quot;Studia musicologica Academiae scientiarum hungaricae&quot;, iii (1962), pp. 149–60
*&quot;Carl Nielsen paa hundredaarsdagen: nogle erindringer&quot;, &quot;Dansk aarbog for musikforskning&quot;, iv (1964–5), pp. 137–50
*&quot;The Manuscript Florence Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale, Banco rari 230: an Attempt at Diplomatic Reconstruction&quot;, Aspects of Medieval and Renaissance Music: a Birthday Offering to Gustave Reese, ed. J. LaRue and others (New York, 1966 revised), pp. 440–47
*&quot;Monteverdi, Kapellmeister an S. Barbara?&quot;, &quot;Claudio Monteverdi e il suo tempo&quot;: Venice, Mantua and Cremona 1968, pp. 313–22
*La frottola (Århus and Copenhagen, 1968–70)
*&quot;An Unknown Pre-Madrigalian Music Print in Relation to other Contemporary Italian Sources (1520–1530)&quot;, Studies in Musicology: Essays … in Memory of Glen Haydon, ed. J.W. Pruett (Chapel Hill, NC, 1969), pp. 3–17
*&quot;Alcune brevi annotazioni sulla musicologia&quot;, Scritti in onore di Luigi Ronga (Milan and Naples, 1973), pp. 275–8

==References==
==Further reading==
*Glahn, Henrik. &quot;Knud Jeppesen. 15. August 1892 bis 14. Juni 1974&quot;, &quot;Acta Musicologica&quot;, Vol. 47, Fasc. 1 (January – June 1975), pp. 1–2.
*&quot;Prof. Knud Jeppesen&quot;, &quot;PremioGalilei.It&quot;. 
*&quot;Knud Jeppesen (1892–1974)&quot;, &quot;Det Kongelige Bibliotek&quot;. 
*&quot;Katalog&quot;, &quot;Det Kongelige Bibliotek&quot;. 
* at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q426763" start="0" end="13" title="Knud Jeppesen" label="Knud Jeppesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="59" end="71" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="76" end="84" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="129" end="161" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640592" start="317" end="331" title="Hakon Andersen" label="Hakon Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151231" start="336" end="349" title="Paul Hellmuth" label="Paul Hellmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q205139" start="673" end="685" title="Carl Nielsen" label="Carl Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344992" start="690" end="701" title="Thomas Laub" label="Thomas Laub"/>
<link wikidata="Q78716" start="1068" end="1079" title="Guido Adler" label="Guido Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061024" start="1164" end="1183" title="Ludvig Knudsen" label="St. Stephens church"/>
<link wikidata="Q284914" start="1213" end="1226" title="Holmen Church" label="Holmen Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201057" start="1276" end="1305" title="Royal Danish Academy of Music" label="Royal Danish Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="1437" end="1454" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q918832" start="1576" end="1588" title="Vagn Holmboe" label="Vagn Holmboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890334" start="1609" end="1623" title="Bent Lorentzen" label="Bent Lorentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944800" start="1865" end="1873" title="frottole" label="frottole"/>
<link wikidata="Q338432" start="2150" end="2170" title="Accademia dei Lincei" label="Accademia dei Lincei"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="2260" end="2272" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q179277" start="2303" end="2313" title="Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422837" start="2766" end="2791" title="Grove Music Online" label="&amp;quot;The New Grove&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544924" start="2863" end="2881" title="Musical analysis" label="stylistic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q607681" start="3715" end="3735" title="Royal Danish Theatre" label="Royal Danish Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304" start="4031" end="4044" title="Gustav Mahler" label="Gustav Mahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q165534" start="5405" end="5418" title="Carlo Goldoni" label="Carlo Goldoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q933348" start="7884" end="7895" title="Festschrift" label="Festschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q19239529" start="8350" end="8383" title="Zeitschrift für Musikwissenschaft" label="Zeitschrift für Musikwissenschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q91581" start="8853" end="8867" title="Theodor Kroyer" label="Theodor Kroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q153637" start="8979" end="8998" title="Dieterich Buxtehude" label="Dieterich Buxtehude"/>
<link wikidata="Q458014" start="9572" end="9588" title="Ottaviano Petrucci" label="Octavio Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760747" start="10782" end="10810" title="Archiv für Musikwissenschaft" label="Archiv für Musikwissenschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q102481" start="11330" end="11350" title="Karl Gustav Fellerer" label="Karl Gustav Fellerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q523660" start="12949" end="12990" title="International Music Score Library Project" label="International Music Score Library Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85752" wikidata="Q451829" url="?curid=85752" title="Lah number">
<text>In mathematics, the (signed and unsigned) Lah numbers are coefficients expressing rising factorials in terms of falling factorials and vice versa. They were discovered by Ivo Lah in 1954. Explicitly, the unsigned Lah numbers formula_1 are given by the formula involving the binomial coefficient 

formula_2

for formula_3.

Unsigned Lah numbers have an interesting meaning in combinatorics: they count the number of ways a set of &quot;formula_4&quot; elements can be partitioned into &quot;formula_5&quot; nonempty linearly ordered subsets. Lah numbers are related to Stirling numbers.

For formula_6, the Lah number formula_7 is equal to the factorial formula_8 in the interpretation above, the only partition of formula_9 into 1 set can have its set ordered in 6 ways:formula_10formula_11 is equal to 6, because there are six partitions of formula_9 into two ordered parts:formula_13formula_14 is always 1 because the only way to partition formula_15 into formula_16 non-empty subsets results in subsets of size 1, that can only be permuted in one way.
In the more recent literature, Karamata–Knuth style notation has taken over. Lah numbers are now often written asformula_17

==Table of values==
Below is a table of values for the Lah numbers:
The row sums are formula_18 .

==Rising and falling factorials==
Let formula_19 represent the rising factorial formula_20 and let formula_21 represent the falling factorial formula_22. The Lah numbers are the coefficients that express each of these families of polynomials in terms of the other. Explicitly,formula_23andformula_24For example,formula_25andformula_26

where the coefficients 6, 6, and 1 are exactly the Lah numbers formula_27, formula_28, and formula_29.

==Identities and relations==
The Lah numbers satisfy a variety of identities and relations.

In Karamata–Knuth notation for Stirling numbersformula_30

== Link to Laguerre polynomials ==
Generalized Laguerre polynomials formula_31 are linked to Lah numbers upon setting formula_32formula_33This formula is the default Laguerre polynomial in Umbral calculus convention.

== Practical application ==
In recent years, Lah numbers have been used in steganography for hiding data in images. Compared to alternatives such as DCT, DFT and DWT, it has lower complexity of calculation—formula_34—of their integer coefficients.
The Lah and Laguerre transforms naturally arise in the perturbative description of the chromatic dispersion.
In Lah-Laguerre optics, such an approach tremendously speeds up optimization problems.

== See also ==
* Stirling numbers
* Pascal matrix

== References ==
== External links ==
* The signed and unsigned Lah numbers are respectively and </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q451829" start="20" end="53" title="Lah number" label="(signed and unsigned) Lah numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="58" end="69" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="82" end="98" title="rising factorial" label="rising factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="112" end="129" title="falling factorial" label="falling factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675783" start="171" end="178" title="Ivo Lah" label="Ivo Lah"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="274" end="294" title="binomial coefficient" label="binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="376" end="389" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="423" end="426" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="468" end="477" title="Partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="533" end="539" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q80918" start="569" end="584" title="Stirling number" label="Stirling number"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="644" end="653" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q691012" start="1087" end="1095" title="Jovan Karamata" label="Karamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="1096" end="1101" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="1343" end="1359" title="rising factorial" label="rising factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339261" start="1404" end="1421" title="falling factorial" label="falling factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q691012" start="1816" end="1824" title="Jovan Karamata" label="Karamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="1825" end="1830" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80918" start="1844" end="1860" title="Stirling numbers" label="Stirling numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124546" start="1919" end="1939" title="Laguerre polynomials" label="Laguerre polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124546" start="2038" end="2057" title="Laguerre polynomials" label="Laguerre polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055314" start="2061" end="2076" title="Umbral calculus" label="Umbral calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032" start="2165" end="2178" title="steganography" label="steganography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877" start="2239" end="2242" title="Discrete cosine transform" label="DCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="2244" end="2247" title="Discrete Fourier transform" label="DFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414958" start="2252" end="2255" title="Discrete wavelet transform" label="DWT"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="2425" end="2445" title="chromatic dispersion" label="chromatic dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2450" end="2469" title="Lah-Laguerre optics" label="Lah-Laguerre optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80918" start="2552" end="2567" title="Stirling number" label="Stirling number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141739" start="2571" end="2584" title="Pascal matrix" label="Pascal matrix"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85754" wikidata="Q186608" url="?curid=85754" title="Phonon">
<text>A phonon is a collective excitation in a periodic, elastic arrangement of atoms or molecules in condensed matter, specifically in solids and some liquids. In the context of optically trapped objects, the quantized vibration mode can be defined as phonons as long as the modal wavelength of the oscillation is smaller than the size of the object. A type of quasiparticle in physics, a phonon is an excited state in the quantum mechanical quantization of the modes of vibrations for elastic structures of interacting particles. Phonons can be thought of as quantized sound waves, similar to photons as quantized light waves. 

The study of phonons is an important part of condensed matter physics. They play a major role in many of the physical properties of condensed matter systems, such as thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity, as well as in models of neutron scattering and related effects.

The concept of phonons was introduced in 1930 by Soviet physicist Igor Tamm. The name &quot;phonon&quot; was suggested by Yakov Frenkel. It comes from the Greek word (), which translates to &quot;sound&quot; or &quot;voice&quot;, because long-wavelength phonons give rise to sound. The name emphasizes the analogy to the word &quot;photon&quot;, in that phonons represent wave-particle duality for sound waves in the same way that photons represent wave-particle duality for light waves. Solids with more than one atom in the smallest unit cell exhibit both acoustic and optical phonons.

==Definition==
A phonon is the quantum mechanical description of an elementary vibrational motion in which a lattice of atoms or molecules uniformly oscillates at a single frequency. In classical mechanics this designates a normal mode of vibration. Normal modes are important because any arbitrary lattice vibration can be considered to be a superposition of these &quot;elementary&quot; vibration modes (cf. Fourier analysis). While normal modes are wave-like phenomena in classical mechanics, phonons have particle-like properties too, in a way related to the wave–particle duality of quantum mechanics.

==Lattice dynamics==
The equations in this section do not use axioms of quantum mechanics but instead use relations for which there exists a direct correspondence in classical mechanics.

For example: a rigid regular, crystalline (not amorphous) lattice is composed of &quot;N&quot; particles. These particles may be atoms or molecules. &quot;N&quot; is a large number, say of the order of 1023, or on the order of the Avogadro number for a typical sample of a solid. Since the lattice is rigid, the atoms must be exerting forces on one another to keep each atom near its equilibrium position. These forces may be Van der Waals forces, covalent bonds, electrostatic attractions, and others, all of which are ultimately due to the electric force. Magnetic and gravitational forces are generally negligible. The forces between each pair of atoms may be characterized by a potential energy function &quot;V&quot; that depends on the distance of separation of the atoms. The potential energy of the entire lattice is the sum of all pairwise potential energies multiplied by a factor of 1/2 to compensate for double counting:

:formula_1

where &quot;ri&quot; is the position of the &quot;i&quot;th atom, and &quot;V&quot; is the potential energy between two atoms.

It is difficult to solve this many-body problem explicitly in either classical or quantum mechanics. In order to simplify the task, two important approximations are usually imposed. First, the sum is only performed over neighboring atoms. Although the electric forces in real solids extend to infinity, this approximation is still valid because the fields produced by distant atoms are effectively screened. Secondly, the potentials &quot;V&quot; are treated as harmonic potentials. This is permissible as long as the atoms remain close to their equilibrium positions. Formally, this is accomplished by Taylor expanding &quot;V&quot; about its equilibrium value to quadratic order, giving &quot;V&quot; proportional to the displacement &quot;x&quot;2 and the elastic force simply proportional to &quot;x&quot;. The error in ignoring higher order terms remains small if &quot;x&quot; remains close to the equilibrium position.

The resulting lattice may be visualized as a system of balls connected by springs. The following figure shows a cubic lattice, which is a good model for many types of crystalline solid. Other lattices include a linear chain, which is a very simple lattice which we will shortly use for modeling phonons. (For other common lattices, see crystal structure.)


The potential energy of the lattice may now be written as

:formula_2

Here, &quot;ω&quot; is the natural frequency of the harmonic potentials, which are assumed to be the same since the lattice is regular. &quot;Ri&quot; is the position coordinate of the &quot;i&quot;th atom, which we now measure from its equilibrium position. The sum over nearest neighbors is denoted (nn).

It is important to mention that the mathematical treatment given here is highly simplified in order to make it accessible to non-experts. The simplification has been achieved by making two basic assumptions in the expression for the total potential energy of the crystal. These assumptions are that (i) the total potential energy can be written as a sum of pairwise interactions, and (ii) each atom interacts with only its nearest neighbors. These are used only sparingly in modern lattice dynamics. A more general approach is to express the potential energy in terms of force constants. See, for example, the Wiki article on multiscale Green&#x27;s functions.

===Lattice waves===

Due to the connections between atoms, the displacement of one or more atoms from their equilibrium positions gives rise to a set of vibration waves propagating through the lattice. One such wave is shown in the figure to the right. The amplitude of the wave is given by the displacements of the atoms from their equilibrium positions. The wavelength &quot;λ&quot; is marked.

There is a minimum possible wavelength, given by twice the equilibrium separation &quot;a&quot; between atoms. Any wavelength shorter than this can be mapped onto a wavelength longer than 2&quot;a&quot;, due to the periodicity of the lattice. This can be thought of as a consequence of the Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem, the lattice points being viewed as the &quot;sampling points&quot; of a continuous wave.

Not every possible lattice vibration has a well-defined wavelength and frequency. However, the normal modes do possess well-defined wavelengths and frequencies.

===One-dimensional lattice===
In order to simplify the analysis needed for a 3-dimensional lattice of atoms, it is convenient to model a 1-dimensional lattice or linear chain. This model is complex enough to display the salient features of phonons.

====Classical treatment====
The forces between the atoms are assumed to be linear and nearest-neighbour, and they are represented by an elastic spring. Each atom is assumed to be a point particle and the nucleus and electrons move in step (adiabatic theorem):

::::::::&quot;n&quot; − 1 &quot;n&quot; &quot;n&quot; + 1 ← &quot;a&quot; →
···o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o++++++o···
::::::::&quot;u&quot;&quot;n&quot; − 1&quot;un&quot;&quot;u&quot;&quot;n&quot; + 1
where labels the th atom out of a total of , is the distance between atoms when the chain is in equilibrium, and the displacement of the th atom from its equilibrium position.

If &quot;C&quot; is the elastic constant of the spring and the mass of the atom, then the equation of motion of the th atom is
:formula_3
This is a set of coupled equations.

Since the solutions are expected to be oscillatory, new coordinates are defined by a discrete Fourier transform, in order to decouple them.

Put
:formula_4
Here, corresponds and devolves to the continuous variable of scalar field theory. The are known as the &quot;normal coordinates&quot; for continuum field modes formula_5 with formula_6 for formula_7.

Substitution into the equation of motion produces the following &quot;decoupled equations&quot; (this requires a significant manipulation using the orthonormality and completeness relations of the discrete Fourier transform),
: formula_8

These are the equations for decoupled harmonic oscillators which have the solution

:formula_9

Each normal coordinate &quot;Qk&quot; represents an independent vibrational mode of the lattice with wavenumber , which is known as a normal mode.

The second equation, for , is known as the dispersion relation between the angular frequency and the wavenumber.

In the continuum limit, →0, →∞, with held fixed, → , a scalar field, and formula_10. This amounts to classical free scalar field theory, an assembly of independent oscillators.

====Quantum treatment====
A one-dimensional quantum mechanical harmonic chain consists of &quot;N&quot; identical atoms. This is the simplest quantum mechanical model of a lattice that allows phonons to arise from it. The formalism for this model is readily generalizable to two and three dimensions.

In contrast to the previous section, the positions of the masses are not denoted by formula_11, but instead by formula_12 as measured from their equilibrium positions. (I.e. formula_13 if particle formula_14 is at its equilibrium position.) In two or more dimensions, the formula_15 are vector quantities. The Hamiltonian for this system is

:formula_16

where &quot;m&quot; is the mass of each atom (assuming it is equal for all), and &quot;xi&quot; and &quot;pi&quot; are the position and momentum operators, respectively, for the &quot;i&quot;th atom and the sum is made over the nearest neighbors (nn). However one expects that in a lattice there could also appear waves that behave like particles. It is customary to deal with waves in Fourier space which uses normal modes of the wavevector as variables instead of coordinates of particles. The number of normal modes is the same as the number of particles. Still, the Fourier space is very useful given the periodicity of the system.

A set of &quot;N&quot; &quot;normal coordinates&quot; &quot;Qk&quot; may be introduced, defined as the discrete Fourier transforms of the &quot;xk&quot; and &quot;N&quot; &quot;conjugate momenta&quot; &quot;Πk&quot; defined as the Fourier transforms of the &quot;pk&quot;:

:formula_17

The quantity &quot;k&quot; turns out to be the wavenumber of the phonon, i.e. 2 divided by the wavelength.

This choice retains the desired commutation relations in either real space or wavevector space

: formula_18

From the general result

: formula_19

The potential energy term is
: formula_20
where

:formula_21

The Hamiltonian may be written in wavevector space as
:formula_22

The couplings between the position variables have been transformed away; if the &quot;Q&quot; and &quot;Π&quot; were Hermitian (which they are not), the transformed Hamiltonian would describe &quot;N&quot; uncoupled harmonic oscillators.

The form of the quantization depends on the choice of boundary conditions; for simplicity, &quot;periodic&quot; boundary conditions are imposed, defining the (&quot;N&quot; + 1)th atom as equivalent to the first atom. Physically, this corresponds to joining the chain at its ends. The resulting quantization is

:formula_23

The upper bound to &quot;n&quot; comes from the minimum wavelength, which is twice the lattice spacing &quot;a&quot;, as discussed above.

The harmonic oscillator eigenvalues or energy levels for the mode &quot;ωk&quot; are:

:formula_24

The levels are evenly spaced at:
:formula_25

where &quot;ħω&quot; is the zero-point energy of a quantum harmonic oscillator.

An exact amount of energy &quot;ħω&quot; must be supplied to the harmonic oscillator lattice to push it to the next energy level. By analogy to the photon case when the electromagnetic field is quantized, the quantum of vibrational energy is called a phonon.

All quantum systems show wavelike and particlelike properties simultaneously. The particle-like properties of the phonon are best understood using the methods of second quantization and operator techniques described later.

===Three-dimensional lattice===
This may be generalized to a three-dimensional lattice. The wavenumber &quot;k&quot; is replaced by a three-dimensional wavevector k. Furthermore, each k is now associated with three normal coordinates.

The new indices &quot;s&quot; = 1, 2, 3 label the polarization of the phonons. In the one-dimensional model, the atoms were restricted to moving along the line, so the phonons corresponded to longitudinal waves. In three dimensions, vibration is not restricted to the direction of propagation, and can also occur in the perpendicular planes, like transverse waves. This gives rise to the additional normal coordinates, which, as the form of the Hamiltonian indicates, we may view as independent species of phonons.

===Dispersion relation===


For a one-dimensional alternating array of two types of ion or atom of mass &quot;m&quot;1, &quot;m&quot;2 repeated periodically at a distance &quot;a&quot;, connected by springs of spring constant &quot;K&quot;, two modes of vibration result:
:formula_26
where &quot;k&quot; is the wavevector of the vibration related to its wavelength by
formula_27.

The connection between frequency and wavevector, &quot;ω&quot; = &quot;ω&quot;(&quot;k&quot;), is known as a dispersion relation. The plus sign results in the so-called &quot;optical&quot; mode, and the minus sign to the &quot;acoustic&quot; mode. In the optical mode two adjacent different atoms move against each other, while in the acoustic mode they move together.

The speed of propagation of an acoustic phonon, which is also the speed of sound in the lattice, is given by the slope of the acoustic dispersion relation, (see group velocity.) At low values of &quot;k&quot; (i.e. long wavelengths), the dispersion relation is almost linear, and the speed of sound is approximately &quot;ωa&quot;, independent of the phonon frequency. As a result, packets of phonons with different (but long) wavelengths can propagate for large distances across the lattice without breaking apart. This is the reason that sound propagates through solids without significant distortion. This behavior fails at large values of &quot;k&quot;, i.e. short wavelengths, due to the microscopic details of the lattice.

For a crystal that has at least two atoms in its primitive cell, the dispersion relations exhibit two types of phonons, namely, optical and acoustic modes corresponding to the upper blue and lower red curve in the diagram, respectively. The vertical axis is the energy or frequency of phonon, while the horizontal axis is the wavevector. The boundaries at − and are those of the first Brillouin zone. A crystal with &quot;N&quot; ≥ 2 different atoms in the primitive cell exhibits three acoustic modes: one longitudinal acoustic mode and two transverse acoustic modes. The number of optical modes is 3&quot;N&quot; – 3. The lower figure shows the dispersion relations for several phonon modes in GaAs as a function of wavevector k in the principal directions of its Brillouin zone.

The modes are also referred to as the branches of phonon dispersion. In general, if there are p atoms (denoted by N earlier) in the primitive unit cell, there will be 3p branches of phonon dispersion in a 3-dimensional crystal. Out of these, 3 branches correspond to acoustic modes and the remaining 3p-3 branches will correspond to optical modes. In some special directions, some branches coincide due to symmetry. These branches are called degenerate. In acoustic modes, all the p atoms vibrate in phase. So there is no change in the relative displacements of these atoms during the wave propagation.

Study of phonon dispersion is useful for modeling propagation of sound waves in solids, which is characterized by phonons. The energy of each phonon, as given earlier, is &quot;ħω.&quot; The velocity of the wave also is given in terms of &quot;ω&quot; and k &quot;.&quot; The direction of the wave vector is the direction of the wave propagation and the phonon polarization vector gives the direction in which the atoms vibrate. Actually, in general, the wave velocity in a crystal is different for different directions of k. In other words, most crystals are anisotropic for phonon propagation.

A wave is longitudinal if the atoms vibrate in the same direction as the wave propagation. In a transverse wave, the atoms vibrate perpendicular to the wave propagation. However, except for isotropic crystals, waves in a crystal are not exactly longitudinal or transverse. For general anisotropic crystals, the phonon waves are longitudinal or transverse only in certain special symmetry directions. In other directions, they can be nearly longitudinal or nearly transverse. It is only for labeling convenience, that they are often called longitudinal or transverse but are actually quasi-longitudinal or quasi-transverse. Note that in the three-dimensional case, there are two directions perpendicular to a straight line at each point on the line. Hence, there are always two (quasi) transverse waves for each (quasi) longitudinal wave.

Many phonon dispersion curves have been measured by inelastic neutron scattering.

The physics of sound in fluids differs from the physics of sound in solids, although both are density waves: sound waves in fluids only have longitudinal components, whereas sound waves in solids have longitudinal and transverse components. This is because fluids cannot support shear stresses (but see viscoelastic fluids, which only apply to high frequencies).

===Interpretation of phonons using second quantization techniques===
The above-derived Hamiltonian may look like a classical Hamiltonian function, but if it is interpreted as an operator, then it describes a quantum field theory of non-interacting bosons.
The second quantization technique, similar to the ladder operator method used for quantum harmonic oscillators, is a means of extracting energy eigenvalues without directly solving the differential equations. Given the Hamiltonian, formula_28, as well as the conjugate position, formula_29, and conjugate momentum formula_30 defined in the quantum treatment section above, we can define creation and annihilation operators:
:formula_31   and   formula_32
The following commutators can be easily obtained by substituting in the canonical commutation relation:
:formula_33
Using this, the operators &quot;bk&quot;† and &quot;bk&quot; can be inverted to redefine the conjugate position and momentum as:
:formula_34   and   formula_35
Directly substituting these definitions for formula_29 and formula_37 into the wavevector space Hamiltonian, as it is defined above, and simplifying then results in the Hamiltonian taking the form:
:formula_38

This is known as the second quantization technique, also known as the occupation number formulation, where &quot;nk&quot; = &quot;bk&quot;†&quot;bk&quot; is the occupation number. This can be seen to be a sum of N independent oscillator Hamiltonians, each with a unique wave vector, and compatible with the methods used for the quantum harmonic oscillator (note that &quot;nk&quot; is hermitian). When a Hamiltonian can be written as a sum of commuting sub-Hamiltonians, the energy eigenstates will be given by the products of eigenstates of each of the separate sub-Hamiltonians. The corresponding energy spectrum is then given by the sum of the individual eigenvalues of the sub-Hamiltonians.

As with the quantum harmonic oscillator, one can show that &quot;bk&quot;† and &quot;bk&quot; respectively create and destroy a single field excitation, a phonon, with an energy of &quot;ħωk&quot;.

Three important properties of phonons may be deduced from this technique. First, phonons are bosons, since any number of identical excitations can be created by repeated application of the creation operator &quot;bk&quot;†. Second, each phonon is a &quot;collective mode&quot; caused by the motion of every atom in the lattice. This may be seen from the fact that the creation and annihilation operators, defined here in momentum space, contain sums over the position and momentum operators of every atom when written in position space. (See position and momentum space.) Finally, using the &quot;position–position correlation function&quot;, it can be shown that phonons act as waves of lattice displacement.

This technique is readily generalized to three dimensions, where the Hamiltonian takes the form:
:formula_39
This can be interpreted as the sum of 3N independent oscillator Hamiltonians, one for each wave vector and polarization.

==Acoustic and optical phonons==
Solids with more than one atom in the smallest unit cell exhibit two types of phonons: acoustic phonons and optical phonons.

Acoustic phonons are coherent movements of atoms of the lattice out of their equilibrium positions. If the displacement is in the direction of propagation, then in some areas the atoms will be closer, in others farther apart, as in a sound wave in air (hence the name acoustic). Displacement perpendicular to the propagation direction is comparable to waves on a string. If the wavelength of acoustic phonons goes to infinity, this corresponds to a simple displacement of the whole crystal, and this costs zero deformation energy. Acoustic phonons exhibit a linear relationship between frequency and phonon wave-vector for long wavelengths. The frequencies of acoustic phonons tend to zero with longer wavelength. Longitudinal and transverse acoustic phonons are often abbreviated as LA and TA phonons, respectively.

Optical phonons are out-of-phase movements of the atoms in the lattice, one atom moving to the left, and its neighbor to the right. This occurs if the lattice basis consists of two or more atoms. They are called &quot;optical&quot; because in ionic crystals, such as sodium chloride, fluctuations in displacement create an electrical polarization that couples to the electromagnetic field. Hence, they can be excited by infrared radiation, the electric field of the light will move every positive sodium ion in the direction of the field, and every negative chloride ion in the other direction, causing the crystal to vibrate.

Optical phonons have a non-zero frequency at the Brillouin zone center and show no dispersion near that long wavelength limit. This is because they correspond to a mode of vibration where positive and negative ions at adjacent lattice sites swing against each other, creating a time-varying electrical dipole moment. Optical phonons that interact in this way with light are called &quot;infrared active&quot;. Optical phonons that are &quot;Raman active&quot; can also interact indirectly with light, through Raman scattering. Optical phonons are often abbreviated as LO and TO phonons, for the longitudinal and transverse modes respectively; the splitting between LO and TO frequencies is often described accurately by the Lyddane–Sachs–Teller relation.

When measuring optical phonon energy experimentally, optical phonon frequencies are sometimes given in spectroscopic wavenumber notation, where the symbol &quot;ω&quot; represents ordinary frequency (not angular frequency), and is expressed in units of cm−1. The value is obtained by dividing the frequency by the speed of light in vacuum. In other words, the wave-number in cm−1 units corresponds to the inverse of the wavelength of a photon in vacuum that has the same frequency as the measured phonon.

==Crystal momentum==

By analogy to photons and matter waves, phonons have been treated with wavevector &quot;k&quot; as though it has a momentum &quot;ħk&quot;; however, this is not strictly correct, because &quot;ħk&quot; is not actually a physical momentum; it is called the &quot;crystal momentum&quot; or &quot;pseudomomentum&quot;. This is because &quot;k&quot; is only determined up to addition of constant vectors (the reciprocal lattice vectors and integer multiples thereof). For example, in the one-dimensional model, the normal coordinates &quot;Q&quot; and &quot;Π&quot; are defined so that
:formula_40

where
:formula_41

for any integer &quot;n&quot;. A phonon with wavenumber &quot;k&quot; is thus equivalent to an infinite family of phonons with wavenumbers &quot;k&quot; ± , &quot;k&quot; ± , and so forth. Physically, the reciprocal lattice vectors act as additional chunks of momentum which the lattice can impart to the phonon. Bloch electrons obey a similar set of restrictions.
It is usually convenient to consider phonon wavevectors &quot;k&quot; which have the smallest magnitude |&quot;k&quot;| in their &quot;family&quot;. The set of all such wavevectors defines the &quot;first Brillouin zone&quot;. Additional Brillouin zones may be defined as copies of the first zone, shifted by some reciprocal lattice vector.

==Thermodynamics==
The thermodynamic properties of a solid are directly related to its phonon structure. The entire set of all possible phonons that are described by the phonon dispersion relations combine in what is known as the phonon density of states which determines the heat capacity of a crystal. By the nature of this distribution, the heat capacity is dominated by the high-frequency part of the distribution, while thermal conductivity is primarily the result of the low-frequency region.

At absolute zero temperature, a crystal lattice lies in its ground state, and contains no phonons. A lattice at a nonzero temperature has an energy that is not constant, but fluctuates randomly about some mean value. These energy fluctuations are caused by random lattice vibrations, which can be viewed as a gas of phonons. Because these phonons are generated by the temperature of the lattice, they are sometimes designated thermal phonons.

Thermal phonons can be created and destroyed by random energy fluctuations. In the language of statistical mechanics this means that the chemical potential for adding a phonon is zero. This behavior is an extension of the harmonic potential into the anharmonic regime. The behavior of thermal phonons is similar to the photon gas produced by an electromagnetic cavity, wherein photons may be emitted or absorbed by the cavity walls. This similarity is not coincidental, for it turns out that the electromagnetic field behaves like a set of harmonic oscillators, giving rise to black-body radiation. Both gases obey the Bose–Einstein statistics: in thermal equilibrium and within the harmonic regime, the probability of finding phonons or photons in a given state with a given angular frequency is:

:formula_42

where &quot;ω&quot;&quot;k&quot;,&quot;s&quot; is the frequency of the phonons (or photons) in the state, &quot;k&quot;B is the Boltzmann constant, and &quot;T&quot; is the temperature.

===Phonon tunneling===
Phonons have been shown to exhibit quantum tunneling behavior (or &quot;phonon tunneling&quot;) where, across gaps up to a nanometer wide, heat can flow via phonons that &quot;tunnel&quot; between two materials. This type of heat transfer works between distances too large for conduction to occur but too small for radiation to occur and therefore cannot be explained by classical heat transfer models.

==Operator formalism==
The phonon Hamiltonian is given by
:formula_43
In terms of the creation and annihilation operators, these are given by
:formula_44
Here, in expressing the Hamiltonian in operator formalism, we have not taken into account the &quot;ħωq&quot; term as, given a continuum or infinite lattice, the &quot;ħωq&quot; terms will add up yielding an infinite term. Because the difference in energy is what we measure and not the absolute value of it, the constant term &quot;ħωq&quot; can be ignored without changing the equations of motion. Hence, the &quot;ħωq&quot; factor is absent in the operator formalized expression for the Hamiltonian.

The ground state, also called the &quot;vacuum state&quot;, is the state composed of no phonons. Hence, the energy of the ground state is 0. When a system is in the state , we say there are &quot;nα&quot; phonons of type &quot;α&quot;, where &quot;nα&quot; is the occupation number of the phonons. The energy of a single phonon of type &quot;α&quot; is given by &quot;ħωq&quot; and the total energy of a general phonon system is given by &quot;n&quot;1&quot;ħω&quot;1 + &quot;n&quot;2&quot;ħω&quot;2 +... As there are no cross terms (e.g. &quot;n&quot;1&quot;ħω&quot;2), the phonons are said to be non-interacting. The action of the creation and annihilation operators is given by:
:formula_45
and,
:formula_46
The creation operator, &quot;aα&quot;† creates a phonon of type &quot;α&quot; while &quot;aα&quot; annihilates one. Hence, they are respectively the creation and annihilation operators for phonons. Analogous to the quantum harmonic oscillator case, we can define particle number operator as
:formula_47
The number operator commutes with a string of products of the creation and annihilation operators if and only if the number of creation operators is equal to number of annihilation operators.

It can be shown that phonons are symmetric under exchange (i.e.  = ), so therefore they are considered bosons.

==Nonlinearity==
As well as photons, phonons can interact via parametric down conversion and form squeezed coherent states.

==Predicted properties==
Recent research has shown that phonons and rotons may have a non-negligible mass and be affected by gravity just as standard particles are. In particular, phonons are predicted to have a kind of negative mass and negative gravity. This can be explained by how phonons are known to travel faster in denser materials. Because the part of a material pointing towards a gravitational source is closer to the object, it becomes denser on that end. From this, it is predicted that phonons would deflect away as it detects the difference in densities, exhibiting the qualities of a negative gravitational field. Although the effect would be too small to measure, it is possible that future equipment could lead to successful results.

== Superconductivity ==

Superconductivity is a state of electronic matter in which electrical resistance vanishes and magnetic fields are expelled from the material. In a superconductor, electrons are bound together into Cooper pairs by a weak attractive force. In a conventional superconductor, this attraction is caused by an exchange of phonons between the electrons. The evidence that phonons, the vibrations of the ionic lattice, are relevant for superconductivity is provided by the isotope effect, the dependence of the superconducting critical temperature on the mass of the ions.

== Other research ==
In 2019, researchers were able to isolate individual phonons without destroying them for the first time.

They have been also shown to form “phonon winds” where an electric current in a graphene surface is generated by a liquid flow above it due to the viscous forces at the liquid–solid interface.

==See also==
* Boson
* Brillouin scattering
* Fracton
* Linear elasticity
* Mechanical wave
* Phonon scattering
* Carrier scattering
* Phononic crystal
* Rayleigh wave
* Relativistic heat conduction
* Rigid unit modes
* SASER
* Second sound
* Surface acoustic wave
* Surface phonon
* Thermal conductivity
* Vibration
==References==
==External links==
** Optical and acoustic modes
* with movies in Bar-Ziv Lab.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="2" end="8" title="Phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="14" end="35" title="collective excitation" label="collective excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="51" end="58" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="74" end="78" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="83" end="91" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="96" end="112" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="130" end="135" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="146" end="152" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="356" end="369" title="quasiparticle" label="quasiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="373" end="380" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="397" end="410" title="excited state" label="excited state"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="418" end="436" title="quantum mechanical" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q636027" start="437" end="449" title="Quantization (physics)" label="quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="457" end="476" title="mode of vibration" label="modes of vibrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="565" end="576" title="sound waves" label="sound waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="589" end="596" title="photons" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="610" end="621" title="light waves" label="light waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="791" end="811" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="816" end="839" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="865" end="883" title="neutron scattering" label="neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="955" end="961" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q155759" start="972" end="981" title="Igor Tamm" label="Igor Tamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q951957" start="1028" end="1041" title="Yakov Frenkel" label="Yakov Frenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1061" end="1066" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1181" end="1186" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q193068" start="1278" end="1299" title="Wave–particle duality" label="wave-particle duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1304" end="1315" title="Sound" label="sound waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1381" end="1392" title="Light" label="light waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="1441" end="1450" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1464" end="1472" title="#Acoustic and optical phonons" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1477" end="1484" title="#Acoustic and optical phonons" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1526" end="1544" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="1574" end="1583" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394145" start="1604" end="1611" title="lattice model (physics)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="1667" end="1676" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="1681" end="1700" title="classical mechanics" label="classical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="1719" end="1730" title="normal mode" label="normal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="1838" end="1851" title="superposition principle" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365258" start="1905" end="1921" title="Fourier analysis" label="Fourier analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="1947" end="1956" title="wave" label="wave-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="2004" end="2017" title="Elementary particle" label="particle-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q193068" start="2058" end="2079" title="wave–particle duality" label="wave–particle duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="2165" end="2170" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136644" start="2251" end="2265" title="correspondence principle" label="correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="2321" end="2332" title="crystalline" label="crystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q103382" start="2338" end="2347" title="amorphous solid" label="amorphous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="2522" end="2537" title="Avogadro number" label="Avogadro number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="2626" end="2631" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="2717" end="2736" title="Van der Waals force" label="Van der Waals force"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="2739" end="2752" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="2755" end="2779" title="electrostatic attraction" label="electrostatic attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="2833" end="2841" title="electric field" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="2849" end="2857" title="magnetism" label="Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="2862" end="2875" title="gravity" label="gravitational"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="2973" end="2989" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="3265" end="3273" title="space" label="position"/>
<link wikidata="Q617316" start="3395" end="3412" title="many-body problem" label="many-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058" start="3511" end="3524" title="approximation" label="approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175727" start="3763" end="3771" title="electric field screening" label="screened"/>
<link wikidata="Q190070" start="3827" end="3846" title="harmonic oscillator" label="harmonic potentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="3968" end="3984" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor expanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="4628" end="4645" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q946764" start="4748" end="4765" title="natural frequency" label="natural frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456383" start="5655" end="5689" title="Multiscale Green&amp;#x27;s function" label="multiscale Green&amp;#x27;s functions."/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="5854" end="5858" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="5948" end="5957" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="6051" end="6061" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q679800" start="6378" end="6410" title="Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem" label="Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="6597" end="6608" title="normal mode" label="normal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="6650" end="6661" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q356895" start="7154" end="7171" title="adiabatic theorem" label="adiabatic theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="7842" end="7868" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q190070" start="8391" end="8411" title="harmonic oscillators" label="harmonic oscillators"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="8583" end="8594" title="normal mode" label="normal mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="8640" end="8659" title="dispersion relation" label="dispersion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q834020" start="8672" end="8689" title="angular frequency" label="angular frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="8698" end="8708" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429781" start="8718" end="8733" title="continuum limit" label="continuum limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979196" start="8827" end="8846" title="scalar field theory" label="scalar field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="9501" end="9512" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="9682" end="9690" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="9923" end="9927" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q786423" start="9932" end="9945" title="Fourier space" label="Fourier space"/>
<link wikidata="Q900488" start="9957" end="9969" title="normal modes" label="normal modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="9977" end="9987" title="wavevector" label="wavevector"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="10155" end="10166" title="Fourier series" label="periodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="10286" end="10312" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="10517" end="10527" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="10565" end="10575" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500908" start="10973" end="10982" title="Hermitian operator" label="Hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327971" start="11733" end="11750" title="zero-point energy" label="zero-point energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="11756" end="11783" title="quantum harmonic oscillator" label="quantum harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="11805" end="11811" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="11934" end="11940" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="11955" end="11976" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353947" start="12208" end="12227" title="second quantization" label="second quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="12422" end="12432" title="wavevector" label="wavevector"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="12556" end="12568" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="12698" end="12715" title="longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="12853" end="12868" title="transverse wave" label="transverse wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q590051" start="13512" end="13531" title="dispersion relation" label="dispersion relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="13839" end="13853" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q217361" start="13934" end="13948" title="group velocity" label="group velocity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14552" end="14566" title="Wigner-Seitz cell#Primitive cell" label="primitive cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="14829" end="14839" title="wavevector" label="wavevector"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="14888" end="14902" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="14960" end="14974" title="primitive cell" label="primitive cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q626707" start="15010" end="15036" title="Longitudinal wave" label="longitudinal acoustic mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q691978" start="15045" end="15070" title="Transverse wave" label="transverse acoustic modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="15199" end="15203" title="GaAs" label="GaAs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15241" end="15261" title="Brillouin zone#Critical points" label="principal directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="17378" end="17406" title="inelastic neutron scattering" label="inelastic neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q102205" start="17433" end="17438" title="fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="17688" end="17700" title="shear stress" label="shear stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q910483" start="17712" end="17724" title="viscoelastic" label="viscoelastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597952" start="17951" end="17959" title="Operator (physics)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="17981" end="18001" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="18021" end="18026" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353947" start="18033" end="18052" title="second quantization" label="second quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186765" start="18079" end="18094" title="ladder operator" label="ladder operator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18111" end="18139" title="Quantum harmonic oscillator#Ladder operator method" label="quantum harmonic oscillators"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="18173" end="18184" title="eigenvalues" label="eigenvalues"/>
<link wikidata="Q902336" start="18416" end="18451" title="creation and annihilation operators" label="creation and annihilation operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q473322" start="18556" end="18586" title="canonical commutation relation" label="canonical commutation relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q652941" start="19356" end="19365" title="Hermitian matrix" label="hermitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="19570" end="19576" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365748" start="19577" end="19585" title="Spectrum of an operator" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="19959" end="19964" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225362" start="20408" end="20435" title="position and momentum space" label="position and momentum space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276790" start="20481" end="20501" title="correlation function" label="correlation function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="20888" end="20897" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="22052" end="22067" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="22205" end="22223" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="22462" end="22476" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="22704" end="22728" title="electrical dipole moment" label="electrical dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="22922" end="22938" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642444" start="23137" end="23166" title="Lyddane–Sachs–Teller relation" label="Lyddane–Sachs–Teller relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192510" start="23286" end="23296" title="wavenumber" label="wavenumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="23422" end="23424" title="Centimetre" label="cm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="23483" end="23507" title="speed of light in vacuum" label="speed of light in vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="23589" end="23599" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="23605" end="23611" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="23711" end="23717" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="23723" end="23735" title="De Broglie wavelength" label="matter waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q657009" start="23768" end="23778" title="wavevector" label="wavevector"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="23812" end="23820" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q164129" start="24102" end="24127" title="reciprocal lattice" label="reciprocal lattice vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454926" start="24624" end="24638" title="Bloch electron" label="Bloch electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="24881" end="24895" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="25041" end="25054" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q230895" start="25255" end="25272" title="density of states" label="density of states"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="25294" end="25307" title="heat capacity" label="heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="25521" end="25534" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="25578" end="25590" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="25640" end="25651" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="25703" end="25709" title="random" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="25723" end="25733" title="Arithmetic mean" label="mean value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187860" start="26281" end="26291" title="photon gas" label="photon gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358078" start="26307" end="26329" title="electromagnetic cavity" label="electromagnetic cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="26539" end="26559" title="black-body radiation" label="black-body radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191076" start="26581" end="26605" title="Bose–Einstein statistics" label="Bose–Einstein statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="26902" end="26920" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="27019" end="27036" title="quantum tunneling" label="quantum tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="27261" end="27271" title="Thermal conduction" label="conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="27299" end="27308" title="thermal radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179635" start="27365" end="27378" title="heat transfer" label="heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q902336" start="27474" end="27509" title="creation and annihilation operators" label="creation and annihilation operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="27566" end="27577" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688953" start="27669" end="27678" title="Linear continuum" label="continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q865788" start="27682" end="27698" title="Bravais lattice" label="infinite lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q863349" start="27750" end="27763" title="Singularity (mathematics)" label="infinite term"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="28032" end="28043" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="28086" end="28098" title="vacuum state" label="vacuum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="28972" end="28999" title="quantum harmonic oscillator" label="quantum harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277876" start="29020" end="29044" title="particle number operator" label="particle number operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="29356" end="29362" title="bosons" label="bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="29393" end="29400" title="photons" label="photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689728" start="29427" end="29453" title="parametric down conversion" label="parametric down conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q661063" start="29463" end="29486" title="squeezed coherent state" label="squeezed coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086480" start="29558" end="29563" title="roton" label="roton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987233" start="29710" end="29723" title="negative mass" label="negative mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="30268" end="30285" title="Superconductivity" label="Superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="30327" end="30348" title="Electrical resistance and conductance" label="electrical resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="30362" end="30376" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q620057" start="30465" end="30476" title="Cooper pair" label="Cooper pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q24364" start="30572" end="30580" title="Force carrier" label="exchange"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30733" end="30747" title="BCS_theory#Underlying_evidence" label="isotope effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="31170" end="31175" title="Boson" label="Boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q578741" start="31178" end="31198" title="Brillouin scattering" label="Brillouin scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q537062" start="31201" end="31208" title="Fracton" label="Fracton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851760" start="31211" end="31228" title="Linear elasticity" label="Linear elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132631" start="31231" end="31246" title="Mechanical wave" label="Mechanical wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187311" start="31249" end="31266" title="Phonon scattering" label="Phonon scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046375" start="31269" end="31287" title="Carrier scattering" label="Carrier scattering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31290" end="31306" title="Acoustic metamaterials#Phononic crystal" label="Phononic crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351144" start="31309" end="31322" title="Rayleigh wave" label="Rayleigh wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310828" start="31325" end="31353" title="Relativistic heat conduction" label="Relativistic heat conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333814" start="31356" end="31372" title="Rigid unit modes" label="Rigid unit modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972615" start="31375" end="31380" title="SASER" label="SASER"/>
<link wikidata="Q233699" start="31383" end="31395" title="Second sound" label="Second sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q424074" start="31398" end="31419" title="Surface acoustic wave" label="Surface acoustic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646004" start="31422" end="31436" title="Surface phonon" label="Surface phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="31439" end="31459" title="Thermal conductivity" label="Thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="31462" end="31471" title="Vibration" label="Vibration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85757" wikidata="Q863248" url="?curid=85757" title="Trans-lunar injection">
<text>A trans-lunar injection (TLI) is a propulsive maneuver, which is used to send a spacecraft to the Moon. Typical lunar transfer trajectories approximate Hohmann transfers, although low-energy transfers have also been used in some cases, as with the Hiten probe. For short duration missions without significant perturbations from sources outside the Earth-Moon system, a fast Hohmann transfer is typically more practical.

A spacecraft performs TLI to begin a lunar transfer from a low circular parking orbit around Earth. The large TLI burn, usually performed by a chemical rocket engine, increases the spacecraft&#x27;s velocity, changing its orbit from a circular low Earth orbit to a highly eccentric orbit. As the spacecraft begins coasting on the lunar transfer arc, its trajectory approximates an elliptical orbit about the Earth with an apogee near to the radius of the Moon&#x27;s orbit. The TLI burn is sized and timed to precisely target the Moon as it revolves around the Earth. The burn is timed so that the spacecraft nears apogee as the Moon approaches. Finally, the spacecraft enters the Moon&#x27;s sphere of influence, making a hyperbolic lunar swingby.

== Free return ==

In some cases it is possible to design a TLI to target a free return trajectory, so that the spacecraft will loop around behind the Moon and return to Earth without need for further propulsive maneuvers.

Such free return trajectories add a margin of safety to human spaceflight missions, since the spacecraft will return to Earth &quot;for free&quot; after the initial TLI burn. The Apollos 8, 10 and 11 began on a free return trajectory, while the later missions used a functionally similar hybrid trajectory, in which a midway course correction is required to reach the Moon.

== Modeling ==
=== Patched conics ===
TLI targeting and lunar transfers are a specific application of the n body problem, which may be approximated in various ways. The simplest way to explore lunar transfer trajectories is by the method of patched conics. The spacecraft is assumed to accelerate only under classical 2 body dynamics, being dominated by the Earth until it reaches the Moon&#x27;s sphere of influence. Motion in a patched-conic system is deterministic and simple to calculate, lending itself for rough mission design and &quot;back of the envelope&quot; studies.

=== Restricted circular three body (RC3B) ===
More realistically, however, the spacecraft is subject to gravitational forces from many bodies. Gravitation from Earth and Moon dominate the spacecraft&#x27;s acceleration, and since the spacecraft&#x27;s own mass is negligible in comparison, the spacecraft&#x27;s trajectory may be better approximated as a restricted three-body problem. This model is a closer approximation but lacks an analytic solution, requiring numerical calculation.

=== Further accuracy ===
More detailed simulation involves modeling the Moon&#x27;s true orbital motion; gravitation from other astronomical bodies; the non-uniformity of the Earth&#x27;s and Moon&#x27;s gravity; including solar radiation pressure; and so on. Propagating spacecraft motion in such a model is numerically intensive, but necessary for true mission accuracy.

== History ==

The first space probe to attempt TLI was the Soviet Union&#x27;s Luna 1 on January 2, 1959 which was designed to impact the Moon. The burn however didn&#x27;t go exactly as planned and the spacecraft missed the Moon by more than three times its radius and was sent into a heliocentric orbit. Luna 2 performed the same maneuver more accurately on September 12, 1959 and crashed into the Moon two days later. The Soviets repeated this success with 22 more Luna missions and 5 Zond missions travelling to the Moon between 1959 and 1976.

The United States launched its first lunar impactor attempt, Ranger 3, on January 26, 1962, which failed to reach the Moon. This was followed by the first US success, Ranger 4, on April 23, 1962. Another 27 US missions to the Moon were launched from 1962 to 1973, including five successful Surveyor soft landers, five Lunar Orbiter surveillance probes, and nine Apollo missions, which landed the first humans on the Moon.

For the Apollo lunar missions, TLI was performed by the restartable J-2 engine in the S-IVB third stage of the Saturn V rocket. This particular TLI burn lasted approximately 350 seconds, providing 3.05 to 3.25 km/s (10,000 to 10,600 ft/s) of change in velocity, at which point the spacecraft was traveling at approximately 10.4 km/s (34150 ft/s) relative to the Earth. The Apollo 8 TLI was spectacularly observed from the Hawaiian Islands in the pre-dawn sky south of Waikiki, photographed and reported in the papers the next day. In 1969, the Apollo 10 pre-dawn TLI was visible from Cloncurry, Australia. It was described as resembling car headlights coming over a hill in fog, with the spacecraft appearing as a bright comet with a greenish tinge.

In 1990 Japan launched its first lunar mission, using the Hiten satellite to fly by the Moon and place the Hagoromo microsatellite in a lunar orbit. Following that, it explored a novel low delta-v TLI method with a 6-month transfer time (compared to 3 days for Apollo).

The 1994 US &quot;Clementine&quot; spacecraft, designed to showcase lightweight technologies, used a 3 week long TLI with two intermediate Earth flybys before entering a lunar orbit.

In 1997 Asiasat-3 became the first commercial satellite to reach the Moon&#x27;s sphere of influence when, after a launch failure, it swung by the Moon twice as a low delta-v way to reach its desired geostationary orbit. It passed within 6200 km of the Moon&#x27;s surface.

The 2003 ESA SMART-1 technology demonstrator satellite became the first European satellite to orbit the Moon. After being launched into a geostationary transfer orbit (GTO), it used solar powered ion engines for propulsion. As a result of its extremely low delta-v TLI maneuver, the spacecraft took over 13 months to reach a lunar orbit and 17 months to reach its desired orbit.

China launched its first Moon mission in 2007, placing the Chang&#x27;e 1 spacecraft in a lunar orbit. It used multiple burns to slowly raise its apogee to reach the vicinity of the Moon.

India followed in 2008, launching the Chandrayaan-1 into a GTO and, like the Chinese spacecraft, increasing its apogee over a number of burns.

The soft lander &quot;Beresheet&quot; from the Israel Aerospace Industries, used this maneuver in 2019, but crashed on the Moon.

In 2011 the NASA GRAIL satellites used a low delta-v route to the Moon, passing by the Sun-Earth L1 point, and taking over 3 months.

== See also ==
* Astrodynamics
* Comparison of super heavy lift launch systems
* Low energy transfer
* Trans-Earth injection
* Trans-Mars injection

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="2" end="23" title="Trans-lunar injection" label="trans-lunar injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q863248" start="25" end="28" title="Trans-lunar injection" label="TLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q801780" start="35" end="54" title="Orbital maneuver" label="propulsive maneuver"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="80" end="90" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="98" end="102" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q723861" start="152" end="168" title="Hohmann transfer orbit" label="Hohmann transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693005" start="180" end="199" title="low-energy transfer" label="low-energy transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q935149" start="248" end="253" title="Hiten (spacecraft)" label="Hiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="309" end="322" title="Perturbation theory" label="perturbations"/>
<link wikidata="Q862717" start="493" end="506" title="parking orbit" label="parking orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="514" end="519" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q801780" start="535" end="539" title="Orbital maneuver" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="573" end="579" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="665" end="680" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268240" start="693" end="708" title="Elliptical orbit" label="eccentric orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="843" end="849" title="apsis" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q928582" start="1114" end="1133" title="Sphere of influence (astrodynamics)" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q73994" start="1247" end="1269" title="free return trajectory" label="free return trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q739962" start="1299" end="1303" title="Loop quantum gravity" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="1451" end="1468" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199050" start="1876" end="1890" title="N-body problem" label="n body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144351" start="2011" end="2025" title="Patched Conics" label="patched conics"/>
<link wikidata="Q928582" start="2167" end="2186" title="Sphere of influence (astrodynamics)" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839010" start="2313" end="2333" title="Back-of-the-envelope calculation" label="back of the envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="2454" end="2474" title="Gravitational force" label="gravitational forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177149" start="2705" end="2734" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s three-body problem" label="restricted three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="3043" end="3050" title="Gravitational field" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="3062" end="3086" title="Solar wind" label="solar radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3273" end="3285" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159913" start="3293" end="3299" title="Luna 1" label="Luna 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159927" start="3520" end="3526" title="Luna 2" label="Luna 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q192372" start="3682" end="3686" title="Luna programme" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q219857" start="3702" end="3706" title="Zond program" label="Zond"/>
<link wikidata="Q609623" start="3824" end="3832" title="Ranger 3" label="Ranger 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q923962" start="3930" end="3938" title="Ranger 4" label="Ranger 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q339963" start="4053" end="4061" title="Surveyor program" label="Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q583625" start="4081" end="4094" title="Lunar Orbiter program" label="Lunar Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="4125" end="4131" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q967676" start="4254" end="4257" title="J-2 (rocket engine)" label="J-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q257161" start="4272" end="4277" title="S-IVB" label="S-IVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q54363" start="4297" end="4305" title="Saturn V" label="Saturn V"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="4334" end="4338" title="combustion" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184955" start="4428" end="4446" title="Delta-v" label="change in velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q664060" start="4770" end="4779" title="Cloncurry" label="Cloncurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="4781" end="4790" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4945" end="4950" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q935149" start="4995" end="5000" title="Hiten (spacecraft)" label="Hiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="5001" end="5010" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580082" start="5053" end="5067" title="Microsatellite (spaceflight)" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184955" start="5126" end="5133" title="delta-v" label="delta-v"/>
<link wikidata="Q49055" start="5226" end="5236" title="Clementine (spacecraft)" label="Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q338250" start="5400" end="5409" title="Asiasat-3" label="Asiasat-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q213498" start="5680" end="5687" title="SMART-1" label="SMART-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138649" start="5805" end="5833" title="geostationary transfer orbit" label="geostationary transfer orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49044" start="6106" end="6120" title="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1" label="Chang&amp;#x27;e 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49011" start="6274" end="6287" title="Chandrayaan-1" label="Chandrayaan-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q61742389" start="6402" end="6411" title="Beresheet" label="Beresheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="6427" end="6454" title="Israel Aerospace Industries" label="Israel Aerospace Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q116681" start="6527" end="6532" title="GRAIL" label="GRAIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q842433" start="6661" end="6674" title="Astrodynamics" label="Astrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611697" start="6677" end="6722" title="Comparison of super heavy lift launch systems" label="Comparison of super heavy lift launch systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693005" start="6725" end="6744" title="Low energy transfer" label="Low energy transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833514" start="6747" end="6768" title="Trans-Earth injection" label="Trans-Earth injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q737809" start="6771" end="6791" title="Trans-Mars injection" label="Trans-Mars injection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85758" wikidata="Q5267832" url="?curid=85758" title="Devonport Leat">
<text>The Devonport Leat is a leat in Devon constructed in the 1790s to carry fresh drinking water from the high ground of Dartmoor to the expanding dockyards at Plymouth Dock (which was renamed as Devonport, Devon on 1 January 1824).

==Feedwaters==
It is fed by five Dartmoor rivers: the West Dart, the Cowsic, the Hart Tor Brook, the River Meavy and the Blackabrook (this last apparently was the first portion to supply Plymouth Dock).

==Construction==
Dartmoor granite was used to construct the water channel, as well as a small aqueduct and a tunnel.

==Historic changes==
It was originally designed to carry water all the way to Plymouth Dock, a total distance of , but has since been shortened and the operational part of the leat now stops near the Burrator Reservoir dam. Some of the water goes through underground pipes to the water treatment works at Dousland; the rest goes into the Burrator Reservoir which provides most of the water supply of Plymouth. For part of the route to Dousland the pipes follow the route of the disused Yelverton to Princetown Railway. Before the piped supply to Dousland was installed, the water was used for a hydroelectric turbine near Yelverton Reservoir and fed by a pipe.

==Route==

The Devonport Leat begins a short distance to the north of Wistman&#x27;s Wood at an altitude of over and twice passes close to Two Bridges (following the contours up the Cowsic valley in between) before heading towards Princetown. Its water supply now ends up in Burrator Reservoir. It follows a meandering path across the moor, carefully selected by engineers to follow the natural contours of the land.

== See also ==
*Drake&#x27;s Leat

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5267832" start="4" end="18" title="Devonport Leat" label="Devonport Leat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14556915" start="24" end="28" title="leat" label="leat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="32" end="37" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="117" end="125" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245018" start="192" end="208" title="Devonport, Plymouth" label="Devonport, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984927" start="284" end="293" title="West Dart River" label="West Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337625" start="331" end="342" title="River Meavy" label="River Meavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="460" end="467" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="528" end="536" title="Aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000388" start="752" end="770" title="Burrator Reservoir" label="Burrator Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302323" start="857" end="865" title="Dousland" label="Dousland"/>
<link wikidata="Q540088" start="1038" end="1047" title="Yelverton, Devon" label="Yelverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221024" start="1051" end="1061" title="Princetown" label="Princetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1147" end="1160" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569474" start="1284" end="1303" title="Wistman&amp;#x27;s Wood" label="Wistman&amp;#x27;s Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858857" start="1353" end="1364" title="Two Bridges, Devon" label="Two Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221024" start="1445" end="1455" title="Princetown" label="Princetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225658" start="1489" end="1507" title="Dartmoor reservoirs" label="Burrator Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305574" start="1648" end="1665" title="Drake&amp;#x27;s Leat" label="Drake&amp;#x27;s Leat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85762" wikidata="Q25351" url="?curid=85762" title="Theodor Mommsen">
<text>Christian Matthias Theodor Mommsen (; ; 30 November 1817 – 1 November 1903) was a German classical scholar, historian, jurist, journalist, politician and archaeologist. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest classicists of the 19th century. He received the 1902 Nobel Prize in Literature for his historical writings, including &quot;The History of Rome&quot;, after having been nominated by 18 members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences. He was also a prominent German politician, as a member of the Prussian and German parliaments. His works on Roman law and on the law of obligations had a significant impact on the German civil code.

== Life ==
Mommsen was born to German parents in Garding in the Duchy of Schleswig in 1817, then ruled by the king of Denmark, and grew up in Bad Oldesloe in Holstein, where his father was a Lutheran minister. He studied mostly at home, though he attended the Gymnasium Christianeum in Altona for four years. He studied Greek and Latin and received his diploma in 1837. As he could not afford to study at Göttingen, he enrolled at the University of Kiel.

Mommsen studied jurisprudence at Kiel from 1838 to 1843, finishing his studies with the degree of Doctor of Roman Law. During this time he was the roommate of Theodor Storm, who was later to become a renowned poet. Together with Mommsen&#x27;s brother Tycho, the three friends even published a collection of poems (&quot;Liederbuch dreier Freunde&quot;). Thanks to a royal Danish grant, Mommsen was able to visit France and Italy to study preserved classical Roman inscriptions. During the revolution of 1848 he worked as a war correspondent in then-Danish Rendsburg, supporting the German annexation of Schleswig-Holstein and a constitutional reform. Having been forced to leave the country by the Danes, he became a professor of law in the same year at the University of Leipzig. When Mommsen protested against the new constitution of Saxony in 1851, he had to resign. However, the next year he obtained a professorship in Roman law at the University of Zurich and then spent a couple of years in exile. In 1854 he became a professor of law at the University of Breslau where he met Jakob Bernays. Mommsen became a research professor at the Berlin Academy of Sciences in 1857. He later helped to create and manage the German Archaeological Institute in Rome.

In 1858 Mommsen was appointed a member of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin, and he also became professor of Roman History at the University of Berlin in 1861, where he held lectures up to 1887. Mommsen received high recognition for his academic achievements: foreign membership of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1859, the Prussian medal Pour le Mérite in 1868, honorary citizenship of Rome, elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1870, and the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1902 for his main work &quot;Römische Geschichte&quot; (&quot;Roman History&quot;). (He is one of the very few non-fiction writers to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature.)

In 1873, he was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society.

At 2 a.m. on 7 July 1880 a fire occurred in the upper floor workroom-library of Mommsen&#x27;s house at Marchstraße 6 in Berlin. After being burned while attempting to remove valuable papers, he was restrained from returning to the blazing house. Several old manuscripts were burnt to ashes, including &quot;Manuscript 0.4.36&quot;, which was on loan from the library of Trinity College, Cambridge. There is information that the important Manuscript of Jordanes from Heidelberg University library was burnt. Two other important manuscripts, from Brussels and Halle, were also destroyed.

Mommsen had sixteen children with his wife Marie (daughter of the publisher and editor Karl Reimer of Leipzig). Their oldest daughter Maria married Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, the great Classics scholar. Their grandson Theodor Ernst Mommsen (1905–1958) became a professor of medieval history in the United States. Two of the great-grandsons, Hans Mommsen and Wolfgang Mommsen, were German historians.

== Mommsen as editor and organiser ==

While he was secretary of the Historical-Philological Class at the Berlin Academy (1874–1895), Mommsen organised countless scientific projects, mostly editions of original sources.

=== &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum&quot; ===
At the beginning of his career, when he published the inscriptions of the Neapolitan Kingdom (1852), Mommsen already had in mind a collection of all known ancient Latin inscriptions. He received additional impetus and training from Bartolomeo Borghesi of San Marino. The complete &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum&quot; would consist of seventeen volumes, the latest of which was published in 1986. Fifteen of these volumes were published still in Mommsen&#x27;s lifetime and he wrote five of them himself. The basic principle of the edition (contrary to previous collections) was the method of autopsy, according to which all copies (i.e., modern transcriptions) of inscriptions were to be checked and compared to the original.

=== Further editions and research projects ===
Mommsen published the fundamental collections in Roman law: the &quot;Corpus Iuris Civilis&quot; and the &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot;. Furthermore, he played an important role in the publication of the &quot;Monumenta Germaniae Historica&quot;, the edition of the texts of the Church Fathers, the limes romanus (Roman frontiers) research and countless other projects.

== Mommsen as politician ==

Mommsen was a delegate to the Prussian House of Representatives from 1863 to 1866 and again from 1873 to 1879, and delegate to the Reichstag from 1881 to 1884, at first for the liberal German Progress Party (&quot;Deutsche Fortschrittspartei&quot;), later for the National Liberal Party, and finally for the Secessionists. He was very concerned with questions about academic and educational policies and held national positions. Although he had supported German Unification, he was disappointed with the politics of the German Empire and he was quite pessimistic about its future. Mommsen strongly disagreed with Otto von Bismarck about social policies in 1881, advising collaboration between Liberals and Social Democrats and using such strong language that he narrowly avoided prosecution.

As a Liberal nationalist Mommsen favored assimilation of ethnic minorities into German society, not exclusion. In 1879, his colleague Heinrich von Treitschke began a political campaign against Jews (the so-called &quot;Berliner Antisemitismusstreit&quot;). Mommsen strongly opposed antisemitism and wrote a harsh pamphlet in which he denounced von Treitschke&#x27;s views. Mommsen viewed a solution to antisemitism in voluntary cultural assimilation, suggesting that the Jews could follow the example of the people of Schleswig-Holstein, Hanover and other German states, which gave up some of their special customs when integrating into Prussia.
Mommsen was a vehement spokesman for German nationalism, maintaining a militant attitude towards the Slavic nations, to the point of advocating the use of violence against them. In an 1897 letter to the &quot;Neue Freie Presse&quot; of Vienna, Mommsen called Czechs &quot;apostles of barbarism&quot; and wrote that &quot;the Czech skull is impervious to reason, but it is susceptible to blows&quot;.

== Influence of Mommsen ==
Fellow Nobel Laureate (1925) Bernard Shaw cited Mommsen&#x27;s interpretation of the last First Consul of the Republic, Julius Caesar, as one of the inspirations for his 1898 (1905 on Broadway) play, &quot;Caesar and Cleopatra&quot;.

Noted naval historian and theorist Alfred Thayer Mahan formulated the thesis for his magnum opus, &quot;The Influence of Sea Power Upon History&quot;, while reading Mommsen&#x27;s &quot;History of Rome&quot;.

The playwright Heiner Müller wrote a &#x27;performance text&#x27; entitled &quot;Mommsens Block&quot; (1993), inspired by the publication of Mommsen&#x27;s fragmentary notes on the later Roman empire and by the East German government&#x27;s decision to replace a statue of Karl Marx outside the Humboldt University of Berlin with one of Mommsen.

There is a Gymnasium (academic high school) named for Mommsen in his hometown of Bad Oldesloe, Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. His birthplace Garding in the west of Schleswig styles itself &quot;Mommsen-Stadt Garding&quot;.

===Mark Twain===
&quot;One of the highpoints of Mark Twain&#x27;s European tour of 1892 was a large formal banquet at the University of Berlin... . Mark Twain was an honoured guest, seated at the head table with some twenty &#x27;particularly eminent professors&#x27;; and it was from this vantage point that he witnessed the following incident...&quot; In Twain&#x27;s own words: 
When apparently the last eminent guest had long ago taken his place, again those three bugle-blasts rang out, and once more the swords leaped from their scabbards. Who might this late comer be? Nobody was interested to inquire. Still, indolent eyes were turned toward the distant entrance, and we saw the silken gleam and the lifted sword of a guard of honor plowing through the remote crowds. Then we saw that end of the house rising to its feet; saw it rise abreast the advancing guard all along like a wave. This supreme honor had been offered to no one before. There was an excited whisper at our table—&#x27;MOMMSEN!&#x27;—and the whole house rose. Rose and shouted and stamped and clapped and banged the beer mugs. Just simply a storm!

Then the little man with his long hair and Emersonian face edged his way past us and took his seat. I could have touched him with my hand—Mommsen!—think of it! ... I would have walked a great many miles to get a sight of him, and here he was, without trouble or tramp or cost of any kind. Here he was clothed in a titanic deceptive modesty which made him look like other men.

==Bibliography==
Mommsen published over 1,500 works, and effectively established a new framework for the systematic study of Roman history. He pioneered epigraphy, the study of inscriptions in material artefacts. Although the unfinished &quot;History of Rome&quot;, written early in his career, has long been widely considered as his main work, the work most relevant today is, perhaps, the &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum&quot;, a collection of Roman inscriptions he contributed to the Berlin Academy.

* Mommsen, Theodor. &quot;Rome, from earliest times to 44 B. C.&quot; (1906) online
* Mommsen, Theodor. &quot;History of Rome: Volume 1&quot; (1894) online edition 
* Mommsen, Theodor. &quot;History of Rome: Volume 2&quot; (1871) online edition 
* Mommsen, Theodor. &quot;History of Rome: Volume 3&quot; (1891) online edition
* Mommsen, Theodor. &quot;History of Rome: Volume 4&quot; (1908) online edition 
* Mommsen, Theodor: &quot;Römische Geschichte&quot;. 8 Volumes. dtv, München 2001. 
* &quot;The Provinces of the Roman Empire from Caesar to Diocletian&quot; (1885), published as volume 5 of his &quot;History of Rome&quot;, is a description of all Roman regions during the early imperial period.
* &quot;Roman Chronology to the Time of Caesar&quot; (1858) written with his brother August Mommsen.
* &quot;Roman Constitutional Law&quot; (1871–1888). This systematic treatment of Roman constitutional law in three volumes has been of importance for research on ancient history.
* &quot;Roman Criminal Law&quot; (1899)
* &quot;Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum&quot;, lead editor and editor (1861, et seq.)
* &quot;Digesta&quot; (of Justinian), editor (1866–1870, two volumes)
* &quot;Iordanis Romana et Getica&quot; (1882) was Mommsen&#x27;s critical edition of Jordanes&#x27; &quot;The Origin and Deeds of the Goths&quot; and has subsequently come to be generally known simply as &quot;Getica&quot;.
* &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot;, editor (1905, posthumous)
* &quot;Monumentum Ancyranum&quot;
* More than 1,500 further studies and treatises on single issues.

A bibliography of over 1,000 of his works is given by Zangemeister in &quot;Mommsen als Schriftsteller&quot; (1887; continued by Jacobs, 1905).

==See also==
* Statue of Theodor Mommsen, Humboldt University of Berlin

==References==
==Further reading==
* Carter, Jesse Benedict. &quot;Theodor Mommsen,&quot; &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot;, Vol. XCIII, 1904.
* Gay, Peter, and Victor G. Wexler (eds). &quot;Historians at Work&quot;, Vol. III, 1975, pp. 271+
* Lionel Gossman, &quot;Orpheus Philologus: Bachofen versus Mommsen on the Study of Antiquity.&quot; American Philosophical Society, 1983. .
* Anthony Grafton. &quot;Roman Monument&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; September 2006 online.
* Mueller, G. H. &quot;Weber and Mommsen: non-Marxist materialism,&quot; &quot;British Journal of Sociology,&quot; (March 1986), 37(1), pp. 1–20 in JSTOR
* Whitman, Sidney, and Theodor Mommsen. &quot;German Feeling toward England and America,&quot; &quot;North American Review&quot;, Vol. 170, No. 519 (Feb. 1900), pp. 240–243 online in JSTOR, an exchange of letters
* Krmnicek, Stefan (ed.). &quot;Theodor Mommsen (1817–1903) auf Medaillen und Plaketten.&quot; Sammlung des Instituts für Klassische Archäologie der Universität Tübingen (Von Krösus bis zu König Wilhelm. Neue Serie 2). Universitätsbibliothek Tübingen, Tübingen 2017, https://dx.doi.org/10.15496/publikation-19540.

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="0" end="34" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Christian Matthias Theodor Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="89" end="106" title="classics" label="classical scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="119" end="125" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="154" end="167" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="214" end="225" title="classicists" label="classicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q112811814" start="263" end="293" title="1902 Nobel Prize in Literature" label="1902 Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500229" start="339" end="358" title="The History of Rome (Mommsen)" label="The History of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="415" end="443" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="553" end="562" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q176006" start="574" end="592" title="law of obligations" label="law of obligations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165728" start="625" end="642" title="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch" label="German civil code"/>
<link wikidata="Q27324" start="694" end="701" title="Garding" label="Garding"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="709" end="727" title="Duchy of Schleswig" label="Duchy of Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q155226" start="787" end="799" title="Bad Oldesloe" label="Bad Oldesloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="803" end="811" title="Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="836" end="844" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q317150" start="905" end="927" title="Gymnasium Christianeum" label="Gymnasium Christianeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="931" end="937" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="965" end="970" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="975" end="980" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="1050" end="1059" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156737" start="1080" end="1098" title="University of Kiel" label="University of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="1117" end="1130" title="jurisprudence" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26993" start="1260" end="1273" title="Theodor Storm" label="Theodor Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="1591" end="1609" title="revolution of 1848" label="revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q490457" start="1658" end="1667" title="Rendsburg" label="Rendsburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1691" end="1723" title="Schleswig-Holstein#History" label="annexation of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="1860" end="1881" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="1938" end="1944" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q206702" start="2043" end="2063" title="University of Zurich" label="University of Zurich"/>
<link wikidata="Q315658" start="2151" end="2172" title="University of Breslau" label="University of Breslau"/>
<link wikidata="Q69019" start="2186" end="2199" title="Jakob Bernays" label="Jakob Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="2244" end="2270" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="2493" end="2513" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="2649" end="2695" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="2724" end="2738" title="Pour le Mérite" label="Pour le Mérite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="2802" end="2830" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="2848" end="2873" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="3095" end="3125" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="3387" end="3397" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="3499" end="3525" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="3581" end="3589" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="3595" end="3616" title="Ruprecht Karl University of Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3674" end="3682" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="3687" end="3692" title="Halle, Saxony-Anhalt" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q61863" start="3864" end="3898" title="Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff" label="Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417555" start="3943" end="3976" title="Theodor Ernst Mommsen (historian)" label="Theodor Ernst Mommsen (1905–1958)"/>
<link wikidata="Q70335" start="4066" end="4078" title="Hans Mommsen" label="Hans Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q68802" start="4083" end="4099" title="Wolfgang Mommsen" label="Wolfgang Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="4232" end="4246" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="4472" end="4482" title="Naples" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q581258" start="4630" end="4649" title="Bartolomeo Borghesi" label="Bartolomeo Borghesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="4653" end="4663" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="4684" end="4714" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="5248" end="5268" title="Corpus Iuris Civilis" label="Corpus Iuris Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300" start="5289" end="5307" title="Codex Theodosianus" label="Codex Theodosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316880" start="5388" end="5417" title="Monumenta Germaniae Historica" label="Monumenta Germaniae Historica"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="5457" end="5471" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="5477" end="5490" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316276" start="5608" end="5641" title="Prussian House of Representatives" label="Prussian House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q160208" start="5709" end="5718" title="Reichstag (German Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q694714" start="5763" end="5784" title="German Progress Party" label="German Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q694299" start="5842" end="5864" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q942383" start="5886" end="5899" title="Liberal Union (Germany)" label="Secessionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="6033" end="6051" title="German Unification" label="German Unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6098" end="6111" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="6191" end="6208" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q62400" start="6505" end="6528" title="Heinrich von Treitschke" label="Heinrich von Treitschke"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6653" end="6665" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="6799" end="6820" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="6889" end="6907" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="6909" end="6916" title="Hannover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="7008" end="7015" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="7118" end="7132" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919142" start="7226" end="7243" title="Neue Freie Presse" label="Neue Freie Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="7253" end="7259" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="7276" end="7282" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="7474" end="7486" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7629" end="7637" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501409" start="7651" end="7671" title="Caesar and Cleopatra (play)" label="Caesar and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="7715" end="7734" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139846" start="7784" end="7823" title="The Influence of Sea Power Upon History" label="The Influence of Sea Power Upon History"/>
<link wikidata="Q57426" start="7905" end="7918" title="Heiner Müller" label="Heiner Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="8101" end="8112" title="East German" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="8163" end="8172" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="8185" end="8214" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="Humboldt University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="8248" end="8257" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q155226" start="8318" end="8330" title="Bad Oldesloe" label="Bad Oldesloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27324" start="8376" end="8383" title="Garding" label="Garding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="8507" end="8517" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="8581" end="8601" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="9627" end="9637" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Emersonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="10086" end="10091" title="Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="10114" end="10123" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="10138" end="10149" title="inscription" label="inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500229" start="10204" end="10219" title="History of Rome (Mommsen)" label="History of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="10358" end="10388" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="10453" end="10467" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205382" start="10941" end="10944" title="dtv Verlagsgesellschaft" label="dtv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500229" start="11078" end="11093" title="History of Rome (Mommsen)" label="History of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722821" start="11258" end="11272" title="August Mommsen" label="August Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="11355" end="11379" title="Roman Law" label="Roman constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q691007" start="11501" end="11531" title="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum" label="Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q838526" start="11586" end="11593" title="Digest (Roman law)" label="Digesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="11604" end="11613" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="11734" end="11742" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="11859" end="11865" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300" start="11881" end="11899" title="Codex Theodosianus" label="Codex Theodosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733509" start="12089" end="12101" title="Karl Zangemeister" label="Zangemeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976703" start="12195" end="12220" title="Statue of Theodor Mommsen" label="Statue of Theodor Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555655" start="12496" end="12510" title="Lionel Gossman" label="Lionel Gossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q555308" start="12637" end="12652" title="Anthony Grafton" label="Anthony Grafton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85764" wikidata="Q5128009" url="?curid=85764" title="Class Warfare">
<text>Class Warfare is a book of collected interviews with Noam Chomsky conducted by David Barsamian. It was first published in the United States by Common Courage Press, and in the United Kingdom by Pluto Press, in 1996.

==Publishing history==
The book was published in clothbound () and paperback () forms in 1996.

It was republished by Oxford University Press (New Delhi) in 2005 ().

==Influence==
Writer Rob Williams has stated that &quot;Class War&quot; was a major inspiration for his superhero comic book series &quot;Cla$$war&quot;.

==See also==
*Class warfare

==Notes==
==External links==
*Robert McNamara excerpt
*Education is Ignorance excerpt
*Looking for the Magic Answer? excerpt
*Full text of &quot;Class Warfare&quot; from archive.org
*Full text of &quot;Class Warfare&quot; from archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="53" end="65" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231172" start="79" end="94" title="David Barsamian" label="David Barsamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753583" start="143" end="163" title="Common Courage Press" label="Common Courage Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017872" start="194" end="205" title="Pluto Press" label="Pluto Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q193955" start="266" end="276" title="clothbound" label="clothbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q193934" start="284" end="293" title="paperback" label="paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="335" end="358" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="360" end="369" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340653" start="405" end="417" title="Rob Williams (comics)" label="Rob Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="488" end="497" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="498" end="508" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297186" start="509" end="515" title="Limited series (comics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124840" start="522" end="530" title="Cla$$war" label="Cla$$war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="553" end="566" title="Class conflict" label="Class warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="738" end="749" title="archive.org" label="archive.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="795" end="806" title="archive.org" label="archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85765" wikidata="Q7162607" url="?curid=85765" title="Penet remailer">
<text>The Penet remailer () was a pseudonymous remailer operated by Johan &quot;Julf&quot; Helsingius of Finland from 1993 to 1996. Its initial creation stemmed from an argument in a Finnish newsgroup over whether people should be required to tie their real name to their online communications. Julf believed that people should not—indeed, could not—be required to do so. In his own words:
:&quot;Some people from a university network really argued about if everybody should put their proper name on the messages and everybody should be accountable, so you could actually verify that it is the person who is sending the messages. And I kept arguing that the Internet just doesn&#x27;t work that way, and if somebody actually tries to enforce that, the Internet will always find a solution around it. And just to prove my point, I spent two days or something cooking up the first version of the server, just to prove a point.&quot;

==Implementation==

Julf&#x27;s remailer worked by receiving an e-mail from a person, stripping away all the technical information that could be used to identify the original source of the e-mail, and then remailing the message to its final destination. The result provided Internet users with the ability to send e-mail messages and post to Usenet newsgroups without revealing their identities.

In addition, the Penet remailer used a type of “post office box” system in which users could claim their own anonymous e-mail addresses of the form &quot;an&quot;xxxxx&quot;@anon.penet.fi&quot;, allowing them to assign pseudonymous identities to their anonymous messages, and to receive messages sent to their (anonymous) e-mail addresses.

While the basic concept was effective, the Penet remailer had several vulnerabilities which threatened the anonymity of its users. Chief among them was the need to store a list of real e-mail addresses mapped to the corresponding anonymous e-mail addresses on the server. A potential attacker needed only to access that list to compromise the identities of all of Penet&#x27;s users. The Penet remailer was on two occasions required by the legal system in Finland (the country where the Penet server hardware resided) to turn over the real e-mail address that was mapped to an anonymous e-mail address. Another potential vulnerability was that messages sent to and from the remailer were all sent in cleartext, making it vulnerable to electronic eavesdropping.

Later anonymous remailer designs, such as the Cypherpunk and Mixmaster designs, adopted more sophisticated techniques to try to overcome these vulnerabilities, including the use of encryption to prevent eavesdropping, and also the technique known as onion routing to allow the existence of pseudonymous remailers in which no record of a user&#x27;s real e-mail address is stored by the remailer.

Despite its relatively weak security, the Penet remailer was a hugely popular remailer owing to its ease of anonymous account set-up and use compared to more secure but less user-friendly remailers, and had over 700,000 registered users at the time of its shutdown in September 1996.

==First compromise==
In the summer of 1994, word spread online of the Penet remailer being compromised, with the announcement being made at the hacker convention DEF CON II. &quot;Wired&quot; magazine reported at the time:

This was followed a year later by a mention in the announcement for DEF CON III:
SPEAKERS
Sarah Gordon, AKA Theora, a veteran of DC II will be presenting another speech this year. Last year she organized a round table discussion with Phil Zimmermann and Presence, and revealed that the Anonymous remailer anon.penet.fi was compromised. TOPIC: Not Announced Yet.
==Second compromise==
The second reported compromise of the Penet remailer occurred in February 1995 at the behest of the Church of Scientology. Claiming that a file had been stolen from one of the Church&#x27;s internal computer servers and posted to the newsgroup alt.religion.scientology by a Penet user, representatives of the Church contacted Interpol, who in turn contacted the Finnish police, who issued a search warrant demanding that Julf hand over data on the users of the Penet remailer. Initially Julf was asked to turn over the identities of all users of his remailer (which numbered 200,000 at the time), but he managed a compromise and revealed only the single user being sought by the Church of Scientology.

The anonymous user in question used the handle &quot;-AB-&quot; when posting anonymously, and their real e-mail address indicated that they were an alumnus or alumna of the California Institute of Technology. The document he posted was an internal report by a Scientology private investigator, Eugene Ingram, about an incident that had occurred involving a man named Tom Klemesrud, a BBS operator involved in a controversy. The confusing story became known on the Internet as the &quot;Miss Blood Incident&quot;.

Eventually the Church learned the real identity of &quot;-AB-&quot; to be Tom Rummelhart, a Scientologist and computer operator responsible for some of the maintenance of the Church of Scientology&#x27;s INCOMM computer system. The fate of &quot;-AB-&quot; after the Church of Scientology learned his true identity is unknown. Years later in 2003, a two-part story entitled &quot;What Really Happened in INCOMM - Part 1&quot; and &quot;What Really Happened in INCOMM – Part 2&quot; was posted to alt.religion.scientology by a former Scientologist named Dan Garvin, which described events within the Church leading up to and stemming from the Penet posting by &quot;-AB-&quot;.

==Other attacks==
Julf was also contacted by the government of Singapore as part of an effort to discover who was posting messages critical of the nation&#x27;s government in the newsgroup soc.culture.singapore, but as Finnish law did not recognise any crime being committed, Julf was not required to reveal the user&#x27;s identity.

In August 1996, a British newspaper, &quot;The Observer&quot;, published an article describing the Penet remailer as a major hub of child pornography, quoting a United States FBI investigator named Toby Tyler as saying that Penet was responsible for between 75% and 90% of the child pornography being distributed on the Internet. Investigations by online journalist Declan McCullagh demonstrated many errors and omissions in the &quot;Observer&quot; article. In an article penned by McCullagh, the alleged FBI investigator described himself as a sergeant in California&#x27;s San Bernardino sheriff&#x27;s office who only consulted with the FBI from time to time, a relationship which the &quot;Observer&quot; article had in his opinion purposefully misrepresented as some kind of employment relationship. Tyler also claimed that the &quot;Observer&quot; purposely misquoted him, and he had actually said that most child pornography posted to newsgroups does not go through remailers.

In addition, Julf claimed that he explained to the &quot;Observer&quot; the steps he took to prevent child pornography from being posted by forbidding posting to the alt.binaries newsgroups and limiting the size of messages to 16 kilobytes, too small to allow uuencoded binaries such as pictures to be posted. He also informed the &quot;Observer&quot; of an investigation already performed by the Finnish police which had found no evidence that child pornography was being remailed through Penet. Julf claims that all this information was ignored, stating that the &quot;Observer&quot; &quot;wanted to make a story so they made things up.&quot;

Despite voluminous reader mail pointing to the numerous errors in the news story, the &quot;Observer&quot; never issued a full retraction of its claims, only going so far as to clarify that Johan Helsingius had &quot;consistently denied&quot; the claims of child pornography distribution.

In September 1996, the Church of Scientology again sought information from Julf as part of its court case against a critic of the Church named Grady Ward. The Church wanted to know if Ward had posted any information through the Penet remailer. Ward gave Julf explicit permission to reveal the extent of his alleged use of the Penet remailer, and Julf told the Church that he could find no evidence that Ward had ever used the Penet remailer at all.

==Third compromise and shutdown==
In September 1996, an anonymous user posted the confidential writings of the Church of Scientology through the Penet remailer. The Church once again demanded that Julf turn over the identity of one of its users, claiming that the poster had infringed the Church&#x27;s copyright on the confidential material. The Church was successful in finding the originating e-mail address of the posting before Penet remailed it, but it turned out to be another anonymous remailer: the alpha.c2.org nymserver, a more advanced and more secure remailer which didn&#x27;t keep a mapping of e-mail addresses that could be subpoenaed.

Facing much criticism and many attacks, and unable to guarantee the anonymity of Penet users, Julf shut down the remailer in September 1996.

==See also==

* Anonymous remailer
* Crypto-anarchism
* Cypherpunk
* Pseudonymous remailer
* Sintercom
* Scientology and law
* Scientology and the Internet

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* (Transcription hosted by Cyberspace Law Institute)

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7162607" start="4" end="18" title="Penet remailer" label="Penet remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944629" start="28" end="49" title="pseudonymous remailer" label="pseudonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6215118" start="62" end="95" title="Johan Helsingius" label="Johan &amp;quot;Julf&amp;quot; Helsingius"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="185" end="194" title="Usenet newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="2120" end="2127" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="2364" end="2373" title="cleartext" label="cleartext"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148190" start="2472" end="2482" title="Cypherpunk anonymous remailer" label="Cypherpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q177722" start="2487" end="2496" title="Mixmaster anonymous remailer" label="Mixmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q392095" start="2676" end="2689" title="onion routing" label="onion routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152956" start="3270" end="3277" title="DEF CON" label="DEF CON"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="3288" end="3293" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422344" start="3422" end="3434" title="Sarah Gordon (computer scientist)" label="Sarah Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912691" start="3440" end="3446" title="Theora Jones" label="Theora"/>
<link wikidata="Q455938" start="3566" end="3581" title="Phil Zimmermann" label="Phil Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="3816" end="3837" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735914" start="3960" end="3984" title="alt.religion.scientology" label="alt.religion.scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8475" start="4042" end="4050" title="Interpol" label="Interpol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4592" end="4626" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4830" end="4841" title="Scientology and the Internet#Raids and lawsuits" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117183" start="5137" end="5143" title="INCOMM" label="INCOMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735914" start="5429" end="5453" title="alt.religion.scientology" label="alt.religion.scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="5674" end="5683" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="5989" end="6001" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="6078" end="6095" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="6121" end="6124" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249361" start="6312" end="6328" title="Declan McCullagh" label="Declan McCullagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="6504" end="6514" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q486168" start="6522" end="6536" title="San Bernardino, California" label="San Bernardino"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="7111" end="7121" title="newsgroups" label="newsgroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570391" start="7192" end="7200" title="uuencode" label="uuencode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="7891" end="7912" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541286" start="8011" end="8021" title="Grady Ward" label="Grady Ward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8400" end="8421" title="Operating Thetan#Confidential materials" label="confidential writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="8429" end="8450" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433865" start="8607" end="8630" title="Scientology and the legal system" label="Church&amp;#x27;s copyright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8638" end="8659" title="Timeline_of_Scientology#1994" label="confidential material"/>
<link wikidata="Q944629" start="8839" end="8848" title="Nym server" label="nymserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="8958" end="8966" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="9129" end="9147" title="Anonymous remailer" label="Anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q794833" start="9150" end="9166" title="Crypto-anarchism" label="Crypto-anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434323" start="9169" end="9179" title="Cypherpunk" label="Cypherpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q944629" start="9182" end="9203" title="Pseudonymous remailer" label="Pseudonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525108" start="9206" end="9215" title="Sintercom" label="Sintercom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433865" start="9218" end="9237" title="Scientology and law" label="Scientology and law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260265" start="9240" end="9268" title="Scientology and the Internet" label="Scientology and the Internet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85766" wikidata="Q5245078" url="?curid=85766" title="Dead Air (novel)">
<text>Dead Air is a Scottish novel by Iain Banks, published in 2002.

==Plot introduction==
The book revolves around the life of Kenneth Nott, a radio DJ on a London station called Capital Live!

==Plot summary==
The first person narrative begins on 11 September 2001, and Banks uses the protagonist&#x27;s conversations - both on the radio and off - to discuss the consequences of the terrorist attacks in the United States on that day. Ken Nott is at a loft party in London at the crucial moment.

The reader hears many of Nott&#x27;s shock-jock lines (&quot;Guns for nutters only; makes sense.&quot;) and sees him described as a sexually promiscuous party animal fuelled by alcohol and other drugs. His politics are left-wing and libertarian, and he rants at every chance.

Nott&#x27;s various girlfriends (including Jo, who does public relations for an indie band called Addicta), his long-suffering radio show colleague Phil, and his black DJ friend Ed are described. Apart from the expected difficulties associated with being a politically controversial radio DJ, everything is going smoothly for Ken until he meets Celia (or &quot;Ceel&quot;), a gangster&#x27;s wife, whom he falls in love with. An indiscretion with a mobile phone and an answering machine leads him into some difficult and frightening situations.

==Literary significance and criticism==
The book was not generally well received by critics. While Banks&#x27; story-telling skills were acknowledged, some felt that this was less satisfying, in contrast to &quot;Look to Windward&quot;, his previous book (under the Iain M Banks guise). Like &quot;The Business&quot;, &quot;Dead Air&quot; is very topical, with much detailed background on technology and contemporary political issues.

&quot;Major rethink on format after the events of September the eleventh,&quot; Phil says, about a delay to a television show they are planning. &quot;What a brilliant excuse that&#x27;s turned out to be, for so many things.&quot; The cover of the novel conjures images of the attack as it shows an old picture of two of the chimneys of London&#x27;s Battersea Power Station with an aeroplane above them. Critics charged that Banks used the dramatic events of 9/11, and other features of the early 21st century, more as wallpaper than in any meaningful or resonant way.

Critics also felt that Banks did not successfully establish a distance between his own voice and that of the protagonist. Nott&#x27;s rants are often passionate and articulate; this book was written at the time Banks was building up to cutting up his passport and taking part in the campaign to impeach Tony Blair. Some of these political ideas are developed further in &quot;Raw Spirit&quot;.

Ken Nott resembles a happier version of Cameron Colley, the main character in Banks&#x27; earlier novel &quot;Complicity&quot;.

==Release details==
* 2002, UK, Little Brown (), Pub date ? ? 2002, hardback (First edition)

==References==
==External links==
* Guardian review 14 September 2002.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16962023" start="14" end="28" title="Scottish novel" label="Scottish novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="32" end="42" title="Iain Banks" label="Iain Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="139" end="147" title="radio DJ" label="radio DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q616622" start="211" end="233" title="first person narrative" label="first person narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="380" end="418" title="September 11, 2001 Terrorist Attack" label="terrorist attacks in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499869" start="531" end="541" title="shock-jock" label="shock-jock"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="713" end="722" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="727" end="738" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="851" end="856" title="Indie (music)" label="indie"/>
<link wikidata="Q46961" start="1147" end="1155" title="gangster" label="gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q884010" start="1530" end="1546" title="Look to Windward" label="Look to Windward"/>
<link wikidata="Q312579" start="1583" end="1595" title="Iain M Banks" label="Iain M Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720737" start="1615" end="1627" title="The Business (novel)" label="The Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q810953" start="2104" end="2127" title="Battersea Power Station" label="Battersea Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="2627" end="2637" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296891" start="2700" end="2710" title="Raw Spirit" label="Raw Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156663" start="2829" end="2839" title="Complicity (novel)" label="Complicity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85767" wikidata="Q944629" url="?curid=85767" title="Pseudonymous remailer">
<text>A pseudonymous remailer or nym server, as opposed to an anonymous remailer, is an Internet software program designed to allow people to write pseudonymous messages on Usenet newsgroups and send pseudonymous email. Unlike purely anonymous remailers, it assigns its users a user name, and it keeps a database of instructions on how to return messages to the real user. These instructions usually involve the anonymous remailer network itself, thus protecting the true identity of the user.

Primordial pseudonymous remailers once recorded enough information to trace the identity of the real user, making it possible for someone to obtain the identity of the real user through legal or illegal means. This form of pseudonymous remailer is no longer common.

David Chaum wrote an article in 1981 that described many of the features present in modern pseudonymous remailers.

The Penet remailer, which lasted from 1993 to 1996, was a popular pseudonymous remailer.

==Contemporary nym servers==
A nym server (short for &quot;pseudonym server&quot;) is a server that provides an untraceable e-mail address, such that neither the nym server operator nor the operators of the remailers involved can discover which nym corresponds to which real identity.

To set up a nym, one creates a PGP keypair and submits it to the nym server, along with instructions (called a &quot;reply block&quot;) to anonymous remailers (such as Cypherpunk or Mixmaster) on how to send a message to one&#x27;s real address. The nym server returns a confirmation through this reply block. One then sends a message to the address in the confirmation.

To send a message through the nym server so that the &quot;From&quot; address is the nym, one adds a few headers, signs the message with one&#x27;s nym key, encrypts it with the nym server key, and sends the message to the nym server, optionally routing it through some anonymous remailers. When the nym server receives the message it decrypts it and sends it on to the intended recipient, with the &quot;From&quot; address indicating one&#x27;s nym.

When the nym server gets a message addressed &quot;to&quot; the nym, it appends it to the nym&#x27;s reply block and sends it to the first remailer in the chain, which sends it to the next and so on until it reaches your real address. It is considered good practice to include instructions to encrypt it on the way, so that someone (or some organization) doing in/out traffic analysis on the nym server cannot easily match the message received by you to the one sent by the nym server.

Existing &quot;multi-use reply block&quot; nym servers were shown to be susceptible to passive traffic analysis with one month&#x27;s worth of incoming spam (based on 2005 figures) in a paper by Bram Cohen, Len Sassaman, and Nick Mathewson.

==See also==

* Anonymity
** Anonymous P2P
** Anonymous remailer
*** Cypherpunk anonymous remailer (Type I)
*** Mixmaster anonymous remailer (Type II)
*** Mixminion (Type III)
*** I2P-Bote
** Onion routing
*** Tor (network)
* Data privacy
* Penet remailer
* Traffic analysis

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Anonymous Remailer FAQ
* Mixmaster FAQ
* Official I2P-Bote eepsite (I2P-internal)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q944629" start="2" end="23" title="Pseudonymous remailer" label="pseudonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q944629" start="27" end="37" title="Pseudonymous remailer" label="nym server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="56" end="74" title="anonymous remailer" label="anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="82" end="90" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="142" end="151" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="167" end="173" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="207" end="212" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173973" start="756" end="767" title="David Chaum" label="David Chaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162607" start="876" end="890" title="Penet remailer" label="Penet remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="1021" end="1030" title="pseudonymity" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="1050" end="1056" title="Server (computing)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227452" start="1279" end="1282" title="Pretty Good Privacy" label="PGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="1387" end="1405" title="anonymous remailer" label="anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148190" start="1416" end="1426" title="Cypherpunk anonymous remailer" label="Cypherpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q177722" start="1430" end="1439" title="Mixmaster anonymous remailer" label="Mixmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="2440" end="2456" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83058" start="2711" end="2715" title="Spam (electronic)" label="spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q318489" start="2754" end="2764" title="Bram Cohen" label="Bram Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523530" start="2766" end="2778" title="Len Sassaman" label="Len Sassaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q94817821" start="2784" end="2798" title="Nick Mathewson" label="Nick Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="2817" end="2826" title="Anonymity" label="Anonymity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544432" start="2830" end="2843" title="Anonymous P2P" label="Anonymous P2P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="2847" end="2865" title="Anonymous remailer" label="Anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148190" start="2870" end="2899" title="Cypherpunk anonymous remailer" label="Cypherpunk anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177722" start="2913" end="2941" title="Mixmaster anonymous remailer" label="Mixmaster anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q388632" start="2956" end="2965" title="Mixminion" label="Mixminion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2981" end="2989" title="I2P#I2P-Bote" label="I2P-Bote"/>
<link wikidata="Q392095" start="2993" end="3006" title="Onion routing" label="Onion routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="3011" end="3024" title="Tor (network)" label="Tor (network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="3027" end="3039" title="Data privacy" label="Data privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162607" start="3042" end="3056" title="Penet remailer" label="Penet remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="3059" end="3075" title="Traffic analysis" label="Traffic analysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85768" wikidata="Q381854" url="?curid=85768" title="Casimir Pulaski">
<text>Kazimierz Michał Władysław Wiktor Pułaski (; March 4 or 6, 1745 October 11, 1779), anglicized as Casimir Pulaski ( ), was a Polish nobleman, soldier, and military commander who has been called &quot;The Father of American cavalry&quot; or &quot;The Soldier of Liberty&quot;.

Born in Warsaw and following in his father&#x27;s footsteps, he became interested in politics at an early age. He soon became involved in the military and in revolutionary affairs in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. Pulaski was one of the leading military commanders for the Bar Confederation and fought against the Commonwealth&#x27;s foreign domination. When this uprising failed, he was driven into exile.

Following a recommendation by Benjamin Franklin, Pulaski traveled to North America to help in the American Revolutionary War. He distinguished himself throughout the revolution, most notably when he saved the life of George Washington. Pulaski became a general in the Continental Army, and he and his friend, the Hungary-born colonel commandant Michael Kovats, raised Pulaski&#x27;s Legion and reformed the American cavalry as a whole. At the siege of Savannah, while leading a cavalry charge against British forces, he was fatally wounded by grapeshot and died shortly after.

Pulaski is remembered as a hero who fought for independence and freedom in Poland and the United States. Numerous places and events are named in his honor, and he is commemorated by many works of art. Pulaski is one of only eight people to be awarded honorary United States citizenship.

==Personal life==
Pulaski was born on March 6, 1745, in the manor house of the Pułaski family in Warsaw, Poland. Casimir was the second eldest son of Marianna Zielińska and Józef Pułaski, who was an &quot;advocatus&quot; at the Crown Tribunal, the Starost of Warka, and one of the town&#x27;s most notable inhabitants. He was a brother of and . His family bore the Ślepowron coat of arms.

The Pułaski family was Catholic. Early in his youth, Casimir Pulaski attended an elite college run by Theatines, a male religious order of the Catholic Church in Warsaw, but did not finish his education.

There is some circumstantial evidence that Pulaski was a Freemason. When Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette laid the cornerstone of the monument erected in Pulaski&#x27;s honour in Monterey Square in Savannah in 1824, a full Masonic ceremony took place with Richard T. Turner, High Priest of the Georgia chapter, conducting the service. Other sources claim Pulaski was a member of the Masonic Army Lodge in Maryland. A Masonic Lodge in Chicago is named &quot;Casimir Pulaski Lodge, No.1167&quot;, and a brochure issued by the lodge claims he obtained the degree of Master Mason on June 19, 1779, and was buried with full Masonic honours. To date, no surviving documents of Pulaski&#x27;s actual membership have been found.

==Military career==
In 1762, Pulaski started his military career as a page of Carl Christian Joseph of Saxony, Duke of Courland and the Polish king&#x27;s vassal. He spent six months at the ducal court in Mitau, during which the court was interned in the palaces by the Russian forces occupying the area. He then returned to Warsaw, and his father gave him the village of Zezulińce in Podole; from that time, Pulaski used the title of Starost of Zezulińce.

===Bar Confederation===
He took part in the 1764 election of the new Polish monarch, Stanisław II Augustus, with his family. In December 1767, Pulaski and his father became involved with the Bar Confederation, which saw King Stanisław as a Russian puppet and sought to curtail Russian hegemony over the Commonwealth. The confederation was actively opposed by the Russian forces stationed in Poland. Pulaski recruited a unit and, on February 29, 1768, signed the act of the confederation, thus declaring himself an official supporter of the movement.

On March 6, he received a &quot;pułkownik&quot; (colonel) rank and commanded a &quot;chorągiew&quot; of cavalry. In March and April, Pulaski agitated among the Polish military, successfully convincing some forces to join the Confederates. He fought his first battle on April 20 near Pohorełe. It was a victory, as was another on April 23 near Starokostiantyniv. An engagement at Kaczanówka on April 28 resulted in a defeat. In early May, he garrisoned Chmielnik (Khmilnyk) but was forced to retreat when allied reinforcements were defeated.

He retreated to a monastery in Berdyczów, which he defended during a siege by royalist forces for over two weeks until June 16. Eventually, he was forced to surrender and was taken captive by the Russians. On June 28, he was released in exchange for a pledge that he would not again take up arms with the Confederates, and that he would lobby the Confederates to end hostilities. However, Pulaski considered the assurance to be non-binding and made a public declaration to that effect upon reaching a camp of the Confederates at the end of July. Agreeing to the pledge in the first place weakened his authority and popularity among the Confederates, and his own father considered whether or not he should be Court-martialed. Some heated debates followed, and Pulaski was reinstated to active-duty only in early September.


In 1769, Pulaski&#x27;s unit was again besieged by numerically superior forces, this time in the old fortress of Okopy Świętej Trójcy, which had served as his base of operations since December the previous year. After a staunch defence, he was able to break the Russian siege. On April 7, he was made the &quot;regimentarz&quot; of the Kraków Voivodeship. In May and June he operated near Przemyśl, but failed to take the town. Criticized by some of his fellow Confederates, Pulaski departed to Lithuania with his allies and a force of about 600 men on June 3. 
There, Pulaski attempted to incite a larger revolt against Russia.

Despite no decisive military successes, he was able to assemble a 4,000-strong army and deliver it back to a Confederate staging point. This excursion received international notice and gained him a reputation as the most effective military leader in the Bar Confederation. Next, he moved with his unit towards Zamość and — after nearly losing his life to the inferior forces of the future Generalissimo Alexander Suvorov in the disastrous Battle of Orekhowa — on the next day, September 15, he was again defeated at the Battle of Włodawa, with his forces almost completely dispelled. He spent the rest of the year rebuilding his unit in the region of Podkarpacie.

In February 1770, Pulaski moved near Nowy Targ, and in March, helped to subdue the mutiny of Józef Bierzyński. Based in Izby, he operated in southern Lesser Poland. On May 13 his force was defeated at the Battle of Dęborzyn. Around June 9–10 in Prešov, in a conference with other Confederate leaders, he met Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor, who complimented Pulaski on his actions. On July 3–4, Pulaski&#x27;s camp was captured by Johann von Drewitz, and he was forced to retreat into Austria. Early in August he met with the French emissary, Charles François Dumouriez. He disregarded an order to take Lanckorona and instead cooperated with Michał Walewski in a raid on Kraków on the night of August 31.

He then departed for Częstochowa. On September 10, along with Walewski, he used subterfuge to take control of the Jasna Góra monastery. On September 18 he met Franciszka z Krasińskich, an aristocrat from the Krasiński family and the wife of Charles of Saxony, Duke of Courland. He impressed her and she became one of his protectors. Around September 22–24 Walewski was made the commandant of Jasna Góra, which slighted Pulaski. Nonetheless, he continued as the &quot;de facto&quot; commander of Confederate troops stationed in and around Jasna Góra.

Between September 10, 1770, and January 14, 1771, Pulaski, Walewski and Józef Zaremba commanded the Polish forces during the siege of Jasna Góra monastery. They successfully defended against Drewitz in a series of engagements, the largest one on November 11, followed by a siege from December 31 to January 14. The defense of Jasna Góra further enhanced his reputation among the Confederates and abroad. A popular Confederate song taunting Drewitz included lyrics about Pulaski and Jasna Góra. Pulaski intended to pursue Drewitz, but a growing discord between him and Zaremba prevented this from becoming a real option.

In February 1771, Pulaski operated around Lublin. On February 25 he was victorious at Tarłów and on the night of February 28 and March 1, his forces besieged Kraśnik. In March that year he became one of the members of the Confederates&#x27; War Council. Dumouriez, who became a military adviser to the Confederates, at the time described him as &quot;spontaneous, more proud than ambitious, friend of the prince of Courland, enemy of the Potocki family, brave and honest&quot; as well as popular among other commanders. This was due to his refusal to follow orders and adhere to discipline. Jędrzej Kitowicz who met him as well around that time described him as short and thin, pacing and speaking quickly, and uninterested in women or drinking. He enjoyed fighting against the Russians above everything else, and was daring to the extent he forgot about his safety in battles, resulting in his many failures on the battlefield.

In May 1771, Pulaski advanced on Zamość, refusing to coordinate an operation with Dumouriez against Alexander Suvorov. Without Pulaski&#x27;s support, the Confederates were defeated at the Battle of Lanckorona. Pulaski&#x27;s forces were victorious at the Battle of Majdany, and briefly besieged Zamość, but it was relieved by Suvorov. He retreated, suffering major losses, towards Częstochowa. On July 27, pressured by Franciszka z Krasińskich, he declared he would from then on strictly adhere to orders from the Confederacy that he had previously habitually disregarded.

In October his responsibilities in the War Council were increased, and the same month he became involved with the plan to kidnap King Poniatowski. Pulaski was initially opposed to this plan but later supported it on the condition that the king would not be harmed. The attempt failed, weakening the international reputation of the Confederates. When Pulaski&#x27;s involvement with the attempted kidnapping became known, the Austrians expelled him from their territories. He spent the following winter and spring in Częstochowa, during which time several of his followers were defeated, captured or killed.

On May 31, 1772, Pulaski, increasingly distanced from other leaders of the Confederation, left the Jasna Góra monastery and went to Silesia in Prussia. In the meantime, the Bar Confederation was defeated, with most fighting ending around the summer. Overall, Pulaski was seen as one of the most famous and accomplished Confederate leaders. At the same time, he often acted independently, disobeying orders from Confederate command, and among his detractors, which included Dumouriez, had a reputation of a &quot;loose cannon&quot;. The First Partition of Poland occurred in 1772.

Leaving Prussia, Pulaski sought refuge in France, where he unsuccessfully attempted to join the French Army. In 1773, his opponents in Poland accused him of attempted regicide, and proceedings began at the Sejm Court on June 7. The Partition Sejm had been convened by the victors to validate the First Partition.

Poniatowski himself warned Pulaski to stay away from Poland, or risk death. The court verdict, declared &quot;in absentia&quot; in July, stripped Pulaski of &quot;all dignity and honors&quot;, demanded that his possessions be confiscated, and sentenced him to death. He attempted to recreate a Confederate force in the Ottoman Empire during the Russo-Turkish War, but before he could make any progress, the Turks were defeated, and he barely escaped by sea to Marseille, France. He found himself in debt and unable to find an army that would enlist him. He spent the year of 1775 in France, imprisoned at times for debts, until his allies gathered enough funds to arrange for his release. Around that time, due to the efforts of his friend Claude-Carloman de Rulhière, he was recruited by the Marquis de Lafayette and Benjamin Franklin, who he met in spring 1777, for service in the American Revolutionary War.

===In the United States===

====Northern front====
Franklin was impressed by Pulaski, and wrote of him: &quot;Count Pulaski of Poland, an officer famous throughout Europe for his bravery and conduct in defence of the liberties of his country against the three great invading powers of Russia, Austria and Prussia ... may be highly useful to our service.&quot; He subsequently recommended that General George Washington accept Pulaski as a volunteer in the Continental Army cavalry. Pulaski departed France from Nantes in June, and arrived in Marblehead, Massachusetts, near Boston, on July 23, 1777. After his arrival, Pulaski wrote to Washington, &quot;I came here, where freedom is being defended, to serve it, and to live or die for it.&quot;
On August 20, he met Washington in his headquarters in Neshaminy Falls, outside Philadelphia. He showed off riding stunts, and argued for the superiority of cavalry over infantry. Because Washington was unable to grant him an officer rank, Pulaski spent the next few months traveling between Washington and the United States Congress in Philadelphia, awaiting his appointment. His first military engagement against the British occurred before he received it, on September 11, 1777, at the Battle of Brandywine.

When the Continental Army troops began to yield, he reconnoitered with Washington&#x27;s bodyguard of about 30 men, and reported that the enemy were endeavoring to cut off the line of retreat. Washington ordered him to collect as many as possible of the scattered troops who came his way and employ them according to his discretion to secure the retreat of the army. His subsequent charge averted a disastrous defeat of the Continental Army cavalry, earning him fame in America and saving the life of George Washington.

As a result, on September 15, 1777, on the orders of Congress, Washington commissioned Pulaski a brigadier general in the Continental Army cavalry. At that point, the cavalry was only a few hundred men strong organized into four regiments. These men were scattered among numerous infantry formations, and used primarily for scouting duties. Pulaski immediately began work on reforming the cavalry, and wrote the first regulations for the formation.

On September 16, while on patrol west of Philadelphia, Pulaski spotted significant British forces moving toward the Continental position. Upon being informed by Pulaski, Washington prepared for a battle, but the encounter was interrupted by a major storm before either side was organized. On October 4, Pulaski took part in the Battle of Germantown. He spent the winter of 1777 to 1778 with most of the army at Valley Forge. Pulaski argued that the military operations should continue through the winter, but this idea was rejected by the general staff. In turn, he directed his efforts towards reorganizing the cavalry force, mostly stationed in Trenton.

While at Trenton his assistance was requested by General Anthony Wayne, whom Washington had dispatched on a foraging expedition into southern New Jersey. Wayne was in danger of encountering a much larger British force sent to oppose his movements. Pulaski and 50 cavalry rode south to Burlington, where they skirmished with British sentries on February 28. After this minor encounter the British commander, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Stirling, was apparently convinced that he was facing a much larger force than expected, and prepared to withdraw his troops across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania at Cooper&#x27;s Ferry (present-day Gloucester City). Pulaski and Wayne joined forces to attack Stirling&#x27;s position on February 29 while he awaited suitable weather conditions to cross. In the resulting skirmish, which only involved a few hundred men out of the larger forces on either side, Pulaski&#x27;s horse was shot out from under him and a few of his cavalry were wounded.

American officers serving under Pulaski had difficulty taking orders from a foreigner who could scarcely speak English and whose ideas of discipline and tactics differed enormously from those to which they were accustomed. This resulted in friction between the Americans and Pulaski and his fellow Polish officers. There was also discontent in the unit over delays in pay, and Pulaski&#x27;s imperious personality was a regular source of discontent among his peers, superiors, and subordinates. Pulaski was also unhappy that his suggestion to create a lancer unit was denied. Despite a commendation from Wayne, these circumstances prompted Pulaski to resign his general command in March 1778, and return to Valley Forge.

Pulaski went to Yorktown, where he met with General Horatio Gates and suggested the creation of a new unit. At Gates&#x27; recommendation, Congress confirmed his previous appointment to the rank of a brigadier general, with a special title of &quot;Commander of the Horse&quot;, and authorized the formation of a corps of 68 lancers and 200 light infantry. This corps, which became known as the Pulaski&#x27;s Legion, was recruited mainly in Baltimore, where it was headquartered. By August 1778, the Pulaski&#x27;s Legion numbered about 330 men, both Americans and foreigners. American Major-General Charles Lee commented on the high standards of the Legion&#x27;s training. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow would later commemorate in verse the consecration of the Legion&#x27;s banner. Longfellow&#x27;s poem &quot;The Hymn of the Moravian Nuns&quot; was, however, retracted by the poet in 1857 due to its ahistorical details. Furthermore, according to the latest research it turns out that the Pulaski banner, which symbolised the legion, was inspired by the colours of the Hungarian national flag (red, white and green) in use since the early 17th century, and was created by the Moravian Lutheran Sisters according to the instructions of Michael Kovats in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in early 1778. The flag embedded cultural history elements reflecting the close Hungarian-Polish friendship and interstate relations back to the centuries.

The &quot;father of the American cavalry&quot; demanded much of his men and trained them in tested cavalry tactics. Pulaski, supported by Michael Kovats, often referred to as the co-founder of the U.S. cavalry, made great efforts to turn their cavalry into an effective force, and the improvement of the Legion&#x27;s mounted arm drew high praise form the British. Pulaski used his own personal finances when money from Congress was scarce, in order to assure his forces of the finest equipment and personal safety. However, later that year a controversy arose related to the Legion&#x27;s finances, and its requisitions from the local populace. His troubles with the auditors continued until his death. Pulaski complained that he received inadequate funds, was obstructed by locals and officials, and was forced to spend his own money. He was not cleared of these charges until after his death.

In the autumn Pulaski was ordered to Little Egg Harbor on the coast of southeast New Jersey, where in the engagement on October 15, known as the affair at Little Egg Harbor, the legion suffered heavy losses. During the following winter Pulaski was stationed at Minisink, at that time in northwestern New Jersey. Ordered to take part in the punitive Sullivan Expedition against the Iroquois, he was dissatisfied with this command, and intended to leave the service and return to Europe, but instead asked to be reassigned to the Southern front. On February 2, 1779, Washington instead ordered him to South Carolina.

====Southern front====
Pulaski arrived in Charleston on May 8, 1779, finding the city in crisis. General Benjamin Lincoln, commander of the southern army, had led most of the army toward Augusta, Georgia, in a bid to recapture Savannah, which had been captured by the British in late 1778. The British commander, Brigadier General Augustine Prevost, responded to Lincoln&#x27;s move by launching a raiding expedition from Savannah across the Savannah River. The South Carolina militia fell back before the British advance, and Prevost&#x27;s force followed them all the way to Charleston. Pulaski arrived just as military leaders were establishing the city&#x27;s defenses.

When the British advanced on May 11, Pulaski&#x27;s Legion engaged forward elements of the British force, and was badly mauled in the encounter. The Legion infantry, numbering only about 60 men before the skirmish, was virtually wiped out, and Pulaski was forced to retreat to the safety of the city&#x27;s guns. Although some historians credit this action with Prevost&#x27;s decision to withdraw back toward Savannah the next day, despite ongoing negotiations of a possible surrender of Charleston, that decision is more likely based on news Prevost received that Lincoln&#x27;s larger force was returning to Charleston to face him, and that Prevost&#x27;s troops had gone further than he had originally intended. One early historian criticized Pulaski&#x27;s actions during that engagement as &quot;ill-judged, ill-conducted, disgraceful and disastrous&quot;. The episode was of minor strategic consequence and did little to enhance the reputation of Pulaski&#x27;s unit.
Although Pulaski frequently suffered from malaria while stationed in Charleston, he remained in active service. At the beginning of September, Lincoln prepared to launch an attempt to retake Savannah with French assistance. Pulaski was ordered to Augusta, where he was to join forces with General Lachlan McIntosh. Their combined forces were to serve as the forward elements of Lincoln&#x27;s army. Pulaski captured a British outpost near Ogeechee River. His units then acted as an advance guard for the allied French units under Admiral Charles Hector, comte d&#x27;Estaing. He rendered great services during the siege of Savannah, and in the assault of October 9 commanded the whole cavalry, both French and American.

==Death and burial==
While attempting to rally fleeing French forces during a cavalry charge, Pulaski was mortally wounded by grapeshot. The reported grapeshot is on display at the Georgia Historical Society in Savannah. The Charleston Museum also has a grapeshot reported to be from Pulaski&#x27;s wound. Pulaski was carried from the field of battle and taken aboard the South Carolina merchant brig privateer &quot;Wasp&quot;, under the command of Captain Samuel Bulfinch, where he died two days later, having never regained consciousness. His heroic death, admired by American Patriot supporters, further boosted his reputation in America.

Pulaski never married and had no descendants. Despite his fame, there have long been uncertainties and controversies surrounding both his place and date of birth, and his burial. Many primary sources record a burial at sea. The historical accounts for Pulaski&#x27;s time and place of burial vary considerably. According to several contemporary accounts there were witnesses, including Pulaski&#x27;s aide-de-camp, that Pulaski received a symbolic burial in Charleston on October 21, sometime after he was buried at sea. Other witnesses, including Captain Samuel Bulfinch of the &quot;Wasp&quot;, claimed that the wounded Pulaski was actually later removed from the ship and taken to the Greenwich Plantation in the town of Thunderbolt, near Savannah, where he died and was buried under the supervision of the plantation&#x27;s owner Jane Bowen, widow of Samuel.

In March 1825, during his grand tour of the United States, Lafayette personally laid the cornerstone for the Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah, Georgia.

===Exhumation and analysis of remains===
In 1853, remains found on a bluff above Augustine Creek on Greenwich Plantation were believed to be the general&#x27;s. These bones were reinterred at the Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah, Georgia. They were exhumed in 1996 and examined during a forensic study. The eight-year examination, including DNA analysis, ended inconclusively, although the skeleton was consistent with Pulaski&#x27;s age and occupation. A healed wound on the skull&#x27;s forehead was consistent with historical records of an injury Pulaski sustained in battle, as was a bone defect on the left cheekbone, believed to have been caused by a benign tumor. In 2005, the remains were reinterred in a public ceremony with full military honors, including Pulaski&#x27;s induction into the Georgia Military Hall of Fame.

A later study funded by the Smithsonian Institution, the results of which were released in 2019, concluded from the mitochondrial DNA of his grandniece, known injuries, and physical characteristics, that the skeleton was likely Pulaski&#x27;s. The skeleton has a number of typically female features, which has led to the hypothesis that Pulaski may have been female or intersex. A documentary based on the Smithsonian study suggests that Pulaski&#x27;s hypothesized intersex condition could have been caused by congenital adrenal hyperplasia, where a fetus with female chromosomes is exposed to a high level of testosterone in utero and develops partially male genitals. This analysis was based on the skeleton&#x27;s female pelvis, facial structure and jaw angle, in combination with the fact that Pulaski identified as and lived as male.

However, there is no conclusive argument or evidence that Pulaski was intersex. The question remains unsettled due to the limited understanding of how an intersex condition might be revealed in the analysis of a skeleton. There is no way to prove that Pulaski was born intersex without a DNA test.

In 2022, in a scholarly article, a Polish-American academic historian published a detailed account of the relevant primary sources and recounted a significant number of evidentiary problems with the historical sources and DNA evidence on which the Smithsonian documentary relied. This study suggested that the bones that led to the &quot;intersex&quot; conclusion were in fact not the bones of Casimir Pulaski.

==Tributes and commemoration==

The United States has long commemorated Pulaski&#x27;s contributions to the American Revolutionary War; on October 29, 1779, the United States Congress passed a resolution that a monument should be dedicated to him, but the first monument to him, the Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah, Georgia, was not built until 1854. A bust of Pulaski was added to a collection of other busts of American heroes at United States Capitol in 1867. On May 11, 1910, US President William Taft revealed a Congress-sponsored General Casimir Pulaski statue.

In 1929, Congress passed another resolution, this one recognizing October 11 of each year as &quot;General Pulaski Memorial Day&quot;, with a large parade held annually on Fifth Avenue in New York City. Separately, a Casimir Pulaski Day is celebrated in Illinois and some other places on the first Monday of each March. In some Illinois school districts, the day is an official school holiday. In 1931 a ten foot tall bronze statue of Pulaski, sculpted by Polish-American sculptor Joseph Kiselewski, was erected in Pulaski Park in Milwaukee Wisconsin. 35,000 people attended the ceremony. After a previous attempt failed, Congress passed a joint resolution conferring honorary US citizenship on Pulaski in 2009, sending it to President Barack Obama for approval. He signed it on November 6, 2009, making Pulaski the seventh person so honored.
In Poland, in 1793 Pulaski&#x27;s relative, Antoni Pułaski, obtained a cancellation of his brother&#x27;s sentence from 1773. He has been mentioned in the literary works of numerous Polish authors, including Adam Mickiewicz, Juliusz Słowacki and Józef Ignacy Kraszewski. Adolf Nowaczyński wrote a drama &quot;Pułaski w Ameryce&quot; (Pulaski in America) in 1917. A museum dedicated to Pulaski, the Casimir Pulaski Museum in Warka, opened in 1967.

Throughout Poland and the United States, people have celebrated anniversaries of Pulaski&#x27;s birth and death, and there exist numerous objects of art such as paintings and statues of him. In 1879, to commemorate the 100th anniversary of his death, Henri Schoeller composed &quot;A Pulaski March&quot;. Twenty years earlier, Eduard Sobolewski composed his opera, &quot;Mohega&quot;, about the last days of Pulaski&#x27;s life. Commemorative medals and stamps of Pulaski have been issued. Several cities, towns, townships and counties in United States are named after him, as are numerous streets, parks and structures.

Although his statue stands in Savannah&#x27;s Monterey Square, the city&#x27;s Pulaski Square is named for him.

The Pulaski Bridge in New York City links Brooklyn to Queens; the Pulaski Skyway in Northern New Jersey links Jersey City to Newark, and the Pulaski Highway traverses the city of Baltimore, Maryland.

Michigan designated US Highway 112 (now US 12) as Pulaski Memorial Highway in 1935.

There are also a number of educational, academic, and Polish-American institutions named after him. A 20th-century US Navy ballistic missile submarine, USS Casimir Pulaski, was named for him, as was, in the 19th century, a United States Revenue Cutter Service cutter, USRC Pulaski and a side-wheel steam gunboat, USS Pulaski. A Polish frigate, ORP &quot;Generał Kazimierz Pułaski&quot;, is also named after Pulaski. Fort Pulaski between Savannah and Tybee Island in Georgia, active during the American Civil War, is named in honor of Casimir Pulaski. Pulaski Barracks, an active US Army post in Kaiserslautern, Germany, is named for Casimir Pulaski in honor of the Polish people who worked for the US Army in Civilian Service Groups after WWII.

A statue commemorating Pulaski stands at the eastern end of Freedom Plaza in Washington, D.C. There is an equestrian statue of Pulaski in Roger Williams Park in Providence, Rhode Island, as well as one in the center of Pulaski park in Manchester, New Hampshire. A statue by Granville W. Carter depicting Pulaski on a rearing horse signaling a forward charge with a sword in his right hand is erected in Hartford, Connecticut. There is a Pulaski Monument in Patterson Park in Baltimore, Maryland. There is also a statue in Buffalo, NY near the intersection of Main and S. Division St. A statue of Pulaski sculpted by Sidney Waugh resides in Philadelphia, on the slope behind the Philadelphia Museum of Art in Fairmount Park.

The villages of Mt. Pulaski, Illinois, Pulaski, New York, and Pulaski, Wisconsin, are named for him, as is the city of Pulaski, Tennessee. Pulaski High School and Casimir Pulaski High School, both in Wisconsin, are also named after him, as is Pulaski Middle School in New Britain, Connecticut. Pulaski County in Virginia, Pulaski County in Arkansas, Pulaski County in Georgia, Pulaski County in Missouri, Pulaski County in Kentucky, and Pulaski County in Indiana are named after him as well.

Polish historian Władysław Konopczyński, who wrote a monograph on Pulaski in 1931, noted that he was one of the most accomplished Polish people, grouping him with other Polish military heroes such as Tadeusz Kościuszko, Stanisław Żółkiewski, Stefan Czarniecki, and Prince Józef Poniatowski.

A major thoroughfare of Bellingham, Massachusetts, is named Pulaski Boulevard in honor of the general, extending from Franklin to the Rhode Island border.

==In popular culture==
* Michigan-born songwriter Sufjan Stevens released a song called &quot;Casimir Pulaski Day&quot; on his album &quot;Illinois&quot;. The song interweaves his memories of a friend&#x27;s battle with bone cancer with an account of the holiday.
* In a downloadable content of &quot;Age of Empires III&quot;, twelve &quot;Uhlan&quot; cavalry units can be summoned by the player by clicking on a shipment button called Pulaski&#x27;s Legion.
* An account of Pulaski&#x27;s death and burial is used as the background and setting for the family reunion of two POV characters in Diana Gabaldon&#x27;s ninth main Outlander novel, &quot;Go Tell the Bees That I Am Gone&quot; (2021). Her historical observations and inspirations are in her author&#x27;s notes.

==See also==
* Casimir Pulaski Foundation - leading Polish think tank specialized in foreign policy and national security
* Johann de Kalb, a Bavarian-born French officer who served as a general in the Continental Army
* Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, a French officer who served as a general in the Continental Army
* &quot;The General Was Female?&quot;, documentary film about Pulaski&#x27;s possible intersex status
* Intersex people and military service in the United States
* Knight of Freedom Award, an award established in honour of General Pulaski
* Michael Kovats de Fabriczy, a Hungarian nobleman and cavalry officer who served in the Continental Army
* List of Poles
* Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben, a Prussian drill master who served in the Continental Army

==Explanatory notes==
==Citations==
==General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* , Url
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Proclaiming Casimir Pulaski to be an honorary citizen of the United States.
* 
* 
* Presidential Studies Quarterly Vol. XXIV No. 4 Fall 1994, pp. 876–77
* 
* 
* Url
* 
==Further reading==
* Url
* Url
* Shepherd, Joshua, &quot;Soldiers: Casimir Pulaski,&quot; Warfare History Network, February 13, 2019

==External links==
* A Chronology of Casimir Pulaski&#x27;s Life 1745–1779
* One More Funeral of Kazimierz Pulaski 221 Years After his Death
* Biography from &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;
* Casimir Pulaski Day, the Office of Civil Rights and Diversity at Eastern Illinois University. Leszek Szymański, &quot;Casimir Pulaski: A Hero of the American Revolution&quot;, E207.P8 S97 1994.
* Casimir Pulaski Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q381854" start="0" end="41" title="Casimir Pulaski" label="Kazimierz Michał Władysław Wiktor Pułaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q381854" start="97" end="112" title="Casimir Pulaski" label="Casimir Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="131" end="139" title="Szlachta" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q861477" start="213" end="229" title="American cavalry" label="American cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="284" end="290" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="463" end="493" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="554" end="571" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740214" start="615" end="633" title="foreign domination" label="foreign domination"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="719" end="736" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="787" end="813" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="906" end="923" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="957" end="973" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q718364" start="1034" end="1048" title="Michael Kovats" label="Michael Kovats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259188" start="1057" end="1078" title="Pulaski&amp;#x27;s Legion" label="Pulaski&amp;#x27;s Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744875" start="1132" end="1149" title="siege of Savannah" label="siege of Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1167" end="1181" title="Charge (warfare)#Cavalry charges" label="cavalry charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075009" start="1232" end="1241" title="grapeshot" label="grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q494273" start="1518" end="1552" title="Honorary citizenship of the United States" label="honorary United States citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="1615" end="1626" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832036" start="1634" end="1648" title="Pułaski family" label="Pułaski family"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="1652" end="1658" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1705" end="1723" title="Marianna Zielińska" label="Marianna Zielińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811767" start="1728" end="1741" title="Józef Pułaski" label="Józef Pułaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q677907" start="1760" end="1769" title="advocatus" label="advocatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52971" start="1783" end="1797" title="Crown Tribunal" label="Crown Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231714" start="1803" end="1810" title="Starost" label="Starost"/>
<link wikidata="Q276857" start="1814" end="1819" title="Warka" label="Warka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557968" start="1920" end="1942" title="Ślepowron coat of arms" label="Ślepowron coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1968" end="1976" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109274" start="2026" end="2039" title="Collegium Nobilium (Warsaw)" label="elite college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414924" start="2047" end="2056" title="Theatines" label="Theatines"/>
<link wikidata="Q391009" start="2065" end="2103" title="Catholic religious order" label="religious order of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2207" end="2216" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="2223" end="2262" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q49527797" start="2336" end="2351" title="Monterey Square (Savannah, Georgia)" label="Monterey Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q855855" start="2949" end="2953" title="Page (occupation)" label="page"/>
<link wikidata="Q215988" start="2957" end="3006" title="Carl Christian Joseph of Saxony, Duke of Courland" label="Carl Christian Joseph of Saxony, Duke of Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179830" start="3084" end="3089" title="Jelgava" label="Mitau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3251" end="3260" title="Zezulińce" label="Zezulińce"/>
<link wikidata="Q191607" start="3264" end="3270" title="Podolia" label="Podole"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="3422" end="3443" title="Stanisław August of Poland" label="Stanisław II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="3528" end="3545" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="3622" end="3630" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="3640" end="3652" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646855" start="3920" end="3929" title="pułkownik" label="pułkownik"/>
<link wikidata="Q806871" start="3967" end="3988" title="Choragiew" label="&amp;quot;chorągiew&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943222" start="3992" end="3999" title="Polish cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q997429" start="4231" end="4248" title="Starokostiantyniv" label="Starokostiantyniv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011310" start="4340" end="4349" title="Khmilnyk" label="Chmielnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q158799" start="4461" end="4470" title="Berdyczów" label="Berdyczów"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="5138" end="5151" title="Court-martial" label="Court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605020" start="5367" end="5387" title="Okopy Świętej Trójcy" label="Okopy Świętej Trójcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596808" start="5565" end="5576" title="regimentarz" label="regimentarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q94449" start="5590" end="5608" title="Kraków Voivodeship (14th century – 1795)" label="Kraków Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q208473" start="5643" end="5651" title="Przemyśl" label="Przemyśl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="5749" end="5758" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q145972" start="6194" end="6200" title="Zamość" label="Zamość"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="6287" end="6304" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688218" start="6323" end="6341" title="Battle of Orzechowo" label="Battle of Orekhowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54175" start="6535" end="6546" title="Podkarpacie" label="Podkarpacie"/>
<link wikidata="Q231593" start="6586" end="6595" title="Nowy Targ" label="Nowy Targ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4981929" start="6669" end="6673" title="Izby" label="Izby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11390" start="6699" end="6712" title="Lesser Poland" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26119" start="6794" end="6800" title="Prešov" label="Prešov"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="6857" end="6886" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="7090" end="7116" title="Charles François Dumouriez" label="Charles François Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493672" start="7150" end="7160" title="Lanckorona" label="Lanckorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="7218" end="7224" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="7274" end="7285" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q573920" start="7367" end="7387" title="Jasna Góra monastery" label="Jasna Góra monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9263167" start="7412" end="7436" title="Franciszka Corvin-Krasińska" label="Franciszka z Krasińskich"/>
<link wikidata="Q450500" start="7461" end="7477" title="Krasiński family" label="Krasiński family"/>
<link wikidata="Q215988" start="7494" end="7529" title="Charles of Saxony, Duke of Courland" label="Charles of Saxony, Duke of Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q578192" start="7876" end="7889" title="Józef Zaremba" label="Józef Zaremba"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="8467" end="8473" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195315" start="8511" end="8517" title="Tarłów" label="Tarłów"/>
<link wikidata="Q983723" start="8583" end="8590" title="Kraśnik" label="Kraśnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q699691" start="8863" end="8877" title="Potocki family" label="Potocki family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343396" start="9016" end="9032" title="Jędrzej Kitowicz" label="Jędrzej Kitowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154232" start="9455" end="9472" title="Alexander Suvorov" label="Alexander Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351517" start="9544" end="9564" title="Battle of Lanckorona" label="Battle of Lanckorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="10059" end="10075" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="King Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="10670" end="10677" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="11074" end="11099" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="11215" end="11226" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475448" start="11286" end="11294" title="regicide" label="regicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354098" start="11351" end="11365" title="Partition Sejm" label="Partition Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="11543" end="11554" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11752" end="11766" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q123070" start="11778" end="11795" title="Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="11893" end="11902" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096309" start="12173" end="12200" title="Claude-Carloman de Rulhière" label="Claude-Carloman de Rulhière"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="12226" end="12246" title="Gilbert du Motier, marquis de La Fayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="12251" end="12268" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="12316" end="12342" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="12746" end="12763" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q861477" start="12801" end="12825" title="American cavalry" label="Continental Army cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="12856" end="12862" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27416" start="12887" end="12912" title="Marblehead, Massachusetts" label="Marblehead, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="12919" end="12925" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895747" start="13146" end="13161" title="Neshaminy Falls" label="Neshaminy Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="13171" end="13183" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="13402" end="13424" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q301487" start="13580" end="13600" title="Battle of Brandywine" label="Battle of Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="13612" end="13628" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="14221" end="14238" title="brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872890" start="14796" end="14828" title="Battle of the Clouds" label="was interrupted by a major storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q523857" start="14902" end="14922" title="Battle of Germantown" label="Battle of Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="14985" end="14997" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="15221" end="15228" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="15288" end="15301" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550922" start="15516" end="15526" title="Burlington, New Jersey" label="Burlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083028" start="15869" end="15884" title="Gloucester City, New Jersey" label="Gloucester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045848" start="16771" end="16777" title="lancer" label="lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="16957" end="16965" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="16993" end="17006" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259188" start="17336" end="17357" title="Pulaski&amp;#x27;s Legion" label="Pulaski&amp;#x27;s Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="17383" end="17392" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q390992" start="17542" end="17553" title="Charles Lee (general)" label="Charles Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="17617" end="17643" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q718364" start="18178" end="18192" title="Michael Kovats" label="Michael Kovats"/>
<link wikidata="Q718364" start="18516" end="18530" title="Michael Kovats" label="Michael Kovats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649887" start="19312" end="19329" title="Little Egg Harbor" label="Little Egg Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="19356" end="19366" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712756" start="19420" end="19447" title="affair at Little Egg Harbor" label="affair at Little Egg Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428372" start="19536" end="19544" title="Minisink, New York" label="Minisink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="19624" end="19643" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="Sullivan Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="19656" end="19664" title="Iroquois people" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="19874" end="19888" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="19933" end="19943" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235083" start="19977" end="19986" title="Siege of Charleston" label="in crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817605" start="19996" end="20012" title="Benjamin Lincoln" label="Benjamin Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="20078" end="20094" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="20118" end="20126" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037058" start="20143" end="20166" title="Capture of Savannah" label="captured by the British"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821209" start="20222" end="20239" title="Augustine Prevost" label="Augustine Prevost"/>
<link wikidata="Q370750" start="20333" end="20347" title="Savannah River" label="Savannah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="21583" end="21590" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215815" start="21838" end="21854" title="Lachlan McIntosh" label="Lachlan McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q130012" start="21980" end="21994" title="Ogeechee River" label="Ogeechee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q694048" start="22079" end="22115" title="Charles Hector, comte d&amp;#x27;Estaing" label="Charles Hector, comte d&amp;#x27;Estaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744875" start="22155" end="22172" title="siege of Savannah" label="siege of Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075009" start="22388" end="22397" title="grapeshot" label="grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547536" start="22443" end="22469" title="Georgia Historical Society" label="Georgia Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084160" start="22487" end="22504" title="Charleston Museum" label="Charleston Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189418" start="22658" end="22662" title="brigantine" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="22663" end="22672" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="22833" end="22849" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="American Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="23307" end="23319" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q630013" start="23412" end="23425" title="burial at sea" label="buried at sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q105806893" start="23594" end="23614" title="Greenwich Plantation" label="Greenwich Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q774537" start="23630" end="23641" title="Thunderbolt, Georgia" label="Thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130442920" start="23740" end="23750" title="Jane Bowen" label="Jane Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859254" start="23761" end="23767" title="Samuel Bowen" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936291" start="23796" end="23806" title="Visit of the Marquis de Lafayette to the United States" label="grand tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686606" start="23879" end="23915" title="Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah" label="Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="24151" end="24168" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q814392" start="24670" end="24685" title="military funeral" label="military honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="24791" end="24814" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q715263" start="24879" end="24896" title="Mitochondrial DNA (human)" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097630" start="25132" end="25140" title="intersex" label="intersex"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="25274" end="25304" title="congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604486" start="25325" end="25343" title="XY sex-determination system" label="female chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="25374" end="25386" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="25892" end="25900" title="Genetic testing" label="DNA test"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26476" end="26498" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686606" start="26598" end="26634" title="Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah" label="Casimir Pulaski Monument in Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="26636" end="26643" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="26752" end="26773" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="26813" end="26825" title="William Taft" label="William Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531755" start="26856" end="26886" title="General Casimir Pulaski (statue)" label="General Casimir Pulaski statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532134" start="26988" end="27016" title="General Pulaski Memorial Day" label="General Pulaski Memorial Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q109858" start="27061" end="27073" title="Fifth Avenue" label="Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048811" start="27106" end="27125" title="Casimir Pulaski Day" label="Casimir Pulaski Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="27143" end="27151" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284620" start="27370" end="27387" title="Joseph Kiselewski" label="Joseph Kiselewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q494273" start="27557" end="27580" title="Honorary citizen of the United States" label="honorary US citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="27625" end="27637" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="27940" end="27955" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="27957" end="27973" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q254524" start="27978" end="28001" title="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski" label="Józef Ignacy Kraszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471076" start="28507" end="28524" title="Eduard Sobolewski" label="Eduard Sobolewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394476" start="28693" end="28702" title="Civil township" label="townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q228656" start="28707" end="28715" title="Pulaski County (disambiguation)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q106630323" start="28881" end="28895" title="Pulaski Square (Savannah, Georgia)" label="Pulaski Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q606796" start="28919" end="28933" title="Pulaski Bridge" label="Pulaski Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q452447" start="28981" end="28995" title="Pulaski Skyway" label="Pulaski Skyway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214592" start="29056" end="29071" title="U.S. Route 40 in Maryland" label="Pulaski Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="29136" end="29146" title="United States Numbered Highway System" label="US Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351189" start="29156" end="29161" title="U.S. Route 12 in Michigan" label="US 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="29255" end="29270" title="Polish-American" label="Polish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="29316" end="29323" title="United States Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="29324" end="29351" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144946" start="29353" end="29372" title="USS Casimir Pulaski (SSBN-633)" label="USS Casimir Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="29424" end="29460" title="United States Revenue Cutter Service" label="United States Revenue Cutter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q683363" start="29461" end="29467" title="Cutter (boat)" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="29488" end="29504" title="Steamship" label="side-wheel steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="29505" end="29512" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873156" start="29514" end="29525" title="USS Pulaski (1854)" label="USS Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072936" start="29545" end="29586" title="ORP Generał Kazimierz Pułaski" label="ORP &amp;quot;Generał Kazimierz Pułaski&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438683" start="29617" end="29629" title="Fort Pulaski National Monument" label="Fort Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="29638" end="29646" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q588907" start="29651" end="29663" title="Tybee Island, Georgia" label="Tybee Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="29667" end="29674" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="29694" end="29712" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087329" start="30007" end="30020" title="Freedom Plaza" label="Freedom Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359134" start="30085" end="30104" title="Roger Williams Park" label="Roger Williams Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="30108" end="30132" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q48370" start="30182" end="30207" title="Manchester, New Hampshire" label="Manchester, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="30350" end="30371" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509408" start="30563" end="30575" title="Sidney Waugh" label="Sidney Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="30587" end="30599" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510324" start="30625" end="30651" title="Philadelphia Museum of Art" label="Philadelphia Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739335" start="30655" end="30669" title="Fairmount Park" label="Fairmount Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020592" start="30711" end="30728" title="Pulaski, New York" label="Pulaski, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q968683" start="30734" end="30752" title="Pulaski, Wisconsin" label="Pulaski, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410885" start="30791" end="30809" title="Pulaski, Tennessee" label="Pulaski, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259204" start="30811" end="30830" title="Pulaski High School" label="Pulaski High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048808" start="30835" end="30862" title="Casimir Pulaski High School" label="Casimir Pulaski High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49172" start="30940" end="30964" title="New Britain, Connecticut" label="New Britain, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q514038" start="30966" end="30980" title="Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61160" start="30994" end="31008" title="Pulaski County, Arkansas" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q498301" start="31022" end="31036" title="Pulaski County, Georgia" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q489980" start="31049" end="31063" title="Pulaski County, Missouri" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506309" start="31077" end="31091" title="Pulaski County, Kentucky" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502640" start="31109" end="31123" title="Pulaski County, Indiana" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q168896" start="31182" end="31204" title="Władysław Konopczyński" label="Władysław Konopczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="31365" end="31383" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Tadeusz Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q453523" start="31385" end="31405" title="Stanisław Żółkiewski" label="Stanisław Żółkiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q561031" start="31407" end="31424" title="Stefan Czarniecki" label="Stefan Czarniecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q154382" start="31437" end="31454" title="Józef Poniatowski" label="Józef Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q521279" start="31481" end="31506" title="Bellingham, Massachusetts" label="Bellingham, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="31638" end="31646" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q319502" start="31663" end="31677" title="Sufjan Stevens" label="Sufjan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658831" start="31752" end="31760" title="Illinois (Sufjan Stevens album)" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="31833" end="31844" title="Bone tumor" label="bone cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34869" start="31914" end="31932" title="Age of Empires III" label="Age of Empires III"/>
<link wikidata="Q382603" start="31953" end="31958" title="Uhlan" label="Uhlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="32188" end="32202" title="Viewpoint character" label="POV characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153036" start="32239" end="32248" title="Outlander (book series)" label="Outlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721547" start="32401" end="32427" title="Casimir Pulaski Foundation" label="Casimir Pulaski Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75363" start="32510" end="32524" title="Johann de Kalb" label="Johann de Kalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="32607" end="32646" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q64768512" start="32721" end="32744" title="The General Was Female?" label="The General Was Female?"/>
<link wikidata="Q60745526" start="32817" end="32874" title="Intersex people and military service in the United States" label="Intersex people and military service in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089154" start="32877" end="32900" title="Knight of Freedom Award" label="Knight of Freedom Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q718364" start="32954" end="32980" title="Michael Kovats de Fabriczy" label="Michael Kovats de Fabriczy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279368" start="33060" end="33073" title="List of Poles" label="List of Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="33076" end="33105" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q624985" start="33848" end="33875" title="Eastern Illinois University" label="Eastern Illinois University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85775" wikidata="Q210853" url="?curid=85775" title="Justin (historian)">
<text>Justin (; fl. century AD) was a Latin writer and historian who lived under the Roman Empire. 


==Life==
Almost nothing is known of Justin&#x27;s personal history, his name appearing only in the title of his work. He must have lived after Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus, whose work he excerpted, and his references to the Romans and Parthians having divided the world between themselves would have been anachronistic after the rise of the Sassanians in the third century. His Latin appears to be consistent with the style of the second century. Ronald Syme, however, argues for a date around 390, immediately before the compilation of the Augustan History, and dismisses anachronisms and the archaic style as unimportant, as he asserts that readers would have understood Justin&#x27;s phrasing to represent Trogus&#x27; time, and not his own.

==Works==

Justin was the author of an epitome of Trogus&#x27; expansive &quot;Liber Historiarum Philippicarum&quot;, or &quot;Philippic Histories&quot;, a history of the kings of Macedon, compiled in the time of Augustus. Due to its numerous digressions, this work was retitled by one of its editors, &quot;Historia Philippicae et Totius Mundi Origines et Terrae Situs&quot;, or &quot;Philippic History and Origins of the Entire World and All of its Lands&quot;. Justin&#x27;s preface explains that he aimed to collect the most important and interesting passages of that work, which has since been lost. Some of Trogus&#x27; original arguments (&quot;&quot;) are preserved in various other authors, such as Pliny the Elder. Trogus&#x27; main theme was the rise and history of the Macedonian Empire, and like him, Justin permitted himself considerable freedom of digression, producing an idiosyncratic anthology rather than a strict epitome.

==Legacy==
Justin&#x27;s history was much used in the Middle Ages, when its author was sometimes mistakenly conflated with Justin Martyr.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* .

==External links==
* An early edition (Milan, 1476) of the &quot;Epitome&quot; from the Bavarian State Library
* Justin&#x27;s &quot;Epitome&quot; at The Latin Library, , &amp; Itinera Electronica 
* Watson&#x27;s 1853 translation at , the Tertullian Project, &amp; Attalus 
* Arnaud-Lindet&#x27;s 2003 translation at 
* Correa&#x27;s 2003 partial translation at 
* &quot;Prologi&quot; of Pompeius Trogus&#x27;s work at the Tertullian Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210853" start="0" end="6" title="Justin (historian)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="79" end="91" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316119" start="239" end="261" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Trogus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="314" end="320" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="325" end="334" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="431" end="441" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sassanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="468" end="473" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q707856" start="537" end="548" title="Ronald Syme" label="Ronald Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="631" end="647" title="Augustan History" label="Augustan History"/>
<link wikidata="Q124761" start="875" end="882" title="epitome" label="epitome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1016" end="1023" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1049" end="1057" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87213120" start="1144" end="1205" title="Historia Philippicae et Totius Mundi Origines et Terrae Situs" label="Historia Philippicae et Totius Mundi Origines et Terrae Situs"/>
<link wikidata="Q670787" start="1314" end="1321" title="preface" label="preface"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1544" end="1559" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1617" end="1634" title="Macedonian Empire" label="Macedonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1833" end="1844" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="1902" end="1915" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257253" start="2165" end="2171" title="John Selby Watson" label="Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q112627952" start="2242" end="2255" title="Marie-Pierre Arnaud-Lindet" label="Arnaud-Lindet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2286" end="2292" title="Silvio Correa" label="Correa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="85816" wikidata="Q45715" url="?curid=85816" title="Complete graph">
<text>In the mathematical field of graph theory, a complete graph is a simple undirected graph in which every pair of distinct vertices is connected by a unique edge. A complete digraph is a directed graph in which every pair of distinct vertices is connected by a pair of unique edges (one in each direction).

Graph theory itself is typically dated as beginning with Leonhard Euler&#x27;s 1736 work on the Seven Bridges of Königsberg. However, drawings of complete graphs, with their vertices placed on the points of a regular polygon, had already appeared in the 13th century, in the work of Ramon Llull. Such a drawing is sometimes referred to as a mystic rose.

==Properties==
The complete graph on vertices is denoted by . Some sources claim that the letter in this notation stands for the German word , but the German name for a complete graph, , does not contain the letter , and other sources state that the notation honors the contributions of Kazimierz Kuratowski to graph theory.

 has edges (a triangular number), and is a regular graph of degree . All complete graphs are their own maximal cliques. They are maximally connected as the only vertex cut which disconnects the graph is the complete set of vertices. The complement graph of a complete graph is an empty graph.

If the edges of a complete graph are each given an orientation, the resulting directed graph is called a tournament.

 can be decomposed into trees such that has vertices. Ringel&#x27;s conjecture asks if the complete graph can be decomposed into copies of any tree with edges. This is known to be true for sufficiently large .

The number of all distinct paths between a specific pair of vertices in is given by

:formula_1

where refers to Euler&#x27;s constant, and

:formula_2

The number of matchings of the complete graphs are given by the telephone numbers
: 1, 1, 2, 4, 10, 26, 76, 232, 764, 2620, 9496, 35696, 140152, 568504, 2390480, 10349536, 46206736, ... .

These numbers give the largest possible value of the Hosoya index for an -vertex graph. The number of perfect matchings of the complete graph (with even) is given by the double factorial .

The crossing numbers up to are known, with requiring either 7233 or 7234 crossings. Further values are collected by the Rectilinear Crossing Number project. Rectilinear Crossing numbers for are 
:0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 3, 9, 19, 36, 62, 102, 153, 229, 324, 447, 603, 798, 1029, 1318, 1657, 2055, 2528, 3077, 3699, 4430, 5250, 6180, ... .

==Geometry and topology==
A complete graph with nodes represents the edges of an -simplex. Geometrically forms the edge set of a triangle, a tetrahedron, etc. The Császár polyhedron, a nonconvex polyhedron with the topology of a torus, has the complete graph as its skeleton. Every neighborly polytope in four or more dimensions also has a complete skeleton.

 through are all planar graphs. However, every planar drawing of a complete graph with five or more vertices must contain a crossing, and the nonplanar complete graph plays a key role in the characterizations of planar graphs: by Kuratowski&#x27;s theorem, a graph is planar if and only if it contains neither nor the complete bipartite graph as a subdivision, and by Wagner&#x27;s theorem the same result holds for graph minors in place of subdivisions. As part of the Petersen family, plays a similar role as one of the forbidden minors for linkless embedding. In other words, and as Conway and Gordon proved, every embedding of into three-dimensional space is intrinsically linked, with at least one pair of linked triangles. Conway and Gordon also showed that any three-dimensional embedding of contains a Hamiltonian cycle that is embedded in space as a nontrivial knot.

==Examples==
Complete graphs on formula_3 vertices, for formula_3 between 1 and 12, are shown below along with the numbers of edges:

==See also==
* Fully connected network, in computer networking
* Complete bipartite graph (or biclique), a special bipartite graph where every vertex on one side of the bipartition is connected to every vertex on the other side
* The simplex, which is identical to a complete graph of formula_5 vertices, where formula_3 is the dimension of the simplex.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7" end="19" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="29" end="41" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="45" end="59" title="Complete graph" label="complete graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="65" end="71" title="simple graph" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="72" end="88" title="undirected graph" label="undirected graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="121" end="129" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="155" end="159" title="edge (graph theory)" label="edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="163" end="179" title="Complete graph" label="complete digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="185" end="199" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="363" end="377" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q33100" start="402" end="429" title="Seven Bridges of Königsberg" label="Seven Bridges of Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q739462" start="440" end="447" title="graph drawing" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="515" end="530" title="regular polygon" label="regular polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="589" end="600" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q45715" start="647" end="658" title="Complete graph" label="mystic rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q161846" start="948" end="968" title="Kazimierz Kuratowski" label="Kazimierz Kuratowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q245102" start="1001" end="1018" title="triangular number" label="triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q826467" start="1030" end="1043" title="regular graph" label="regular graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q383444" start="1047" end="1053" title="degree (graph theory)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q761631" start="1090" end="1105" title="Clique (graph theory)" label="maximal cliques"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="1126" end="1135" title="connectivity (graph theory)" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922780" start="1148" end="1158" title="vertex cut" label="vertex cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q902252" start="1224" end="1240" title="complement graph" label="complement graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15838314" start="1267" end="1278" title="empty graph" label="empty graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102401" start="1332" end="1343" title="Orientation (graph theory)" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="1359" end="1373" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320634" start="1386" end="1396" title="tournament (graph theory)" label="tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="1637" end="1642" title="Path (graph theory)" label="paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="1723" end="1744" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065144" start="1777" end="1786" title="Matching (graph theory)" label="matchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696507" start="1827" end="1844" title="Telephone number (mathematics)" label="telephone numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200699" start="2005" end="2017" title="Hosoya index" label="Hosoya index"/>
<link wikidata="Q99567093" start="2054" end="2070" title="perfect matching" label="perfect matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q13520655" start="2122" end="2138" title="double factorial" label="double factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q266775" start="2146" end="2162" title="Crossing number (graph theory)" label="crossing numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="2555" end="2562" title="simplex" label="simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="2602" end="2610" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="2614" end="2625" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q723786" start="2636" end="2654" title="Császár polyhedron" label="Császár polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12510" start="2702" end="2707" title="torus" label="torus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154570" start="2739" end="2747" title="skeleton (topology)" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099348" start="2755" end="2774" title="neighborly polytope" label="neighborly polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q547823" start="2850" end="2862" title="planar graph" label="planar graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q837902" start="3063" end="3088" title="Kuratowski&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Kuratowski&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q913598" start="3151" end="3175" title="complete bipartite graph" label="complete bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959587" start="3201" end="3222" title="Wagner&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Wagner&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q905837" start="3249" end="3260" title="graph minor" label="graph minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065962" start="3303" end="3318" title="Petersen family" label="Petersen family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467387" start="3355" end="3370" title="forbidden minor" label="forbidden minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554389" start="3376" end="3394" title="linkless embedding" label="linkless embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q273037" start="3643" end="3660" title="Hamiltonian cycle" label="Hamiltonian cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188853" start="3692" end="3707" title="Knot (mathematics)" label="nontrivial knot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3859" end="3882" title="Network topology#Decentralization" label="Fully connected network"/>
<link wikidata="Q913598" start="3909" end="3933" title="Complete bipartite graph" label="Complete bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q174733" start="3959" end="3974" title="bipartite graph" label="bipartite graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="4078" end="4085" title="simplex" label="simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="4172" end="4181" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
</links>
</doc>
