<doc id="87410" wikidata="Q11292" url="?curid=87410" title="Coral reef">
<text>A coral reef is an underwater ecosystem characterized by reef-building corals. Reefs are formed of colonies of coral polyps held together by calcium carbonate. Most coral reefs are built from stony corals, whose polyps cluster in groups.

Coral belongs to the class Anthozoa in the animal phylum Cnidaria, which includes sea anemones and jellyfish. Unlike sea anemones, corals secrete hard carbonate exoskeletons that support and protect the coral. Most reefs grow best in warm, shallow, clear, sunny and agitated water. Coral reefs first appeared 485 million years ago, at the dawn of the Early Ordovician, displacing the microbial and sponge reefs of the Cambrian.

Sometimes called &quot;rainforests of the sea&quot;, shallow coral reefs form some of Earth&#x27;s most diverse ecosystems. They occupy less than 0.1% of the world&#x27;s ocean area, about half the area of France, yet they provide a home for at least 25% of all marine species, including fish, mollusks, worms, crustaceans, echinoderms, sponges, tunicates and other cnidarians. Coral reefs flourish in ocean waters that provide few nutrients. They are most commonly found at shallow depths in tropical waters, but deep water and cold water coral reefs exist on smaller scales in other areas.

Shallow tropical coral reefs have declined by 50% since 1950, partly because they are sensitive to water conditions. They are under threat from excess nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus), rising ocean heat content and acidification, overfishing (e.g., from blast fishing, cyanide fishing, spearfishing on scuba), sunscreen use, and harmful land-use practices, including runoff and seeps (e.g., from injection wells and cesspools).

Coral reefs deliver ecosystem services for tourism, fisheries and shoreline protection. The annual global economic value of coral reefs has been estimated at anywhere from US$30–375 billion (1997 and 2003 estimates) to US$2.7 trillion (a 2020 estimate) to US$9.9 trillion (a 2014 estimate).

Though the shallow water tropical coral reefs are best known, there are also deeper water reef-forming corals, which live in colder water and in temperate seas.

== Formation ==
Most coral reefs were formed after the Last Glacial Period when melting ice caused sea level to rise and flood continental shelves. Most coral reefs are less than 10,000 years old. As communities established themselves, the reefs grew upwards, pacing rising sea levels. Reefs that rose too slowly could become drowned, without sufficient light. Coral reefs are also found in the deep sea away from continental shelves, around oceanic islands and atolls. The majority of these islands are volcanic in origin. Others have tectonic origins where plate movements lifted the deep ocean floor.

In &quot;The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs&quot;, Charles Darwin set out his theory of the formation of atoll reefs, an idea he conceived during the voyage of the &quot;Beagle&quot;. He theorized that uplift and subsidence of Earth&#x27;s crust under the oceans formed the atolls. Darwin set out a sequence of three stages in atoll formation. A fringing reef forms around an extinct volcanic island as the island and ocean floor subside. As the subsidence continues, the fringing reef becomes a barrier reef and ultimately an atoll reef.

Darwin predicted that underneath each lagoon would be a bedrock base, the remains of the original volcano. Subsequent research supported this hypothesis. Darwin&#x27;s theory followed from his understanding that coral polyps thrive in the tropics where the water is agitated, but can only live within a limited depth range, starting just below low tide. Where the level of the underlying earth allows, the corals grow around the coast to form fringing reefs, and can eventually grow to become a barrier reef.

Where the bottom is rising, fringing reefs can grow around the coast, but coral raised above sea level dies. If the land subsides slowly, the fringing reefs keep pace by growing upwards on a base of older, dead coral, forming a barrier reef enclosing a lagoon between the reef and the land. A barrier reef can encircle an island, and once the island sinks below sea level a roughly circular atoll of growing coral continues to keep up with the sea level, forming a central lagoon. Barrier reefs and atolls do not usually form complete circles but are broken in places by storms. Like sea level rise, a rapidly subsiding bottom can overwhelm coral growth, killing the coral and the reef, due to what is called &quot;coral drowning&quot;. Corals that rely on zooxanthellae can die when the water becomes too deep for their symbionts to adequately photosynthesize, due to decreased light exposure.

The two main variables determining the geomorphology, or shape, of coral reefs are the nature of the substrate on which they rest, and the history of the change in sea level relative to that substrate.

The approximately 20,000-year-old Great Barrier Reef offers an example of how coral reefs formed on continental shelves. Sea level was then lower than in the 21st century. As sea level rose, the water and the corals encroached on what had been hills of the Australian coastal plain. By 13,000 years ago, sea level had risen to lower than at present, and many hills of the coastal plains had become continental islands. As sea level rise continued, water topped most of the continental islands. The corals could then overgrow the hills, forming cays and reefs. Sea level on the Great Barrier Reef has not changed significantly in the last 6,000 years. The age of living reef structure is estimated to be between 6,000 and 8,000 years. Although the Great Barrier Reef formed along a continental shelf, and not around a volcanic island, Darwin&#x27;s principles apply. Development stopped at the barrier reef stage, since Australia is not about to submerge. It formed the world&#x27;s largest barrier reef, from shore, stretching for .

Healthy tropical coral reefs grow horizontally from per year, and grow vertically anywhere from per year; however, they grow only at depths shallower than because of their need for sunlight, and cannot grow above sea level.

===Material===
As the name implies, coral reefs are made up of coral skeletons from mostly intact coral colonies. As other chemical elements present in corals become incorporated into the calcium carbonate deposits, aragonite is formed. However, shell fragments and the remains of coralline algae such as the green-segmented genus &quot;Halimeda&quot; can add to the reef&#x27;s ability to withstand damage from storms and other threats. Such mixtures are visible in structures such as Eniwetok Atoll.

=== In the geologic past ===

The times of maximum reef development were in the Middle Cambrian (513–501 Ma), Devonian (416–359 Ma) and Carboniferous (359–299 Ma), owing to extinct order Rugosa corals, and Late Cretaceous (100–66 Ma) and Neogene (23 Ma–present), owing to order Scleractinia corals.

Not all reefs in the past were formed by corals: those in the Early Cambrian (542–513 Ma) resulted from calcareous algae and archaeocyathids (small animals with conical shape, probably related to sponges) and in the Late Cretaceous (100–66 Ma), when reefs formed by a group of bivalves called rudists existed; one of the valves formed the main conical structure and the other, much smaller valve acted as a cap.

Measurements of the oxygen isotopic composition of the aragonitic skeleton of coral reefs, such as &quot;Porites&quot;, can indicate changes in sea surface temperature and sea surface salinity conditions during the growth of the coral. This technique is often used by climate scientists to infer a region&#x27;s paleoclimate.

==Types==
Since Darwin&#x27;s identification of the three classical reef formations – the fringing reef around a volcanic island becoming a barrier reef and then an atoll – scientists have identified further reef types. While some sources find only three, Thomas lists &quot;Four major forms of large-scale coral reefs&quot; – the fringing reef, barrier reef, atoll and table reef based on Stoddart, D.R. (1969). Spalding &quot;et al.&quot; list four main reef types that can be clearly illustrated – the fringing reef, barrier reef, atoll, and &quot;bank or platform reef&quot;—and notes that many other structures exist which do not conform easily to strict definitions, including the &quot;patch reef&quot;.

===Fringing reef===

A fringing reef, also called a shore reef, is directly attached to a shore, or borders it with an intervening narrow, shallow channel or lagoon. It is the most common reef type. Fringing reefs follow coastlines and can extend for many kilometres. They are usually less than 100 metres wide, but some are hundreds of metres wide. Fringing reefs are initially formed on the shore at the low water level and expand seawards as they grow in size. The final width depends on where the sea bed begins to drop steeply. The surface of the fringe reef generally remains at the same height: just below the waterline. In older fringing reefs, with outer regions pushed far out into the sea, the inner part is deepened by erosion and eventually forms a lagoon. Fringing reef lagoons can become over 100 metres wide and several metres deep. Like the fringing reef itself, they run parallel to the coast. The fringing reefs of the Red Sea are &quot;some of the best developed in the world&quot; and occur along all its shores except off sandy bays.

===Barrier reef===

Barrier reefs are separated from a mainland or island shore by a deep channel or lagoon. They resemble the later stages of a fringing reef with its lagoon but differ from the latter mainly in size and origin. Their lagoons can be several kilometres wide and 30 to 70 metres deep. Above all, the offshore outer reef edge formed in open water rather than next to a shoreline. Like an atoll, it is thought that these reefs are formed either as the seabed lowered or sea level rose. Formation takes considerably longer than for a fringing reef, thus barrier reefs are much rarer.

The best known and largest example of a barrier reef is the Australian Great Barrier Reef. Other major examples are the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System and the New Caledonian Barrier Reef. Barrier reefs are also found on the coasts of Providencia, Mayotte, the Gambier Islands, on the southeast coast of Kalimantan, on parts of the coast of Sulawesi, southeastern New Guinea and the south coast of the Louisiade Archipelago.

===Platform reef===

Platform reefs, variously called bank or table reefs, can form on the continental shelf, as well as in the open ocean, in fact anywhere where the seabed rises close enough to the surface of the ocean to enable the growth of zooxanthemic, reef-forming corals. Platform reefs are found in the southern Great Barrier Reef, the Swain and Capricorn Group on the continental shelf, about 100–200 km from the coast. Some platform reefs of the northern Mascarenes are several thousand kilometres from the mainland. Unlike fringing and barrier reefs which extend only seaward, platform reefs grow in all directions. They are variable in size, ranging from a few hundred metres to many kilometres across. Their usual shape is oval to elongated. Parts of these reefs can reach the surface and form sandbanks and small islands around which may form fringing reefs. A lagoon may form In the middle of a platform reef.

Platform reefs are typically situated within atolls, where they adopt the name &quot;patch reefs&quot; and often span a diameter of just a few dozen meters. In instances where platform reefs develop along elongated structures, such as old and weathered barrier reefs, they tend to arrange themselves in a linear formation. This is the case, for example, on the east coast of the Red Sea near Jeddah. In old platform reefs, the inner part can be so heavily eroded that it forms a pseudo-atoll. These can be distinguished from real atolls only by detailed investigation, possibly including core drilling. Some platform reefs of the Laccadives are U-shaped, due to wind and water flow.

===Atoll===
Atolls or atoll reefs are a more or less circular or continuous barrier reef that extends all the way around a lagoon without a central island. They are usually formed from fringing reefs around volcanic islands. Over time, the island erodes away and sinks below sea level. Atolls may also be formed by the sinking of the seabed or rising of the sea level. A ring of reefs results, which enclose a lagoon. Atolls are numerous in the South Pacific, where they usually occur in mid-ocean, for example, in the Caroline Islands, the Cook Islands, French Polynesia, the Marshall Islands and Micronesia.

Atolls are found in the Indian Ocean, for example, in the Maldives, the Chagos Islands, the Seychelles and around Cocos Island. The entire Maldives consist of 26 atolls.

===Other reef types or variants===

* Apron reef – short reef resembling a fringing reef, but more sloped; extending out and downward from a point or peninsular shore. The initial stage of a fringing reef.
* Bank reef – isolated, flat-topped reef larger than a patch reef and usually on mid-shelf regions and linear or semi-circular in shape; a type of platform reef.
* Patch reef – common, isolated, comparatively small reef outcrop, usually within a lagoon or embayment, often circular and surrounded by sand or seagrass. Can be considered as a type of platform reef or as features of fringing reefs, atolls and barrier reefs. The patches may be surrounded by a ring of reduced seagrass cover referred to as a &quot;grazing halo&quot;. 
* Ribbon reef – long, narrow, possibly winding reef, usually associated with an atoll lagoon. Also called a shelf-edge reef or sill reef.
* Drying reef – a part of a reef which is above water at low tide but submerged at high tide
* Habili – reef specific to the Red Sea; does not reach near enough to the surface to cause visible surf; may be a hazard to ships (from the Arabic for &quot;unborn&quot;)
* Microatoll – community of species of corals; vertical growth limited by average tidal height; growth morphologies offer a low-resolution record of patterns of sea level change; fossilized remains can be dated using radioactive carbon dating and have been used to reconstruct Holocene sea levels
* Cays – small, low-elevation, sandy islands formed on the surface of coral reefs from eroded material that piles up, forming an area above sea level; can be stabilized by plants to become habitable; occur in tropical environments throughout the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans (including the Caribbean and on the Great Barrier Reef and Belize Barrier Reef), where they provide habitable and agricultural land
* Seamount or guyot – formed when a coral reef on a volcanic island subsides; tops of seamounts are rounded and guyots are flat; flat tops of guyots, or &quot;tablemounts&quot;, are due to erosion by waves, winds, and atmospheric processes

== Zones ==
Coral reef ecosystems contain distinct zones that host different kinds of habitats. Usually, three major zones are recognized: the fore reef, reef crest, and the back reef (frequently referred to as the reef lagoon).

The three zones are physically and ecologically interconnected. Reef life and oceanic processes create opportunities for the exchange of seawater, sediments, nutrients and marine life.

Most coral reefs exist in waters less than 50 m deep. Some inhabit tropical continental shelves where cool, nutrient-rich upwelling does not occur, such as the Great Barrier Reef. Others are found in the deep ocean surrounding islands or as atolls, such as in the Maldives. The reefs surrounding islands form when islands subside into the ocean, and atolls form when an island subsides below the surface of the sea.

Alternatively, Moyle and Cech distinguish six zones, though most reefs possess only some of the zones.

The reef surface is the shallowest part of the reef. It is subject to surge and tides. When waves pass over shallow areas, they shoal, as shown in the adjacent diagram. This means the water is often agitated. These are the precise condition under which corals flourish. The light is sufficient for photosynthesis by the symbiotic zooxanthellae, and agitated water brings plankton to feed the coral.

The off-reef floor is the shallow sea floor surrounding a reef. This zone occurs next to reefs on continental shelves. Reefs around tropical islands and atolls drop abruptly to great depths and do not have such a floor. Usually sandy, the floor often supports seagrass meadows which are important foraging areas for reef fish.

The reef drop-off is, for its first 50 m, habitat for reef fish who find shelter on the cliff face and plankton in the water nearby. The drop-off zone applies mainly to the reefs surrounding oceanic islands and atolls.

The reef face is the zone above the reef floor or the reef drop-off. This zone is often the reef&#x27;s most diverse area. Coral and calcareous algae provide complex habitats and areas that offer protection, such as cracks and crevices. Invertebrates and epiphytic algae provide much of the food for other organisms. A common feature on this forereef zone is spur and groove formations that serve to transport sediment downslope.

The reef flat is the sandy-bottomed flat, which can be behind the main reef, containing chunks of coral. This zone may border a lagoon and serve as a protective area, or it may lie between the reef and the shore, and in this case is a flat, rocky area. Fish tend to prefer it when it is present.

The reef lagoon is an entirely enclosed region, which creates an area less affected by wave action and often contains small reef patches.

However, the topography of coral reefs is constantly changing. Each reef is made up of irregular patches of algae, sessile invertebrates, and bare rock and sand. The size, shape and relative abundance of these patches change from year to year in response to the various factors that favor one type of patch over another. Growing coral, for example, produces constant change in the fine structure of reefs. On a larger scale, tropical storms may knock out large sections of reef and cause boulders on sandy areas to move.

==Locations==



Coral reefs are estimated to cover 284,300 km2 (109,800 sq mi), just under 0.1% of the oceans&#x27; surface area. The Indo-Pacific region (including the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia and the Pacific) account for 91.9% of this total. Southeast Asia accounts for 32.3% of that figure, while the Pacific including Australia accounts for 40.8%. Atlantic and Caribbean coral reefs account for 7.6%.

Although corals exist both in temperate and tropical waters, shallow-water reefs form only in a zone extending from approximately 30° N to 30° S of the equator. Tropical corals do not grow at depths of over . The optimum temperature for most coral reefs is , and few reefs exist in waters below . When the net production by reef building corals no longer keeps pace with relative sea level and the reef structure permanently drowns a Darwin Point is reached. One such point exists at the northwestern end of the Hawaiian Archipelago; see Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes#Coral atoll stage.

However, reefs in the Persian Gulf have adapted to temperatures of in winter and in summer. 37 species of scleractinian corals inhabit such an environment around Larak Island.

Deep-water coral inhabits greater depths and colder temperatures at much higher latitudes, as far north as Norway. Although deep water corals can form reefs, little is known about them.

The northernmost coral reef on Earth is located near Eilat, Israel. Coral reefs are rare along the west coasts of the Americas and Africa, due primarily to upwelling and strong cold coastal currents that reduce water temperatures in these areas (the Humboldt, Benguela, and Canary Currents, respectively). Corals are seldom found along the coastline of South Asia—from the eastern tip of India (Chennai) to the Bangladesh and Myanmar borders—as well as along the coasts of northeastern South America and Bangladesh, due to the freshwater release from the Amazon and Ganges Rivers respectively.

Significant coral reefs include:
* The Great Barrier Reef—largest, comprising over 2,900 individual reefs and 900 islands stretching for over off Queensland, Australia
* The Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System—second largest, stretching from Isla Contoy at the tip of the Yucatán Peninsula down to the Bay Islands of Honduras
* The New Caledonia Barrier Reef—second longest double barrier reef, covering 
* The Andros, Bahamas Barrier Reef—third largest, following the east coast of Andros Island, Bahamas, between Andros and Nassau
* The Red Sea—includes 6,000-year-old fringing reefs located along a coastline
* The Florida Reef Tract—largest continental US reef and the third-largest coral barrier reef, extends from Soldier Key, located in Biscayne Bay, to the Dry Tortugas in the Gulf of Mexico
* Blake Plateau has the world&#x27;s largest known deep-water coral reef, comprising a 6.4 million acre reef that stretches from Miami to Charleston, S. C. Its discovery was announced in January 2024.
* Pulley Ridge—deepest photosynthetic coral reef, Florida
* Numerous reefs around the Maldives
* The Philippines coral reef area, the second-largest in Southeast Asia, is estimated at 26,000 square kilometres. 915 reef fish species and more than 400 scleractinian coral species, 12 of which are endemic are found there.
* The Raja Ampat Islands in Indonesia&#x27;s Southwest Papua province offer the highest known marine diversity.
* Bermuda is known for its northernmost coral reef system, located at . The presence of coral reefs at this high latitude is due to the proximity of the Gulf Stream. Bermuda coral species represent a subset of those found in the greater Caribbean.
* The world&#x27;s northernmost individual coral reef is located in the Finlayson Channel, in the inside passage of British Columbia, Canada.
* The world&#x27;s southernmost coral reef is at Lord Howe Island, in the Pacific Ocean off the east coast of Australia.

==Coral==

When alive, corals are colonies of small animals embedded in calcium carbonate shells. Coral heads consist of accumulations of individual animals called polyps, arranged in diverse shapes. Polyps are usually tiny, but they can range in size from a pinhead to across.

Reef-building or hermatypic corals live only in the photic zone (above 70 m), the depth to which sufficient sunlight penetrates the water.

===Zooxanthellae===

Coral polyps do not photosynthesize, but have a symbiotic relationship with microscopic algae (dinoflagellates) of the genus &quot;Symbiodinium&quot;, commonly referred to as zooxanthellae. These organisms live within the polyps&#x27; tissues and provide organic nutrients that nourish the polyp in the form of glucose, glycerol and amino acids. Because of this relationship, coral reefs grow much faster in clear water, which admits more sunlight. Without their symbionts, coral growth would be too slow to form significant reef structures. Corals get up to 90% of their nutrients from their symbionts. In return, as an example of mutualism, the corals shelter the zooxanthellae, averaging one million for every cubic centimetre of coral, and provide a constant supply of the carbon dioxide they need for photosynthesis.

The varying pigments in different species of zooxanthellae give them an overall brown or golden-brown appearance and give brown corals their colors. Other pigments such as reds, blues, greens, etc. come from colored proteins made by the coral animals. Coral that loses a large fraction of its zooxanthellae becomes white (or sometimes pastel shades in corals that are pigmented with their own proteins) and is said to be bleached, a condition which, unless corrected, can kill the coral.

There are eight clades of &quot;Symbiodinium&quot; phylotypes. Most research has been conducted on clades A–D. Each clade contributes their own benefits as well as less compatible attributes to the survival of their coral hosts. Each photosynthetic organism has a specific level of sensitivity to photodamage to compounds needed for survival, such as proteins. Rates of regeneration and replication determine the organism&#x27;s ability to survive. Phylotype A is found more in the shallow waters. It is able to produce mycosporine-like amino acids that are UV resistant, using a derivative of glycerin to absorb the UV radiation and allowing them to better adapt to warmer water temperatures. In the event of UV or thermal damage, if and when repair occurs, it will increase the likelihood of survival of the host and symbiont. This leads to the idea that, evolutionarily, clade A is more UV resistant and thermally resistant than the other clades.

Clades B and C are found more frequently in deeper water, which may explain their higher vulnerability to increased temperatures. Terrestrial plants that receive less sunlight because they are found in the undergrowth are analogous to clades B, C, and D. Since clades B through D are found at deeper depths, they require an elevated light absorption rate to be able to synthesize as much energy. With elevated absorption rates at UV wavelengths, these phylotypes are more prone to coral bleaching versus the shallow clade A.

Clade D has been observed to be high temperature-tolerant, and has a higher rate of survival than clades B and C during modern bleaching events.

===Skeleton===
Reefs grow as polyps and other organisms deposit calcium carbonate, the basis of coral, as a skeletal structure beneath and around themselves, pushing the coral head&#x27;s top upwards and outwards. Waves, grazing fish (such as parrotfish), sea urchins, sponges and other forces and organisms act as bioeroders, breaking down coral skeletons into fragments that settle into spaces in the reef structure or form sandy bottoms in associated reef lagoons.

Typical shapes for coral species are named by their resemblance to terrestrial objects such as wrinkled brains, cabbages, table tops, antlers, wire strands and pillars. These shapes can depend on the life history of the coral, like light exposure and wave action, and events such as breakages.
===Reproduction===
Corals reproduce both sexually and asexually. An individual polyp uses both reproductive modes within its lifetime. Corals reproduce sexually by either internal or external fertilization. The reproductive cells are found on the mesenteries, membranes that radiate inward from the layer of tissue that lines the stomach cavity. Some mature adult corals are hermaphroditic; others are exclusively male or female. A few species change sex as they grow.

Internally fertilized eggs develop in the polyp for a period ranging from days to weeks. Subsequent development produces a tiny larva, known as a planula. Externally fertilized eggs develop during synchronized spawning. Polyps across a reef simultaneously release eggs and sperm into the water en masse. Spawn disperse over a large area. The timing of spawning depends on time of year, water temperature, and tidal and lunar cycles. Spawning is most successful given little variation between high and low tide. The less water movement, the better the chance for fertilization. The release of eggs or planula usually occurs at night and is sometimes in phase with the lunar cycle (three to six days after a full moon).
The period from release to settlement lasts only a few days, but some planulae can survive afloat for several weeks. During this process, the larvae may use several different cues to find a suitable location for settlement. At long distances sounds from existing reefs are likely important, while at short distances chemical compounds become important. The larvae are vulnerable to predation and environmental conditions. The lucky few planulae that successfully attach to substrate then compete for food and space.

==Gallery of reef-building corals==

==Other reef builders==
Corals are the most prodigious reef-builders. However many other organisms living in the reef community contribute skeletal calcium carbonate in the same manner as corals. These include coralline algae, some sponges and bivalves. Reefs are always built by the combined efforts of these different phyla, with different organisms leading reef-building in different geological periods.

===Coralline algae===

Coralline algae are important contributors to reef structure. Although their mineral deposition rates are much slower than corals, they are more tolerant of rough wave-action, and so help to create a protective crust over those parts of the reef subjected to the greatest forces by waves, such as the reef front facing the open ocean. They also strengthen the reef structure by depositing limestone in sheets over the reef surface.

===Sponges===

&quot;Sclerosponge&quot; is the descriptive name for all &quot;Porifera&quot; that build reefs. In the early Cambrian period, &quot;Archaeocyatha&quot; sponges were the world&#x27;s first reef-building organisms, and sponges were the only reef-builders until the Ordovician. Sclerosponges still assist corals building modern reefs, but like coralline algae are much slower-growing than corals and their contribution is (usually) minor.

In the northern Pacific Ocean cloud sponges still create deep-water mineral-structures without corals, although the structures are not recognizable from the surface like tropical reefs. They are the only extant organisms known to build reef-like structures in cold water.

===Bivalves===
Oyster reefs are dense aggregations of oysters living in colonial communities. Other regionally-specific names for these structures include oyster beds and oyster banks. Oyster larvae require a hard substrate or surface to attach on, which includes the shells of old or dead oysters. Thus reefs can build up over time as new larvae settle on older individuals. &quot;Crassostrea virginica&quot; were once abundant in Chesapeake Bay and shorelines bordering the Atlantic coastal plain until the late nineteenth century. &quot;Ostrea angasi&quot; is a species of flat oyster that had also formed large reefs in South Australia.

Hippuritida, an extinct order of bivalves known as rudists, were major reef-building organisms during the Cretaceous. By the mid-Cretaceous, rudists became the dominant tropical reef-builders, becoming more numerous than scleractinian corals. During this period, ocean temperatures and saline levels—which corals are sensitive to—were higher than it is today, which may have contributed to the success of rudist reefs.

===Gastropods===
Some gastropods, like family Vermetidae, are sessile and cement themselves to the substrate, contributing to the reef building.

==Darwin&#x27;s paradox==
In &quot;The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs&quot;, published in 1842, Darwin described how coral reefs were found in some tropical areas but not others, with no obvious cause. The largest and strongest corals grew in parts of the reef exposed to the most violent surf and corals were weakened or absent where loose sediment accumulated.

Tropical waters contain few nutrients yet a coral reef can flourish like an &quot;oasis in the desert&quot;. This has given rise to the ecosystem conundrum, sometimes called &quot;Darwin&#x27;s paradox&quot;: &quot;How can such high production flourish in such nutrient poor conditions?&quot;

Coral reefs support over one-quarter of all marine species. This diversity results in complex food webs, with large predator fish eating smaller forage fish that eat yet smaller zooplankton and so on. However, all food webs eventually depend on plants, which are the primary producers. Coral reefs typically produce 5–10 grams of carbon per square meter per day (gC·m−2·day−1) biomass.

One reason for the unusual clarity of tropical waters is their nutrient deficiency and drifting plankton. Further, the sun shines year-round in the tropics, warming the surface layer, making it less dense than subsurface layers. The warmer water is separated from deeper, cooler water by a stable thermocline, where the temperature makes a rapid change. This keeps the warm surface waters floating above the cooler deeper waters. In most parts of the ocean, there is little exchange between these layers. Organisms that die in aquatic environments generally sink to the bottom, where they decompose, which releases nutrients in the form of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K). These nutrients are necessary for plant growth, but in the tropics, they do not directly return to the surface.

Plants form the base of the food chain and need sunlight and nutrients to grow. In the ocean, these plants are mainly microscopic phytoplankton which drift in the water column. They need sunlight for photosynthesis, which powers carbon fixation, so they are found only relatively near the surface, but they also need nutrients. Phytoplankton rapidly use nutrients in the surface waters, and in the tropics, these nutrients are not usually replaced because of the thermocline.

===Explanations===
Around coral reefs, lagoons fill in with material eroded from the reef and the island. They become havens for marine life, providing protection from waves and storms.

Most importantly, reefs recycle nutrients, which happens much less in the open ocean. In coral reefs and lagoons, producers include phytoplankton, as well as seaweed and coralline algae, especially small types called turf algae, which pass nutrients to corals. The phytoplankton form the base of the food chain and are eaten by fish and crustaceans. Recycling reduces the nutrient inputs needed overall to support the community.

Corals also absorb nutrients, including inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus, directly from water. Many corals extend their tentacles at night to catch zooplankton that pass near. Zooplankton provide the polyp with nitrogen, and the polyp shares some of the nitrogen with the zooxanthellae, which also require this element.

Sponges live in crevices in the reefs. They are efficient filter feeders, and in the Red Sea they consume about 60% of the phytoplankton that drifts by. Sponges eventually excrete nutrients in a form that corals can use.

The roughness of coral surfaces is key to coral survival in agitated waters. Normally, a boundary layer of still water surrounds a submerged object, which acts as a barrier. Waves breaking on the extremely rough edges of corals disrupt the boundary layer, allowing the corals access to passing nutrients. Turbulent water thereby promotes reef growth. Without the access to nutrients brought by rough coral surfaces, even the most effective recycling would not suffice.

Deep nutrient-rich water entering coral reefs through isolated events may have significant effects on temperature and nutrient systems. This water movement disrupts the relatively stable thermocline that usually exists between warm shallow water and deeper colder water. Temperature regimes on coral reefs in the Bahamas and Florida are highly variable with temporal scales of minutes to seasons and spatial scales across depths.

Water can pass through coral reefs in various ways, including current rings, surface waves, internal waves and tidal changes. Movement is generally created by tides and wind. As tides interact with varying bathymetry and wind mixes with surface water, internal waves are created. An internal wave is a gravity wave that moves along density stratification within the ocean. When a water parcel encounters a different density it oscillates and creates internal waves. While internal waves generally have a lower frequency than surface waves, they often form as a single wave that breaks into multiple waves as it hits a slope and moves upward. This vertical breakup of internal waves causes significant diapycnal mixing and turbulence. Internal waves can act as nutrient pumps, bringing plankton and cool nutrient-rich water to the surface.

The irregular structure characteristic of coral reef bathymetry may enhance mixing and produce pockets of cooler water and variable nutrient content. Arrival of cool, nutrient-rich water from depths due to internal waves and tidal bores has been linked to growth rates of suspension feeders and benthic algae as well as plankton and larval organisms. The seaweed &quot;Codium isthmocladum&quot; reacts to deep water nutrient sources because their tissues have different concentrations of nutrients dependent upon depth. Aggregations of eggs, larval organisms and plankton on reefs respond to deep water intrusions. Similarly, as internal waves and bores move vertically, surface-dwelling larval organisms are carried toward the shore. This has significant biological importance to cascading effects of food chains in coral reef ecosystems and may provide yet another key to unlocking the paradox.

Cyanobacteria provide soluble nitrates via nitrogen fixation.

Coral reefs often depend on surrounding habitats, such as seagrass meadows and mangrove forests, for nutrients. Seagrass and mangroves supply dead plants and animals that are rich in nitrogen and serve to feed fish and animals from the reef by supplying wood and vegetation. Reefs, in turn, protect mangroves and seagrass from waves and produce sediment in which the mangroves and seagrass can root.

==Biodiversity==
Coral reefs form some of the world&#x27;s most productive ecosystems, providing complex and varied marine habitats that support a wide range of organisms. Fringing reefs just below low tide level have a mutually beneficial relationship with mangrove forests at high tide level and sea grass meadows in between: the reefs protect the mangroves and seagrass from strong currents and waves that would damage them or erode the sediments in which they are rooted, while the mangroves and sea grass protect the coral from large influxes of silt, fresh water and pollutants. This level of variety in the environment benefits many coral reef animals, which, for example, may feed in the sea grass and use the reefs for protection or breeding.

Reefs are home to a variety of animals, including fish, seabirds, sponges, cnidarians (which includes some types of corals and jellyfish), worms, crustaceans (including shrimp, cleaner shrimp, spiny lobsters and crabs), mollusks (including cephalopods), echinoderms (including starfish, sea urchins and sea cucumbers), sea squirts, sea turtles and sea snakes. Aside from humans, mammals are rare on coral reefs, with visiting cetaceans such as dolphins being the main exception. A few species feed directly on corals, while others graze on algae on the reef. Reef biomass is positively related to species diversity.

The same hideouts in a reef may be regularly inhabited by different species at different times of day. Nighttime predators such as cardinalfish and squirrelfish hide during the day, while damselfish, surgeonfish, triggerfish, wrasses and parrotfish hide from eels and sharks.

The great number and diversity of hiding places in coral reefs, i.e. refuges, are the most important factor causing the great diversity and high biomass of the organisms in coral reefs.

Coral reefs also have a very high degree of microorganism diversity compared to other environments.

===Algae===
Reefs are chronically at risk of algal encroachment. Overfishing and excess nutrient supply from onshore can enable algae to outcompete and kill the coral. Increased nutrient levels can be a result of sewage or chemical fertilizer runoff. Runoff can carry nitrogen and phosphorus which promote excess algae growth. Algae can sometimes out-compete the coral for space. The algae can then smother the coral by decreasing the oxygen supply available to the reef. Decreased oxygen levels can slow down calcification rates, weakening the coral and leaving it more susceptible to disease and degradation. Algae inhabit a large percentage of surveyed coral locations. The algal population consists of turf algae, coralline algae and macro algae. Some sea urchins (such as &quot;Diadema antillarum&quot;) eat these algae and could thus decrease the risk of algal encroachment.

===Sponges===
Sponges are essential for the functioning of the coral reef system. Algae and corals in coral reefs produce organic material. This is filtered through sponges which convert this organic material into small particles which in turn are absorbed by algae and corals. Sponges are essential to the coral reef system however, they are quite different from corals. While corals are complex and many celled while sponges are very simple organisms with no tissue. They are alike in that they are both immobile aquatic invertebrates but otherwise are completely different.

Types of sponges-

There are several different species of sea sponge. They come in multiple shapes and sizes and all have unique characteristics. Some types of sea sponges include; the tube sponge, vase sponge, yellow sponge, bright red tree sponge, painted tunicate sponge, and the sea squirt sponge.

Medicinal Qualities of Sea Sponges-

Sea sponges have provided the base for many life saving medications. Scientists began to study them in the 1940s and after a few years, discovered that sea sponges contain properties that can stop viral infections. The first drug developed from sea sponges was released in 1969.

===Fish===

Over 4,000 species of fish inhabit coral reefs. The reasons for this diversity remain unclear. Hypotheses include the &quot;lottery&quot;, in which the first (lucky winner) recruit to a territory is typically able to defend it against latecomers, &quot;competition&quot;, in which adults compete for territory, and less-competitive species must be able to survive in poorer habitat, and &quot;predation&quot;, in which population size is a function of postsettlement piscivore mortality. Healthy reefs can produce up to 35 tons of fish per square kilometre each year, but damaged reefs produce much less.

===Invertebrates===
Sea urchins, &quot;Dotidae&quot; and sea slugs eat seaweed. Some species of sea urchins, such as &quot;Diadema antillarum&quot;, can play a pivotal part in preventing algae from overrunning reefs. Researchers are investigating the use of native collector urchins, &quot;Tripneustes gratilla&quot;, for their potential as biocontrol agents to mitigate the spread of invasive algae species on coral reefs. &quot;Nudibranchia&quot; and sea anemones eat sponges.

A number of invertebrates, collectively called &quot;cryptofauna&quot;, inhabit the coral skeletal substrate itself, either boring into the skeletons (through the process of bioerosion) or living in pre-existing voids and crevices. Animals boring into the rock include sponges, bivalve mollusks, and sipunculans. Those settling on the reef include many other species, particularly crustaceans and polychaete worms.

===Seabirds===
Coral reef systems provide important habitats for seabird species, some endangered. For example, Midway Atoll in Hawaii supports nearly three million seabirds, including two-thirds (1.5 million) of the global population of Laysan albatross, and one-third of the global population of black-footed albatross. Each seabird species has specific sites on the atoll where they nest. Altogether, 17 species of seabirds live on Midway. The short-tailed albatross is the rarest, with fewer than 2,200 surviving after excessive feather hunting in the late 19th century.

===Other===
Sea snakes feed exclusively on fish and their eggs. Marine birds, such as herons, gannets, pelicans and boobies, feed on reef fish. Some land-based reptiles intermittently associate with reefs, such as monitor lizards, the marine crocodile and semiaquatic snakes, such as &quot;Laticauda colubrina&quot;. Sea turtles, particularly hawksbill sea turtles, feed on sponges.

==Ecosystem services==
Coral reefs deliver ecosystem services to tourism, fisheries and coastline protection. The global economic value of coral reefs has been estimated to be between US$29.8 billion and $375 billion per year. About 500 million people benefit from ecosystem services provided by coral reefs.

The economic cost over a 25-year period of destroying one square kilometre of coral reef has been estimated to be somewhere between $137,000 and $1,200,000.

To improve the management of coastal coral reefs, the World Resources Institute (WRI) developed and published tools for calculating the value of coral reef-related tourism, shoreline protection and fisheries, partnering with five Caribbean countries. As of April 2011, published working papers covered St. Lucia, Tobago, Belize, and the Dominican Republic. The WRI was &quot;making sure that the study results support improved coastal policies and management planning&quot;. The Belize study estimated the value of reef and mangrove services at $395–559 million annually.

Bermuda&#x27;s coral reefs provide economic benefits to the Island worth on average $722 million per year, based on six key ecosystem services, according to Sarkis &quot;et al&quot; (2010).

===Shoreline protection===

Coral reefs protect shorelines by absorbing wave energy, and many small islands would not exist without reefs. Coral reefs can reduce wave energy by 97%, helping to prevent loss of life and property damage. Coastlines protected by coral reefs are also more stable in terms of erosion than those without. Reefs can attenuate waves as well as or better than artificial structures designed for coastal defence such as breakwaters. An estimated 197 million people who live both below 10 m elevation and within 50 km of a reef consequently may receive risk reduction benefits from reefs. Restoring reefs is significantly cheaper than building artificial breakwaters in tropical environments. Expected damages from flooding would double, and costs from frequent storms would triple without the topmost meter of reefs. For 100-year storm events, flood damages would increase by 91% to $US 272 billion without the top meter.

===Fisheries===
About six million tons of fish are taken each year from coral reefs. Well-managed reefs have an average annual yield of 15 tons of seafood per square kilometre. Southeast Asia&#x27;s coral reef fisheries alone yield about $2.4 billion annually from seafood.

==Threats==

Since their emergence 485 million years ago, coral reefs have faced many threats, including disease, predation, invasive species, bioerosion by grazing fish, algal blooms, and geologic hazards. Recent human activities present new threats. From 2009 to 2018, coral reefs worldwide declined 14%.

Human activities that threaten coral include coral mining, bottom trawling, and the digging of canals and accesses into islands and bays, all of which can damage marine ecosystems if not done sustainably. Other localized threats include blast fishing, overfishing, coral overmining, and marine pollution, including use of the banned anti-fouling biocide tributyltin; although absent in developed countries, these activities continue in places with few environmental protections or poor regulatory enforcement. Chemicals in sunscreens may awaken latent viral infections in zooxanthellae and impact reproduction. However, concentrating tourism activities via offshore platforms has been shown to limit the spread of coral disease by tourists.

Greenhouse gas emissions present a broader threat through sea temperature rise and sea level rise, resulting in widespread coral bleaching and loss of coral cover. Climate change causes more frequent and more severe storms, also changes ocean circulation patterns, which can destroy coral reefs.Ocean acidification also affects corals by decreasing calcification rates and increasing dissolution rates, although corals can adapt their calcifying fluids to changes in seawater pH and carbonate levels to mitigate the impact. Volcanic and human-made aerosol pollution can modulate regional sea surface temperatures.

In 2011, two researchers suggested that &quot;extant marine invertebrates face the same synergistic effects of multiple stressors&quot; that occurred during the end-Permian extinction, and that genera &quot;with poorly buffered respiratory physiology and calcareous shells&quot;, such as corals, were particularly vulnerable.

Corals respond to stress by &quot;bleaching&quot;, or expelling their colorful zooxanthellate endosymbionts. Corals with Clade C zooxanthellae are generally vulnerable to heat-induced bleaching, whereas corals with the hardier Clade A or D are generally resistant, as are tougher coral genera like Porites and Montipora.

Every 4–7 years, an El Niño event causes some reefs with heat-sensitive corals to bleach, with especially widespread bleachings in 1998 and 2010. However, reefs that experience a severe bleaching event become resistant to future heat-induced bleaching, due to rapid directional selection. Similar rapid adaption may protect coral reefs from global warming.

A large-scale systematic study of the Jarvis Island coral community, which experienced ten El Niño-coincident coral bleaching events from 1960 to 2016, found that the reef recovered from almost complete death after severe events.

==Protection==


Marine protected areas (MPAs) are areas designated because they provide various kinds of protection to ocean and/or estuarine areas. They are intended to promote responsible fishery management and habitat protection. MPAs can also encompass social and biological objectives, including reef restoration, aesthetics, biodiversity and economic benefits.

The effectiveness of MPAs is still debated. For example, a study investigating the success of a small number of MPAs in Indonesia, the Philippines and Papua New Guinea found no significant differences between the MPAs and unprotected sites. Furthermore, in some cases they can generate local conflict, due to a lack of community participation, clashing views of the government and fisheries, effectiveness of the area and funding. In some situations, as in the Phoenix Islands Protected Area, MPAs provide revenue to locals. The level of income provided is similar to the income they would have generated without controls. Overall, it appears the MPA&#x27;s can provide protection to local coral reefs, but that clear management and sufficient funds are required.

The Caribbean Coral Reefs – Status Report 1970–2012, states that coral decline may be reduced or even reversed. For this overfishing needs to be stopped, especially fishing on species key to coral reefs, such as parrotfish. Direct human pressure on coral reefs should also be reduced and the inflow of sewage should be minimised. Measures to achieve this could include restricting coastal settlement, development and tourism. The report shows that healthier reefs in the Caribbean are those with large, healthy populations of parrotfish. These occur in countries that protect parrotfish and other species, like sea urchins. They also often ban fish trapping and spearfishing. Together these measures help creating &quot;resilient reefs&quot;.

Protecting networks of diverse and healthy reefs, not only climate refugia, helps ensure the greatest chance of genetic diversity, which is critical for coral to adapt to new climates. A variety of conservation methods applied across marine and terrestrial threatened ecosystems makes coral adaption more likely and effective.

Designating a reef as a biosphere reserve, marine park, national monument or world heritage site can offer protections. For example, Belize&#x27;s barrier reef, Sian Ka&#x27;an, the Galapagos islands, Great Barrier Reef, Henderson Island, Palau and Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument are world heritage sites.

In Australia, the Great Barrier Reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, and is the subject of much legislation, including a biodiversity action plan. Australia compiled a Coral Reef Resilience Action Plan. This plan consists of adaptive management strategies, including reducing carbon footprint. A public awareness plan provides education on the &quot;rainforests of the sea&quot; and how people can reduce carbon emissions.

Inhabitants of Ahus Island, Manus Province, Papua New Guinea, have followed a generations-old practice of restricting fishing in six areas of their reef lagoon. Their cultural traditions allow line fishing, but no net or spear fishing. Both biomass and individual fish sizes are significantly larger than in places where fishing is unrestricted.

Increased levels of atmospheric CO2 contribute to ocean acidification, which in turn damages coral reefs. To help combat ocean acidification, several countries have put laws in place to reduce greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide. Many land use laws aim to reduce CO2 emissions by limiting deforestation. Deforestation can release significant amounts of CO2 absent sequestration via active follow-up forestry programs. Deforestation can also cause erosion, which flows into the ocean, contributing to ocean acidification. Incentives are used to reduce miles traveled by vehicles, which reduces carbon emissions into the atmosphere, thereby reducing the amount of dissolved CO2 in the ocean. State and federal governments also regulate land activities that affect coastal erosion. High-end satellite technology can monitor reef conditions.

The United States Clean Water Act puts pressure on state governments to monitor and limit run-off of polluted water.

==Restoration==
Coral reef restoration has grown in prominence over the past several decades because of the unprecedented reef die-offs around the planet. Coral stressors can include pollution, warming ocean temperatures, extreme weather events, and overfishing. With the deterioration of global reefs, fish nurseries, biodiversity, coastal development and livelihood, and natural beauty are under threat. Fortunately, researchers have taken it upon themselves to develop a new field, coral restoration, in the 1970s–1980s

===Coral farming===

Coral aquaculture, also known as coral farming or coral gardening, is showing promise as a potentially effective tool for restoring coral reefs. The &quot;gardening&quot; process bypasses the early growth stages of corals when they are most at risk of dying. Coral seeds are grown in nurseries, then replanted on the reef. Coral is farmed by coral farmers whose interests range from reef conservation to increased income. Due to its straight forward process and substantial evidence of the technique having a significant effect on coral reef growth, coral nurseries became the most widespread and arguably the most effective method for coral restoration.

Coral gardens take advantage of a coral&#x27;s natural ability to fragment and continuing to grow if the fragments are able to anchor themselves onto new substrates. This method was first tested by Baruch Rinkevich in 1995 which found success at the time. By today&#x27;s standards, coral farming has grown into a variety of different forms, but still has the same goals of cultivating corals. Consequently, coral farming quickly replaced previously used transplantation methods or the act of physically moving sections or whole colonies of corals into a new area. Transplantation has seen success in the past and decades of experiments have led to a high success and survival rate. However, this method still requires the removal of corals from existing reefs. With the current state of reefs, this kind of method should generally be avoided if possible. Saving healthy corals from eroding substrates or reefs that are doomed to collapse could be a major advantage of utilizing transplantation.

Coral gardens generally take on the safe forms no matter where you go. It begins with the establishment of a nursery where operators can observe and care for coral fragments. It goes without saying that nurseries should be established in areas that are going to maximize growth and minimize mortality. Floating offshore coral trees or even aquariums are possible locations where corals can grow. After a location has been determined, collection and cultivation can occur.

The major benefit of using coral farms is it lowers polyp and juvenile mortality rates. By removing predators and recruitment obstacles, corals are able to mature without much hindrance. However, nurseries cannot stop climate stressors. Warming temperatures or hurricanes can still disrupt or even kill nursery corals.

Technology is becoming more popular in the coral farming process. Teams from the Reef Restoration and Adaptation Program (RRAP) have trialled coral counting technology utilizing a prototype robotic camera. The camera uses computer vision and learning algorithms to detect and count individual coral babies and track their growth and health in real time. This technology, with research led by QUT, is intended to be used during annual coral spawning events and will provide researchers with control that is not currently possible when mass-producing corals.

===Creating substrates===

Efforts to expand the size and number of coral reefs generally involve supplying substrate to allow more corals to find a home. Substrate materials include discarded vehicle tires, scuttled ships, subway cars and formed concrete, such as reef balls. Reefs grow unaided on marine structures such as oil rigs. In large restoration projects, propagated hermatypic coral on substrate can be secured with metal pins, superglue or milliput. Needle and thread can also attach A-hermatype coral to substrate.

Biorock is a substrate produced by a patented process that runs low voltage electrical currents through seawater to cause dissolved minerals to precipitate onto steel structures. The resultant white carbonate (aragonite) is the same mineral that makes up natural coral reefs. Corals rapidly colonize and grow at accelerated rates on these coated structures. The electrical currents also accelerate the formation and growth of both chemical limestone rock and the skeletons of corals and other shell-bearing organisms, such as oysters. The vicinity of the anode and cathode provides a high-pH environment which inhibits the growth of competitive filamentous and fleshy algae. The increased growth rates fully depend on the accretion activity. Under the influence of the electric field, corals display an increased growth rate, size and density.

Simply having many structures on the ocean floor is not enough to form coral reefs. Restoration projects must consider the complexity of the substrates they are creating for future reefs. Researchers conducted an experiment near Ticao Island in the Philippines in 2013 where several substrates in varying complexities were laid in the nearby degraded reefs. Large complexity consisted of plots that had both a human-made substrates of both smooth and rough rocks with a surrounding fence, medium consisted of only the human-made substrates, and small had neither the fence or substrates. After one month, researchers found that there was a positive correlation between structure complexity and recruitment rates of larvae. The medium complexity performed the best with larvae favoring rough rocks over smooth rocks. Following one year of their study, researchers visited the site and found that many of the sites were able to support local fisheries. They came to the conclusion that reef restoration could be done cost-effectively and will yield long term benefits given they are protected and maintained.

===Relocation===

One case study with coral reef restoration was conducted on the island of Oahu in Hawaii. The University of Hawaii operates a Coral Reef Assessment and Monitoring Program to help relocate and restore coral reefs in Hawaii. A boat channel from the island of Oahu to the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology on Coconut Island was overcrowded with coral reefs. Many areas of coral reef patches in the channel had been damaged from past dredging in the channel.

Dredging covers corals with sand. Coral larvae cannot settle on sand; they can only build on existing reefs or compatible hard surfaces, such as rock or concrete. Because of this, the university decided to relocate some of the coral. They transplanted them with the help of United States Army divers, to a site relatively close to the channel. They observed little if any damage to any of the colonies during transport and no mortality of coral reefs was observed on the transplant site. While attaching the coral to the transplant site, they found that coral placed on hard rock grew well, including on the wires that attached the corals to the site.

No environmental effects were seen from the transplantation process, recreational activities were not decreased, and no scenic areas were affected.

As an alternative to transplanting coral themselves, juvenile fish can also be encouraged to relocate to existing coral reefs by auditory simulation. In damaged sections of the Great Barrier Reef, loudspeakers playing recordings of healthy reef environments were found to attract fish twice as often as equivalent patches where no sound was played, and also increased species biodiversity by 50%.

===Heat-tolerant symbionts===
Another possibility for coral restoration is gene therapy: inoculating coral with genetically modified bacteria, or naturally-occurring heat-tolerant varieties of coral symbiotes, may make it possible to grow corals that are more resistant to climate change and other threats. Warming oceans are forcing corals to adapt to unprecedented temperatures. Those that do not have a tolerance for the elevated temperatures experience coral bleaching and eventually mortality. There is already research that looks to create genetically modified corals that can withstand a warming ocean. Madeleine J. H. van Oppen, James K. Oliver, Hollie M. Putnam, and Ruth D. Gates described four different ways that gradually increase in human intervention to genetically modify corals. These methods focus on altering the genetics of the zooxanthellae within coral rather than the alternative.

The first method is to induce acclimatization of the first generation of corals. The idea is that when adult and offspring corals are exposed to stressors, the zooxanthellae will gain a mutation. This method is based mostly on the chance that the zooxanthellae will acquire the specific trait that will allow it to better survive in warmer waters. The second method focuses on identifying what different kinds of zooxanthellae are within the coral and configuring how much of each zooxanthella lives within the coral at a given age. Use of zooxanthellae from the previous method would only boost success rates for this method. However, this method would only be applicable to younger corals, for now, because previous experiments of manipulation zooxanthellae communities at later life stages have all failed. The third method focuses on selective breeding tactics. Once selected, corals would be reared and exposed to simulated stressors in a laboratory. The last method is to genetically modify the zooxanthellae itself. When preferred mutations are acquired, the genetically modified zooxanthellae will be introduced to an aposymbiotic poly and a new coral will be produced. This method is the most laborious of the fourth, but researchers believe this method should be utilized more and holds the most promise in genetic engineering for coral restoration.

===Invasive algae===
Hawaiian coral reefs smothered by the spread of invasive algae were managed with a two-prong approach: divers manually removed invasive algae, with the support of super-sucker barges. Grazing pressure on invasive algae needed to be increased to prevent the regrowth of the algae. Researchers found that native collector urchins were reasonable candidate grazers for algae biocontrol, to extirpate the remaining invasive algae from the reef.

====Invasive algae in Caribbean reefs====

Macroalgae, or better known as seaweed, has to potential to cause reef collapse because they can outcompete many coral species. Macroalgae can overgrow on corals, shade, block recruitment, release biochemicals that can hinder spawning, and potentially form bacteria harmful to corals. Historically, algae growth was controlled by herbivorous fish and sea urchins. Parrotfish are a prime example of reef caretakers. Consequently, these two species can be considered as keystone species for reef environments because of their role in protecting reefs.

Before the 1980s, Jamaica&#x27;s reefs were thriving and well cared for, however, this all changed after Hurricane Allen occurred in 1980 and an unknown disease spread across the Caribbean. In the wake of these events, massive damage was caused to both the reefs and sea urchin population across Jamaican&#x27;s reefs and into the Caribbean Sea. As little as 2% of the original sea urchin population survived the disease. Primary macroalgae succeeded the destroyed reefs and eventually larger, more resilient macroalgae soon took its place as the dominant organism. Parrotfish and other herbivorous fish were few in numbers because of decades of overfishing and bycatch at the time. Historically, the Jamaican coast had 90% coral cover and was reduced to 5% in the 1990s. Eventually, corals were able to recover in areas where sea urchin populations were increasing. Sea urchins were able to feed and multiply and clear off substrates, leaving areas for coral polyps to anchor and mature. However, sea urchin populations are still not recovering as fast as researchers predicted, despite being highly fecundate. It is unknown whether or not the mysterious disease is still present and preventing sea urchin populations from rebounding. Regardless, these areas are slowly recovering with the aid of sea urchin grazing. This event supports an early restoration idea of cultivating and releasing sea urchins into reefs to prevent algal overgrowth.

===Microfragmentation and fusion===
In 2014, Christopher Page, Erinn Muller, and David Vaughan from the International Center for Coral Reef Research &amp; Restoration at Mote Marine Laboratory in Summerland Key, Florida developed a new technology called &quot;microfragmentation&quot;, in which they use a specialized diamond band saw to cut corals into 1 cm2 fragments instead of 6 cm2 to advance the growth of brain, boulder, and star corals. Corals &quot;Orbicella faveolata&quot; and &quot;Montastraea cavernosa&quot; were outplanted off the Florida&#x27;s shores in several microfragment arrays. After two years, &quot;O. faveolata&quot; had grown 6.5x its original size while &quot;M. cavernosa&quot; had grown nearly twice its size. Under conventional means, both corals would have required decades to reach the same size. It is suspected that if predation events had not occurred near the beginning of the experiment &quot;O. faveolata&quot; would have grown at least ten times its original size. By using this method, Mote Marine Laboratory successfully generated 25,000 corals within a single year, subsequently transplanting 10,000 of them into the Florida Keys. Shortly after, they discovered that these microfragments fused with other microfragments from the same parent coral. Typically, corals that are not from the same parent fight and kill nearby corals in an attempt to survive and expand. This new technology is known as &quot;fusion&quot; and has been shown to grow coral heads in just two years instead of the typical 25–75 years. After fusion occurs, the reef will act as a single organism rather than several independent reefs. Currently, there has been no published research into this method.

==See also==

* Deep-water coral — Corals living in the cold waters of deeper, darker parts of the oceans
* Mesophotic coral reef — Corals living in the mesopelagic or twilight zone
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==Further references==
* Coral Reef Protection: What Are Coral Reefs?. US EPA.
* 

==External links==

* Corals and Coral Reefs overview at the Smithsonian Ocean Portal
* About Corals &quot;Australian Institute of Marine Science&quot;.
*International Coral Reef Initiative
*Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research Site (US NSF)
*ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies
*NOAA&#x27;s Coral-List Listserver for Coral Reef Information and News
*NOAA&#x27;s Coral Reef Conservation Program
*NOAA&#x27;s Coral Reef Information System
*ReefBase: A Global Information System on Coral Reefs 
*National Coral Reef Institute Nova Southeastern University
*Marine Aquarium Council 
*NCORE National Center for Coral Reef Research University of Miami
*Microdocs : 4 kinds of Reef &amp; Reef structure 
*Reef Relief Active Florida environmental non-profit focusing on coral reef education and protection
* Global Reef Record – Catlin Seaview Survey of reef, a database of images and other information
*&quot;Corals and Coral Reefs&quot; (archived). Nancy Knowlton, &quot;iBioSeminars&quot;, 2011.
*Nancy Knowlton&#x27;s Seminar: &quot;Corals and Coral Reefs&quot;. Nancy Knowlton, &quot;iBioSeminars&quot;, 2011.
*About coral reefs Living Reefs Foundation, Bermuda
*Caribbean Coral Reefs – Status Report 1970-2012&quot; by the IUCN. – , featuring the report.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="2" end="12" title="Coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="30" end="39" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="71" end="76" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="99" end="107" title="Colony (biology)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="111" end="116" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q689884" start="117" end="122" title="polyp (zoology)" label="polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="141" end="158" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q195605" start="192" end="203" title="stony coral" label="stony coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="260" end="265" title="Class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q28524" start="266" end="274" title="Anthozoa" label="Anthozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="289" end="295" title="phylum" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="296" end="304" title="Cnidaria" label="Cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="321" end="332" title="sea anemone" label="sea anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="338" end="347" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="400" end="411" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10739169" start="590" end="606" title="Early Ordovician" label="Early Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="637" end="643" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="657" end="665" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="937" end="944" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="956" end="960" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="962" end="969" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47253" start="972" end="976" title="worm" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="979" end="990" title="crustaceans" label="crustaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="992" end="1002" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="1005" end="1011" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165118" start="1014" end="1022" title="tunicate" label="tunicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="1034" end="1044" title="cnidarians" label="cnidarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741984" start="1182" end="1192" title="deep water coral" label="deep water"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="1405" end="1421" title="Nutrient pollution" label="excess nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q14868764" start="1456" end="1474" title="ocean heat content" label="ocean heat content"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="1479" end="1492" title="oceanic acidification" label="acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269057" start="1518" end="1531" title="blast fishing" label="blast fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q445055" start="1533" end="1548" title="cyanide fishing" label="cyanide fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q765706" start="1550" end="1562" title="spearfishing" label="spearfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096878" start="1566" end="1571" title="Scuba diving" label="scuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693969" start="1631" end="1637" title="agricultural runoff" label="runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q59420558" start="1660" end="1674" title="injection well" label="injection well"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="1713" end="1731" title="ecosystem services" label="ecosystem services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="1759" end="1779" title="Coastal management" label="shoreline protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="2202" end="2221" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Last Glacial Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="2246" end="2255" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="2274" end="2293" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="2421" end="2430" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="2561" end="2580" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2589" end="2604" title="Island#Oceanic islands" label="oceanic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="2609" end="2614" title="atoll" label="atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="2651" end="2659" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="2683" end="2691" title="tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="2706" end="2721" title="plate tectonics" label="plate movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767074" start="2761" end="2806" title="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs" label="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2814" end="2828" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564366" start="2913" end="2945" title="second voyage of HMS Beagle" label="voyage of the &amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="2965" end="2971" title="tectonic uplift" label="uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="2976" end="2986" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q238851" start="3003" end="3008" title="oceanic crust" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999990" start="3109" end="3122" title="fringing reef" label="fringing reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="3147" end="3162" title="volcanic island" label="volcanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="3341" end="3347" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q570309" start="3359" end="3366" title="bedrock" label="bedrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="3542" end="3549" title="tropics" label="tropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="3651" end="3655" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="4397" end="4411" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q220392" start="4570" end="4583" title="zooxanthellae" label="zooxanthellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="4634" end="4643" title="symbionts" label="symbionts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="4658" end="4673" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesize"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="4748" end="4761" title="geomorphology" label="geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5824490" start="4810" end="4819" title="substrate (biology)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="4946" end="4964" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5310" end="5329" title="Island#Continental islands" label="continental islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q503481" start="5456" end="5459" title="cay" label="cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="6387" end="6396" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="6452" end="6467" title="coralline algae" label="coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="6496" end="6501" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707334" start="6508" end="6516" title="Halimeda" label="Halimeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q649190" start="6657" end="6671" title="Eniwetok Atoll" label="Eniwetok Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025304" start="6754" end="6769" title="Middle Cambrian" label="Middle Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="6779" end="6781" title="Annum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="6784" end="6792" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="6810" end="6823" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="6847" end="6854" title="extinction" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q133091" start="6861" end="6867" title="Rugosa" label="Rugosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="6880" end="6895" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="6912" end="6919" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="6946" end="6951" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q195605" start="6952" end="6964" title="Scleractinia" label="Scleractinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="7036" end="7050" title="Early Cambrian" label="Early Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="7089" end="7094" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="7099" end="7114" title="Archaeocyatha" label="archaeocyathids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="7170" end="7177" title="sponges" label="sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="7190" end="7205" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541069" start="7267" end="7274" title="rudists" label="rudists"/>
<link wikidata="Q144608" start="7492" end="7499" title="Porites" label="Porites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507383" start="7531" end="7554" title="sea surface temperature" label="sea surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="7699" end="7711" title="paleoclimate" label="paleoclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="8832" end="8841" title="low water" label="low water"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="9188" end="9194" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="9364" end="9371" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="9584" end="9590" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="10151" end="10169" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108191" start="10200" end="10232" title="Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System" label="Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330981" start="10241" end="10268" title="New Caledonian Barrier Reef" label="New Caledonian Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138756" start="10316" end="10327" title="Providencia (Colombia)" label="Providencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="10329" end="10336" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q504043" start="10342" end="10357" title="Gambier Islands" label="Gambier Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="10385" end="10395" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="10422" end="10430" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="10445" end="10455" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127200" start="10483" end="10504" title="Louisiade Archipelago" label="Louisiade Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="10598" end="10615" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="10973" end="10983" title="Mascarenes" label="Mascarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="11813" end="11820" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q374365" start="11826" end="11832" title="Jeddah" label="Jeddah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="12064" end="12074" title="Lakshadweep" label="Laccadives"/>
<link wikidata="Q42523" start="12140" end="12150" title="atoll reef" label="atoll reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="12365" end="12371" title="erosion" label="erodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="12637" end="12653" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="12659" end="12671" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30971" start="12673" end="12689" title="French Polynesia" label="French Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="12695" end="12711" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="12716" end="12726" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="12787" end="12795" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q192188" start="12801" end="12815" title="Chagos Islands" label="Chagos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="12821" end="12831" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q215081" start="12843" end="12855" title="Cocos Island" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="13352" end="13358" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="13362" end="13371" title="embayment" label="embayment"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="13414" end="13422" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="13902" end="13909" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q661247" start="13970" end="13974" title="Breaking wave" label="surf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="14011" end="14017" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145577" start="14044" end="14054" title="Microatoll" label="Microatoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="14259" end="14284" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radioactive carbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="14319" end="14327" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="14328" end="14337" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q503481" start="14341" end="14344" title="Cay" label="Cay"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="14585" end="14592" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="14594" end="14602" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="14607" end="14619" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="14657" end="14675" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q503269" start="14755" end="14763" title="Seamount" label="Seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q151957" start="14767" end="14772" title="guyot" label="guyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="15361" end="15369" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="15371" end="15379" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="15532" end="15541" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="15570" end="15588" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="15674" end="15682" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="16001" end="16006" title="tidal surge" label="surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="16011" end="16015" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975331" start="16059" end="16064" title="Wave shoaling" label="shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="16229" end="16243" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411280" start="16591" end="16606" title="seagrass meadow" label="seagrass meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="16762" end="16770" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="17012" end="17022" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q188238" start="17134" end="17143" title="epiphytic" label="epiphytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681001" start="17238" end="17263" title="spur and groove formation" label="spur and groove formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="17861" end="17868" title="sessility (zoology)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547309" start="18403" end="18415" title="Indo-Pacific" label="Indo-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="18438" end="18445" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="18447" end="18459" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18461" end="18475" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="18484" end="18491" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="18604" end="18613" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="18634" end="18642" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="18647" end="18656" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19226" end="19275" title="Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes#Coral atoll stage" label="Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes#Coral atoll stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="19300" end="19312" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q967421" start="19440" end="19452" title="Larak Island" label="Larak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741984" start="19455" end="19471" title="Deep-water coral" label="Deep-water coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16132183" start="19646" end="19669" title="Eilat&amp;#x27;s Coral Beach" label="northernmost coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q134762" start="19695" end="19700" title="Eilat" label="Eilat"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="19702" end="19708" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="19760" end="19768" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="19773" end="19779" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="19798" end="19807" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="19892" end="19900" title="Humboldt Current" label="Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q59676" start="19902" end="19910" title="Benguela Current" label="Benguela"/>
<link wikidata="Q213197" start="19916" end="19930" title="Canary Current" label="Canary Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="19995" end="20005" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="20037" end="20044" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="20053" end="20063" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="20068" end="20075" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="20128" end="20141" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="20197" end="20203" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="20208" end="20214" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="20276" end="20294" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="20383" end="20404" title="Queensland" label="Queensland, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108191" start="20411" end="20443" title="Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System" label="Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System"/>
<link wikidata="Q912409" start="20476" end="20487" title="Isla Contoy" label="Isla Contoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="20506" end="20523" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q751725" start="20536" end="20559" title="Bay Islands (department)" label="Bay Islands of Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330981" start="20566" end="20592" title="New Caledonia Barrier Reef" label="New Caledonia Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q514070" start="20645" end="20660" title="Andros, Bahamas" label="Andros, Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q175741" start="20749" end="20755" title="Andros" label="Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467" start="20760" end="20766" title="Nassau, Bahamas" label="Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="20773" end="20780" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461566" start="20852" end="20870" title="Florida Reef Tract" label="Florida Reef Tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489272" start="20954" end="20965" title="Soldier Key" label="Soldier Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q954659" start="20978" end="20990" title="Biscayne Bay" label="Biscayne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143655" start="20999" end="21011" title="Dry Tortugas" label="Dry Tortugas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924463" start="21036" end="21049" title="Blake Plateau" label="Blake Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741984" start="21085" end="21106" title="deep-water coral" label="deep-water coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259447" start="21237" end="21249" title="Pulley Ridge" label="Pulley Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="21285" end="21292" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="21321" end="21329" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21336" end="21347" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088317" start="21561" end="21579" title="Raja Ampat Islands" label="Raja Ampat Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="21583" end="21592" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115253263" start="21600" end="21615" title="Southwest Papua" label="Southwest Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="21669" end="21676" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="21820" end="21831" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q125167319" start="21947" end="21968" title="Lophelia reef" label="individual coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="22106" end="22122" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="22213" end="22221" title="Colony (biology)" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="22251" end="22268" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q689884" start="22343" end="22348" title="polyp (zoology)" label="polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057485" start="22475" end="22491" title="hermatypic coral" label="hermatypic coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="22510" end="22521" title="photic zone" label="photic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="22707" end="22712" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="22714" end="22728" title="dinoflagellate" label="dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10375461" start="22750" end="22762" title="Symbiodinium" label="Symbiodinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q220392" start="22794" end="22807" title="zooxanthellae" label="zooxanthellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="22930" end="22937" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="22939" end="22947" title="glycerol" label="glycerol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="22952" end="22963" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="23251" end="23260" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="23396" end="23410" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="23863" end="23871" title="Coral bleaching" label="bleached"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="23947" end="23952" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q27980903" start="23982" end="23991" title="phylotype" label="phylotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156860" start="24451" end="24478" title="mycosporine-like amino acid" label="mycosporine-like amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="24489" end="24501" title="ultraviolet" label="UV resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q132501" start="24525" end="24533" title="glycerin" label="glycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="25535" end="25551" title="coral bleaching" label="bleaching events"/>
<link wikidata="Q502220" start="25797" end="25807" title="parrotfish" label="parrotfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="25810" end="25820" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="25823" end="25830" title="sea sponge" label="sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120531" start="25869" end="25879" title="Bioerosion" label="bioeroders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="26048" end="26055" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q43185455" start="26118" end="26133" title="Brain coral" label="wrinkled brains"/>
<link wikidata="Q292100" start="26145" end="26155" title="Acropora" label="table tops"/>
<link wikidata="Q618452" start="26157" end="26164" title="Staghorn coral" label="antlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25666973" start="26183" end="26190" title="Pillar coral" label="pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339394" start="26564" end="26575" title="Mesentery (zoology)" label="mesenteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="26753" end="26760" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="26915" end="26920" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q943388" start="26933" end="26940" title="planula" label="planula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="27292" end="27296" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="28083" end="28089" title="Corals" label="Corals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="28269" end="28284" title="coralline algae" label="coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q248530" start="28286" end="28298" title="Sclerosponge" label="some sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="28303" end="28310" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="28379" end="28384" title="Phylum (biology)" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="28446" end="28463" title="geological period" label="geological period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="28490" end="28505" title="Coralline algae" label="Coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q248530" start="28944" end="28956" title="Sclerosponge" label="Sclerosponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="28995" end="29015" title="sponge" label="&amp;quot;Porifera&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578997" start="29027" end="29032" title="sponge reef" label="reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="29047" end="29062" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="29064" end="29097" title="Archaeocyatha" label="&amp;quot;Archaeocyatha&amp;quot; sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="29201" end="29211" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q248530" start="29213" end="29225" title="Sclerosponge" label="Sclerosponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="29279" end="29294" title="coralline algae" label="coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195904" start="29405" end="29417" title="cloud sponge" label="cloud sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="29579" end="29585" title="extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220868" start="29663" end="29674" title="Oyster reef" label="Oyster reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="29702" end="29708" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q468415" start="30030" end="30051" title="Crassostrea virginica" label="Crassostrea virginica"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="30080" end="30094" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816510" start="30124" end="30146" title="Atlantic coastal plain" label="Atlantic coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107731" start="30188" end="30201" title="Ostrea angasi" label="Ostrea angasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541069" start="30341" end="30348" title="rudists" label="rudists"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="30396" end="30406" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139330" start="30756" end="30766" title="Vermetidae" label="Vermetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767074" start="30891" end="30936" title="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs" label="The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="31619" end="31627" title="food web" label="food web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028474" start="31641" end="31654" title="predator fish" label="predator fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q495488" start="31670" end="31681" title="forage fish" label="forage fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="31703" end="31714" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="31770" end="31775" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="31792" end="31809" title="primary producers" label="primary producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="31902" end="31909" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="32008" end="32016" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="32209" end="32220" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="32552" end="32560" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="32566" end="32576" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="32585" end="32594" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="32843" end="32856" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395805" start="32876" end="32888" title="water column" label="water column"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="32913" end="32927" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q901921" start="32942" end="32957" title="carbon fixation" label="carbon fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="33176" end="33187" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q846303" start="33401" end="33408" title="Biogeochemical cycle" label="recycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="33956" end="33967" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="34187" end="34200" title="filter feeder" label="filter feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="34214" end="34221" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143304" start="36455" end="36486" title="Codium" label="&amp;quot;Codium isthmocladum&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="36990" end="37003" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="37020" end="37027" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="37033" end="37050" title="nitrogen fixation" label="nitrogen fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411280" start="37111" end="37126" title="seagrass meadow" label="seagrass meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817834" start="37132" end="37147" title="mangrove forest" label="mangrove forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="37398" end="37406" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764288" start="37570" end="37584" title="marine habitat" label="marine habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999990" start="37626" end="37639" title="Fringing reef" label="Fringing reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="37652" end="37660" title="low tide" label="low tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="37712" end="37720" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="37752" end="37761" title="sea grass" label="sea grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="37884" end="37889" title="erosion" label="erode"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="38005" end="38009" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="38027" end="38037" title="pollution" label="pollutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="38263" end="38270" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="38273" end="38280" title="sea sponge" label="sponges"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="38282" end="38290" title="cnidaria" label="cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="38334" end="38343" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47253" start="38346" end="38350" title="worm" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="38353" end="38363" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="38376" end="38382" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002557" start="38384" end="38398" title="cleaner shrimp" label="cleaner shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q916760" start="38400" end="38413" title="spiny lobster" label="spiny lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40802" start="38419" end="38423" title="crab" label="crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="38427" end="38434" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="38447" end="38457" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q44631" start="38461" end="38471" title="echinoderm" label="echinoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="38484" end="38492" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="38494" end="38504" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127470" start="38510" end="38522" title="Holothuroidea" label="sea cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q190090" start="38526" end="38536" title="sea squirt" label="sea squirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="38539" end="38549" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44514058" start="38555" end="38564" title="sea snake" label="sea snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="38586" end="38592" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="38633" end="38641" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="38651" end="38658" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q728422" start="38955" end="38967" title="cardinalfish" label="cardinalfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q771415" start="38972" end="38984" title="squirrelfish" label="squirrelfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022204" start="39012" end="39022" title="damselfish" label="damselfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q465563" start="39024" end="39035" title="surgeonfish" label="surgeonfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q504796" start="39037" end="39048" title="triggerfish" label="triggerfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208722" start="39050" end="39056" title="wrasse" label="wrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q502220" start="39062" end="39072" title="parrotfish" label="parrotfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="39083" end="39086" title="eel" label="eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="39092" end="39097" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307624" start="39170" end="39177" title="Refuge (ecology)" label="refuges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="39246" end="39253" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723929" start="40095" end="40105" title="turf algae" label="turf algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524330" start="40107" end="40122" title="coralline algae" label="coralline algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="40127" end="40138" title="macroalgae" label="macro algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999987" start="40172" end="40190" title="Diadema antillarum" label="Diadema antillarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141602" start="42126" end="42133" title="Dotidae" label="Dotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q733595" start="42144" end="42153" title="Nudibranch" label="sea slugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999987" start="42210" end="42228" title="Diadema antillarum" label="Diadema antillarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811877" start="42377" end="42397" title="Collector urchin" label="Tripneustes gratilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q733595" start="42517" end="42529" title="Nudibranchia" label="Nudibranchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="42540" end="42551" title="sea anemone" label="sea anemone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120531" start="42741" end="42751" title="bioerosion" label="bioerosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="42845" end="42852" title="bivalve" label="bivalve"/>
<link wikidata="Q205712" start="42867" end="42876" title="sipuncula" label="sipuncula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18952" start="42964" end="42974" title="polychaete" label="polychaete"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="43048" end="43055" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q47863" start="43095" end="43107" title="Midway Atoll" label="Midway Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="43111" end="43117" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q934841" start="43221" end="43237" title="Laysan albatross" label="Laysan albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q600319" start="43281" end="43303" title="black-footed albatross" label="black-footed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q853412" start="43430" end="43452" title="short-tailed albatross" label="short-tailed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q44514058" start="43571" end="43580" title="Sea snake" label="Sea snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="43645" end="43650" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651414" start="43653" end="43659" title="gannet" label="gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="43662" end="43669" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q612817" start="43675" end="43682" title="boobies" label="boobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="43719" end="43726" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q81228" start="43773" end="43787" title="monitor lizard" label="monitor lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q182599" start="43794" end="43810" title="Crocodylus porosus" label="marine crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q383702" start="43849" end="43868" title="Laticauda colubrina" label="Laticauda colubrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="43876" end="43886" title="Sea turtle" label="Sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="43902" end="43922" title="hawksbill sea turtle" label="hawksbill sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="43986" end="44004" title="ecosystem services" label="ecosystem services"/>
<link wikidata="Q976978" start="44465" end="44490" title="World Resources Institute" label="World Resources Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="44713" end="44722" title="St. Lucia" label="St. Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="44724" end="44730" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="44732" end="44738" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="44748" end="44766" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="45594" end="45609" title="coastal management" label="coastal defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120531" start="46539" end="46549" title="bioerosion" label="bioerosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="46567" end="46578" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743627" start="46585" end="46601" title="geologic hazards" label="geologic hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q811598" start="46763" end="46778" title="bottom trawling" label="bottom trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="46799" end="46804" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269057" start="46941" end="46954" title="blast fishing" label="blast fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="46956" end="46967" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="46991" end="47007" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223623" start="47037" end="47049" title="anti-fouling paint" label="anti-fouling"/>
<link wikidata="Q864939" start="47050" end="47057" title="biocide" label="biocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q13462192" start="47058" end="47069" title="tributyltin" label="tributyltin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="47446" end="47460" title="Greenhouse gas" label="Greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="47569" end="47584" title="coral bleaching" label="coral bleaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="47610" end="47624" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="47741" end="47760" title="Ocean acidification" label="Ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="47869" end="47874" title="homeostasis" label="adapt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="47913" end="47921" title="seawater" label="seawater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744298" start="47929" end="47945" title="dissolved inorganic carbon" label="carbonate levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="48222" end="48244" title="end-Permian extinction" label="end-Permian extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q220392" start="48467" end="48479" title="zooxanthella" label="zooxanthella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531856" start="48482" end="48494" title="endosymbiont" label="endosymbiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q144608" start="48686" end="48693" title="Porites" label="Porites"/>
<link wikidata="Q145782" start="48698" end="48707" title="Montipora" label="Montipora"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="48730" end="48737" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q764759" start="48976" end="48997" title="directional selection" label="directional selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q62218" start="49106" end="49119" title="Jarvis Island" label="Jarvis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="49178" end="49193" title="coral bleaching" label="coral bleaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="49316" end="49338" title="Marine Protected Area" label="Marine protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454893" start="49490" end="49508" title="Fisheries management" label="fishery management"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="49513" end="49531" title="habitat (ecology)" label="habitat protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="49788" end="49797" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="49803" end="49814" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="49819" end="49835" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q863815" start="50129" end="50159" title="Phoenix Islands Protected Area" label="Phoenix Islands Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="50554" end="50565" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50609" end="50635" title="Coral reef fish#Herbivores" label="species key to coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50645" end="50655" title="Parrotfish#Economic importance" label="parrotfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="50735" end="50741" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="50850" end="50857" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="51044" end="51055" title="sea urchins" label="sea urchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q952443" start="51077" end="51086" title="fish trap" label="fish trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q765706" start="51095" end="51107" title="spearfishing" label="spearfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435290" start="51244" end="51251" title="Refugium (population biology)" label="refugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="51289" end="51306" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="51529" end="51546" title="biosphere reserve" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185274" start="51548" end="51559" title="marine park" label="marine park"/>
<link wikidata="Q893745" start="51561" end="51578" title="national monument" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="51582" end="51596" title="world heritage" label="world heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q559789" start="51666" end="51681" title="Sian Ka&amp;#x27;an" label="Sian Ka&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q38095" start="51687" end="51696" title="Galapagos" label="Galapagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343" start="51706" end="51724" title="Great Barrier Reef" label="Great Barrier Reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q379759" start="51726" end="51742" title="Henderson Island (Pitcairn Islands)" label="Henderson Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="51744" end="51749" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q787425" start="51754" end="51796" title="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument" label="Papahānaumokuākea Marine National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q938159" start="51881" end="51921" title="Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority" label="Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680750" start="52079" end="52098" title="adaptive management" label="adaptive management"/>
<link wikidata="Q874935" start="52306" end="52320" title="Manus Province" label="Manus Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="52322" end="52338" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q765706" start="52499" end="52512" title="spear fishing" label="spear fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="52519" end="52526" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="53486" end="53501" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q107088397" start="53602" end="53624" title="Coral reef restoration" label="Coral reef restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782659" start="54131" end="54148" title="Coral aquaculture" label="Coral aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="54519" end="54531" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844240" start="56799" end="56814" title="computer vision" label="computer vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144750" start="56969" end="56972" title="Queensland University of Technology" label="QUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747027" start="57017" end="57025" title="Spawn (biology)" label="spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700240" start="57400" end="57410" title="Reef Ball" label="reef balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="57460" end="57468" title="Oil platform" label="oil rigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057485" start="57512" end="57528" title="hermatypic coral" label="hermatypic coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q427161" start="57574" end="57583" title="superglue" label="superglue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457773" start="57587" end="57595" title="milliput" label="milliput"/>
<link wikidata="Q864689" start="57664" end="57671" title="Biorock" label="Biorock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="57740" end="57758" title="electrical current" label="electrical current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="57825" end="57830" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="57874" end="57883" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="58219" end="58224" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q175233" start="58229" end="58236" title="cathode" label="cathode"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="58253" end="58255" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="59709" end="59713" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="59717" end="59723" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="59729" end="59749" title="University of Hawaii" label="University of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684640" start="59904" end="59938" title="Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology" label="Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139830" start="59942" end="59956" title="Coconut Island (Oahu Island)" label="Coconut Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="60366" end="60384" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532933" start="61404" end="61433" title="genetically modified bacterium" label="genetically modified bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346161" start="64720" end="64735" title="Hurricane Allen" label="Hurricane Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917159" start="67088" end="67110" title="Mote Marine Laboratory" label="Mote Marine Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741984" start="67796" end="67812" title="Deep-water coral" label="Deep-water coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390563" start="67888" end="67909" title="Mesophotic coral reef" label="Mesophotic coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962784" start="69036" end="69050" title="Nancy Knowlton" label="Nancy Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962784" start="69152" end="69166" title="Nancy Knowlton" label="Nancy Knowlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="69314" end="69318" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87413" wikidata="Q4937996" url="?curid=87413" title="Marilyn Bell">
<text>Marilyn Grace Bell Di Lascio (born October 19, 1937) is a Canadian retired long distance swimmer. She was the first person to swim across Lake Ontario and later swam the English Channel and Strait of Juan de Fuca.

==Personal life==
Bell was born in Toronto, Ontario, to parents Sydney and Grace Bell. The family moved to North Bay, Ontario, then Halifax, Nova Scotia, before returning to Toronto in 1946. After her swimming career, Marilyn married Joe Di Lascio and moved to New Jersey, United States. They raised four children, Lisa, Michael, Jodi, and Janet, who were unaware of their mother&#x27;s fame. Bell earned a BA, became an American citizen and was a teacher for over twenty years. Joe Di Lascio died in September 2007. Bell later moved to New Paltz, New York. 

Due to a back injury and scoliosis, Bell gave up swimming in the early 2000s and used a motorized chair to get around. She was able to return to swimming in 2016 at her retirement home when swimming instructor Terry Laughlin helped her change her swimming style from a &quot;classic &#x27;50s style&quot; to one that did not put as much strain on her spine.

==Swimming career==
Bell first took up swimming lessons in 1946 at Oakwood Pool, joining the Dolphinette Club coached by Alex Duff. In 1947, Bell entered her first long-distance race: a one-mile swim at the Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) in Lake Ontario. It was at that first race that Bell first met her future coach Gus Ryder, who was coach of the Lakeshore Swimming Club. Bell soon joined the Lakeshore Club and started practising at the indoor pool of Humberside Collegiate in Toronto.

In July 1954, Bell swam in the Centennial Marathon at Atlantic City, New Jersey. Bell finished first among the women&#x27;s competitors, seventh overall, winning . Fellow Lakeshore Swimming Club members Tom Park and Cliff Lumsden finished first and second. The course was 26 miles around Absecon Island in the Atlantic Ocean.

===1954 Lake Ontario swim===

On September 8, 1954, at 11:07 pm, Bell started her swim across Lake Ontario from Youngstown, New York, at virtually the same time as world-famous United States long-distance swimmer Florence Chadwick. The CNE had offered Chadwick to swim the lake as a publicity effort for the annual exhibition. The offer to Chadwick had disappointed Canadian swimmers, Bell included, who had expected the CNE to hold a marathon race. Because of the criticism, the CNE decided to allow other swimmers, at first as part of a relay race, but Bell decided to try the whole swim herself. According to Bell, she &quot;did it for Canada.&quot; Bell took on the challenge without pay with the encouragement of Alexandrine Gibb, a &quot;Toronto Daily Star&quot; reporter. A third swimmer, Torontonian Winnie Roach, who had swum the English Channel, also decided to swim the lake.

After several hours, Chadwick was forced to give up with stomach pains and vomiting at 6 am. Roach quit at about three-quarters distance, due to cramps. Bell swam for 20 hours and 59 minutes before she finally reached a breakwater near the Boulevard Club, west of the CNE grounds. The planned route straight across the lake was , but she actually had to swim much further because of strong winds and the lack of modern navigation equipment. Waves that day were almost high, water temperature was 21 °C (70 °F) and lamprey eels were attacking her legs and arms.

Bell kept up her strength with Pablum, corn syrup, and lemon juice with water, along with heroic encouragement from her boat crew, including fellow swimmer Joan Cooke and her coach, Gus Ryder. Radio stations broadcast hourly reports of her progress and rival newspapers published &quot;extra&quot; editions throughout the day. At the start, Bell was accompanied by two boats, but a flotilla of boats gathered around her by mid-day. When she finally arrived at about 8:15 p.m., a crowd estimated at over 250,000 was gathered to see her arrive. CNE officials had hoped that Bell would arrive at the CNE waterfront, where a grandstand had been set up, but Ryder guided her to Sunnyside where the amusement park was brightly lit to aid her navigation, and the waves were smaller.

Bell was the first person to swim the distance. The CNE decided to give Bell the $10,000 prize, and she was later given numerous gifts, including a car, television, clothing, and furniture. Bell appeared on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;. In an article, Bell later thanked the Toronto community for the support, especially Alexandrine Gibb, the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; reporter. Bell later recounted that she did not hear the crowds cheering when she arrived at the waterfront. Bell heard the cheering for the first time when she heard a recording made by a radio station a few days later.

Bell&#x27;s swim was front-page news in Toronto. The &quot;Toronto Telegram&quot;, &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; and the &quot;Toronto Daily Star&quot; all competed to get her interview. The &quot;Star&quot; had signed for an exclusive, providing boats to the swim team, but the &quot;Telegram&quot; tried to &quot;scoop&quot; the story by having a &quot;Telegram&quot; reporter pose as a nurse.

===Other swims===

Offered $15,000 by the &quot;Toronto Telegram&quot; newspaper to swim the English Channel, Bell made the crossing in 14 hours, 36 minutes on July 31, 1955. Her crossing started at Cap Gris-Nez and ended at Abbotscliff, between Dover and Folkestone. At 17 years of age, she was the youngest swimmer to succeed in the crossing. She was guided by her coach Gus Ryder and John (Pop) Boswell. She did not beat the existing record for the crossing, hitting a strong current which took her past Dover Harbour. Bell returned to Toronto for a ticker tape parade along Bay Street to City Hall, attended by a crowd of 100,000 on August 19.

On August 23, 1956, she swam the Strait of Juan de Fuca off the Pacific coast, swimming from Port Angeles, Washington, to Victoria, British Columbia. It was her second attempt, after giving up after eight kilometres on her first attempt. A cairn by Dallas Road Waterfront Trail, below Beacon Hill Park in Victoria, overlooks the bay where she completed her swim. 
==Awards and recognition==
In 1954, Bell was named the Canadian Newsmaker of the Year by The Canadian Press, awarded the Lou Marsh Trophy as Canada&#x27;s athlete of the year and awarded the Bobbie Rosenfeld Award as Canadian female athlete of the year. Bell was inducted into Canada&#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame in 1958. In 1993 she entered the Canadian Swimming Hall of Fame and was named one of Canada&#x27;s top athletes of the century. She was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 1997. In 2003, Bell (now Marilyn Bell Di Lascio) was presented with the Order of Ontario.

The National Historic Sites and Monuments Board designated Bell&#x27;s crossing of the lake a National Historic Event in 2005, and a federal plaque was erected in 2008 near the site of her landfall. Another plaque is mounted on the base of a statue of a lion along Lake Shore Boulevard by the CNE Ontario Government Building. A plaque commemorating her Strait of Juan de Fuca achievement is placed at her landing site in Beacon Hill Park.

Parkland near the location where Bell arrived is now named Marilyn Bell Park. In 2009, the Lakeshore Swimming Club of Toronto held the first annual Marilyn Bell Swim Classic, a meet sanctioned by Swim Ontario. In 2010, a ferry boat to serve the Toronto Island Airport was named the &quot;Marilyn Bell 1&quot;. The name was chosen as the top name in a contest held by the Toronto Port Authority.

The story of Bell&#x27;s historic swim was told in the 2001 made-for-TV film &quot;Heart: The Marilyn Bell Story&quot; with Caroline Dhavernas portraying Marilyn Bell.

An experimental 16 mm film by Brenda Longfellow, &quot;Our Marilyn&quot;, was made in 1987, and was purchased by the National Gallery of Canada in 1990.

==References==
* 

;Notes
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* Solo Swims of Ontario Inc. Hall of Fame
* Celebrating Women&#x27;s achievements - Marilyn Bell
* LIFE Magazine article, Sept. 27, 1954</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4937996" start="0" end="28" title="Marilyn Bell" label="Marilyn Grace Bell Di Lascio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500260" start="75" end="96" title="Long-distance swimming" label="long distance swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="138" end="150" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="170" end="185" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="190" end="212" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="Strait of Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="476" end="486" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709293" start="752" end="771" title="New Paltz, New York" label="New Paltz, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q174857" start="800" end="809" title="scoliosis" label="scoliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q857399" start="1341" end="1369" title="Canadian National Exhibition" label="Canadian National Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939879" start="1594" end="1615" title="Humberside Collegiate Institute" label="Humberside Collegiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="1683" end="1696" title="Atlantic City" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669683" start="1917" end="1931" title="Absecon Island" label="Absecon Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1939" end="1953" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q960040" start="2068" end="2088" title="Youngstown, New York" label="Youngstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q452291" start="2169" end="2186" title="Florence Chadwick" label="Florence Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999118" start="2674" end="2690" title="Alexandrine Gibb" label="Alexandrine Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="2700" end="2718" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="3358" end="3365" title="lamprey" label="lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121806" start="3437" end="3443" title="Pablum" label="Pablum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640857" start="4079" end="4088" title="Sunnyside, Toronto" label="Sunnyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503945" start="4099" end="4113" title="Sunnyside Amusement Park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="4396" end="4416" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152683" start="4836" end="4852" title="Toronto Telegram" label="Toronto Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q604525" start="4866" end="4884" title="The Globe and Mail" label="The Globe and Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="5202" end="5203" title="Canadian dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5268" end="5283" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q531030" start="5374" end="5386" title="Cap Gris-Nez" label="Cap Gris-Nez"/>
<link wikidata="Q867627" start="5857" end="5879" title="Strait of Juan de Fuca" label="Strait of Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q852584" start="5917" end="5941" title="Port Angeles, Washington" label="Port Angeles, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="5946" end="5972" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030382" start="6243" end="6273" title="Canadian Newsmaker of the Year" label="Canadian Newsmaker of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410130" start="6277" end="6295" title="The Canadian Press" label="The Canadian Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766360" start="6309" end="6325" title="Lou Marsh Trophy" label="Lou Marsh Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377033" start="6379" end="6401" title="Bobbie Rosenfeld Award" label="Bobbie Rosenfeld Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330014" start="6465" end="6498" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128982" start="6653" end="6680" title="Ontario Sports Hall of Fame" label="Ontario Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q742162" start="6756" end="6772" title="Order of Ontario" label="Order of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416782" start="6869" end="6892" title="Events of National Historic Significance (Canada)" label="National Historic Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q283628" start="7040" end="7060" title="Lake Shore Boulevard" label="Lake Shore Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000089" start="7068" end="7099" title="CNE Ontario Government Building" label="CNE Ontario Government Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q117708" start="7460" end="7482" title="Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport" label="Toronto Island Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826475" start="7586" end="7608" title="Toronto Port Authority" label="Toronto Port Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q435183" start="7735" end="7753" title="Caroline Dhavernas" label="Caroline Dhavernas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55217817" start="7810" end="7827" title="Brenda Longfellow" label="Brenda Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068063" start="7897" end="7923" title="National Gallery of Canada" label="National Gallery of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87414" wikidata="Q421763" url="?curid=87414" title="Act Without Words I">
<text>Act Without Words I is a short play by Samuel Beckett. It is a mime, Beckett&#x27;s first (followed by &quot;Act Without Words II&quot;). Like many of Beckett&#x27;s works, the play was originally written in French (&quot;Acte sans paroles I&quot;), being translated into English by Beckett himself. It was written in 1956 following a request from the dancer Deryk Mendel and first performed on 3 April 1957 at the Royal Court Theatre in London. On that occasion it followed a performance of &quot;Endgame&quot;. The original music to accompany the performance was written by composer John S. Beckett, Samuel&#x27;s cousin, who would later collaborate with him on the radio play &quot;Words and Music&quot;.

==Synopsis==

The action takes place in a desert illuminated by a &quot;dazzling light&quot;. The cast consists of just one man, who, at the start of the play, is “flung backwards” onto the stage. After he lands he hears a whistle from the right wing. He “takes the sound for some kind of call, and after a bit of reflection, proceeds in that direction only to find himself hurled back again. Next the sound issues from the left. The scene is repeated in reverse.” There is clearly no exit. He sits on the ground and looks at his hands.

A number of objects are then lowered into this set beginning with a palm tree with “a single bough some three yards from the ground,” “a caricature of the Tree of Life.” Its arrival is announced, as is that of each object which follows, with the same sharp whistle. On being made aware of its existence the man moves into its shade and continues looking at his hands. “A pair of tailor’s scissors descends from the flies” but again the man doesn’t notice them until he hears the whistle. He then starts to trim his nails.

Over the course of the play other items are lowered from above: three cubes of varying sizes, a length of knotted rope and – always just out of reach – a “tiny carafe, to which is attached a huge label inscribed WATER.”

The rest of the sketch is a study in frustrated efforts. “Armed with two natural tools, mind and hands, those tools, which separate him from lower orders of animals, he tries to survive, to secure some water in the desert. The mind works, at least in part: he learns – small cube on large; he invents, or is given inventions – scissors, cubes, rope. But when he learns to use his tools effectively, they are confiscated: the scissors, when he reasons that in addition to cutting his fingernails, he might cut his throat; the blocks and rope, when he discovers that they might make a gallows.” (Vladimir and Estragon also contemplate suicide in this way at the end of &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;). Beckett is here drawing on his viewing of the silent screen comedies of the like of Buster Keaton, Ben Turpin and Harry Langdon all of whom would have encountered objects on-screen apparently with minds of their own.

Eventually it looks as if he&#x27;s given up and he sits on the big cube. After a while, this is pulled up from beneath him, and he is left on the ground. From this point on he refuses to ‘play the game’ any further; even when the carafe of water is dangled in front of his face he does not make to grab it. The palms for the tree open, providing shade once more, but he doesn’t move. He simply sits there in the dazzling light looking at his hands.

==Interpretation==

On one level &quot;Act Without Words I&quot; “seems a behaviourist experiment within a classical myth”, that of Tantalus, who stood in a pool of water which receded every time he bent to drink it, and stood under a fruit tree which raised its branches every time he reached for food. In the 1930s Beckett read Wolfgang Köhler’s book, &quot;The Mentality of Apes&quot; about the colony of apes in Tenerife, where experiments were conducted in which the apes also placed cubes on top of another in order to reach a banana” and is clearly referenced in this piece.

Tantalus was punished for stealing ambrosia and nectar. It is not certain that the man &quot;is&quot; being punished for a crime other than that of existing in the first place. The situation is similar to that of the narrator in Beckett&#x27;s 1955 &quot;The Expelled&quot;, whose story begins with him being jettisoned from the place he was living (“The fall was … not serious. Even as I fell I heard the door slam, which brought me a little comfort … [for] that meant they were not pursuing me down the street with a stick, to beat me.”) “into an environment where he cannot exist but cannot escape … Whereas Godot’s existence remains uncertain, here an external force exists” “represented by a sharp, inhuman, disembodied whistle” which will not permit him to leave; “like Jacob, [he] wrestles with it to illustrate its substance.” In simplistic terms the man&#x27;s actual fall could be seen to represent the Fall of man.

The fact that the man is literally, as far as the audience is concerned, thrown into existence brings to mind the Heideggerian concept of &quot;Geworfenheit&quot; (‘Throwness’).” Heidegger is clearly using the expression metaphorically as is Beckett; the man is expelled from a womb-like condition, from non-being into being. This is not the first time Beckett has used light to symbolise existence: “They give birth astride of a grave, the light gleams an instant, then it’s night once more.” The protagonist is nameless, he is Everyman. “As Beckett told Barney Rosset, his longtime U.S. publisher, in 1957: he is just ‘human meat or bones.’”

When he first looks at his hands it is “”as though [he is] noticing his own body for the first time … Having become cognisant of his &quot;Dasein&quot; … [he is willing to] accept the presence of various &quot;Seiendes&quot;”, as Heidegger calls existing objects, that start to appear beginning with the tree.

When the scissors arrive the man begins to trim his nails “for no other reason than the sudden availability of the correct object. The scissors of course could stand for any other useful object of daily living such as a house or car, objects whose &quot;thereness&quot; is most often taken for granted.”

The play is a parable of resignation; a state one reaches only after a series of disappointments. The man has learned ‘the hard way’ that there is nothing he can rely on in life other than himself.

G. C. Barnard argues the prevalent interpretation of the ending; the protagonist does not move because he is simply crushed: ‘the man remains, defeated, having opted out of the struggle, lying on the empty desert.’ “But within this obvious, traditional ending, Beckett works his consummate skill, for the real play begins with its terminus. The climactic ending of the mime may signify not a pathetic defeat, but a conscious rebellion, man’s deliberate refusal to obey. Lucky has finally turned on Pozzo. Ironically then, the protagonist is most active when inert, and his life acquires meaning at its end. In this refusal, this cutting of the umbilical rope, a second birth occurs, the birth of Man.” Man has given birth to himself even though it appears it will mean the death of him. It is a victory of sorts, albeit a hollow one.

===Beckett on Film===

A filmed version of &quot;Act Without Words I&quot; was directed by Karel Reisz for the 2001 &quot;Beckett on Film&quot; project, with music specially composed by Michael Nyman.

==References==
== External links ==
* Text of the play</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="31" end="35" title="Play (theatre)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="39" end="53" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q674067" start="63" end="67" title="mime" label="mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q421767" start="109" end="129" title="Act Without Words II" label="Act Without Words II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20273701" start="359" end="371" title="Deryk Mendel" label="Deryk Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169370" start="415" end="434" title="Royal Court Theatre" label="Royal Court Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="438" end="444" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235448" start="498" end="505" title="Endgame (play)" label="Endgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460177" start="585" end="600" title="John S. Beckett" label="John S. Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="751" end="757" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194428" start="899" end="904" title="Stage (theatre)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="1315" end="1324" title="Arecaceae" label="palm tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q482798" start="1357" end="1361" title="yard" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="1384" end="1394" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651237" start="1402" end="1414" title="Tree of Life" label="Tree of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q228266" start="1662" end="1667" title="Fly system" label="flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917316" start="1930" end="1936" title="Decanter" label="carafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="2305" end="2314" title="invention" label="invention"/>
<link wikidata="Q243778" start="2574" end="2581" title="gallows" label="gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7938230" start="2585" end="2593" title="Vladimir (character)" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401769" start="2598" end="2606" title="Estragon" label="Estragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="2664" end="2681" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="2774" end="2787" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q153292" start="2789" end="2799" title="Ben Turpin" label="Ben Turpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965701" start="2804" end="2817" title="Harry Langdon" label="Harry Langdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="3433" end="3445" title="Behaviorism" label="behaviourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3466" end="3480" title="Greek mythology" label="classical myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q182101" start="3491" end="3499" title="Tantalus" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213672" start="3689" end="3704" title="Wolfgang Köhler" label="Wolfgang Köhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751026" start="3719" end="3740" title="The Mentality of Apes" label="The Mentality of Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="3767" end="3770" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="3775" end="3783" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="3977" end="3996" title="Ambrosia" label="ambrosia and nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="4553" end="4560" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Godot’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="4718" end="4723" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="4855" end="4866" title="Fall of man" label="Fall of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404910" start="4983" end="4995" title="Heideggerian terminology" label="Heideggerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798564" start="5013" end="5025" title="Geworfenheit" label="Geworfenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="5090" end="5098" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407143" start="5398" end="5406" title="Everyman" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861783" start="5425" end="5438" title="Barney Rosset" label="Barney Rosset"/>
<link wikidata="Q404130" start="5653" end="5659" title="Dasein" label="Dasein"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="6144" end="6151" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697827" start="6799" end="6804" title="Lucky (Waiting for Godot)" label="Lucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237071" start="6827" end="6832" title="Pozzo (Waiting for Godot)" label="Pozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172563" start="6973" end="6987" title="Umbilical cord" label="umbilical rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q167023" start="7255" end="7266" title="Karel Reisz" label="Karel Reisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878694" start="7286" end="7301" title="Beckett on Film" label="Beckett on Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q313639" start="7350" end="7363" title="Michael Nyman" label="Michael Nyman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87417" wikidata="Q539067" url="?curid=87417" title="Ninjutsu">
<text>, is the term for the techniques and skills used by spies and scouts in pre-modern Japan known as ninja. Some of these techniques are recorded in ninja scrolls, some which have been published and translated. The study of these scrolls have changed the perception of ninja and ninjutsu.

While there are martial arts schools that claim to be modern styles of &quot;ninjutsu&quot;, the historical lineage of these styles only go as far back as the 1950s. 

==Training==
The skills required of the ninja have come to be known in modern times as , but it is unlikely they were previously named under a single discipline, rather distributed among a variety of espionage and survival skills. Some view &quot;ninjutsu&quot; as evidence that ninja were not simple mercenaries because texts contained not only information on combat training, but also information about daily needs, which even included mining techniques. The guidance provided for daily work also included elements that enable the ninja to understand the martial qualities of even the most menial task. These factors show how the &quot;ninjutsu&quot; established among the ninja class the fundamental principle of adaptation.
The first specialized training began in the mid-15th century, when certain samurai families started to focus on covert warfare, including espionage and assassination. According to Turnbull, the ninja was trained from childhood, as was also common in samurai families.

Outside the expected martial art disciplines, a youth studied survival and scouting techniques, as well as information regarding poisons and explosives. Physical training was also important, which involved long-distance runs, climbing, stealth methods of walking and swimming. A certain degree of knowledge regarding common professions was also required if one was expected to take their form in disguise. Some evidence of medical training can be derived from one account, where an Iga ninja provided first-aid to Ii Naomasa, who was injured by gunfire in the Battle of Sekigahara. Here the ninja reportedly gave Naomasa a &quot;black medicine&quot; meant to stop bleeding.

With the fall of the Iga and Kōga clans, &quot;daimyōs&quot; could no longer recruit professional ninja, and were forced to train their own &quot;shinobi&quot;. The &quot;shinobi&quot; was considered a real profession, as demonstrated in the 1649 &quot;bakufu&quot; law on military service, which declared that only &quot;daimyōs&quot; with an income of over 10,000 &quot;koku&quot; were allowed to retain &quot;shinobi&quot;. In the two centuries that followed, a number of &quot;ninjutsu&quot; manuals were written by descendants of Hattori Hanzō as well as members of the Fujibayashi clan, an offshoot of the Hattori. Major examples include the &quot;Ninpiden&quot; (1655), the &quot;Bansenshūkai&quot; (1675), and the &quot;Shōninki&quot; (1681).

Modern schools that claim to train &quot;ninjutsu&quot; arose from the 1970s, including that of Masaaki Hatsumi (Bujinkan), Stephen K. Hayes (To-Shin Do), and Jinichi Kawakami (Banke Shinobinoden). The lineage and authenticity of these schools are a matter of controversy.

===Tactics===
Most &quot;ninjutsu&quot; techniques recorded in scrolls and manuals revolve around ways to avoid detection, and methods of escape. These techniques were loosely grouped under corresponding natural elements. Some examples are:

* &quot;Hitsuke&quot;: The practice of distracting guards by starting a fire away from the ninja&#x27;s planned point of entry. Falls under &quot;fire techniques&quot; (&quot;katon-no-jutsu&quot;).
* &quot;Tanuki-gakure&quot;: The practice of climbing a tree and camouflaging oneself within the foliage. Falls under &quot;wood techniques&quot; (&quot;mokuton-no-jutsu&quot;).
* &quot;Ukigusa-gakure&quot;: The practice of throwing duckweed over water to conceal underwater movement. Falls under &quot;water techniques&quot; (&quot;suiton-no-jutsu&quot;).
* &quot;Uzura-gakure&quot;: The practice of curling into a ball and remaining motionless to appear like a stone. Falls under &quot;earth techniques&quot; (&quot;doton-no-jutsu&quot;).

===Disguises===
The use of disguises is common and well documented. Disguises came in the form of priests, entertainers, fortune tellers, merchants, &quot;rōnin&quot;, and monks. The &quot;Buke Myōmokushō&quot; states,

{{blockquote|&quot;Shinobi-monomi&quot; were people used in secret ways, and their duties were to go into the mountains and disguise themselves as firewood gatherers to discover and acquire the news about an enemy&#x27;s territory... they were particularly expert at travelling in disguise.
A mountain ascetic (&quot;yamabushi&quot;) attire facilitated travel, as they were common and could travel freely between political boundaries. The loose robes of Buddhist priests also allowed concealed weapons, such as the &quot;tantō&quot;. Minstrel or &quot;sarugaku&quot; outfits could have allowed the ninja to spy in enemy buildings without rousing suspicion. Disguises as a &quot;komusō&quot;, a mendicant monk known for playing the &quot;shakuhachi&quot;, were also effective, as the large &quot;basket&quot; hats traditionally worn by them concealed the head completely.

==Equipment==
Ninja used a large variety of tools and weaponry, some of which were commonly known, but others were more specialized. Most were tools used in the infiltration of castles. A wide range of specialized equipment is described and illustrated in the 17th-century &quot;Bansenshūkai&quot;, including climbing equipment, extending spears, rocket-propelled arrows, and small collapsible boats.

===Outerwear===

While the image of a ninja clad in black garb (&quot;shinobi shōzoku&quot;) is prevalent in popular media, there is no hard evidence for such attire. It is theorized that, instead, it was much more common for the ninja to be disguised as civilians. The popular notion of black clothing may be rooted in artistic convention; early drawings of ninja showed them dressed in black to portray a sense of invisibility.; Turnbull uses the name &quot;Buke Meimokushō&quot;, an alternate reading for the same title. The &quot;Buke Myōmokushō&quot; cited here is a much more common reading.&lt;/ref&gt; This convention may have been borrowed from the puppet handlers of &quot;bunraku&quot; theater, who dressed in total black in an effort to simulate props moving independently of their controls. However, it has been put forward by some authorities that black robes, perhaps slightly tainted with red to hide bloodstains, was indeed the sensible garment of choice for infiltration.

Clothing used was similar to that of the samurai, but loose garments (such as leggings) were tucked into trousers or secured with belts. The &quot;tenugui&quot;, a piece of cloth also used in martial arts, had many functions. It could be used to cover the face, form a belt, or assist in climbing.

The historicity of armor specifically made for ninja cannot be ascertained. While pieces of light armor purportedly worn by ninja exist and date to the right time, there is no hard evidence of their use in ninja operations. Depictions of famous persons later deemed ninja often show them in samurai armor. There were lightweight concealable types of armour made with &quot;kusari&quot; (chain armour) and small armor plates such as &quot;karuta&quot; that could have been worn by ninja including &quot;katabira&quot; (jackets) made with armour hidden between layers of cloth. Shin and arm guards, along with metal-reinforced hoods are also speculated to make up the ninja&#x27;s armor.

===Tools===
Tools used for infiltration and espionage are some of the most abundant artifacts related to the ninja. Ropes and grappling hooks were common, and were tied to the belt. A collapsible ladder is illustrated in the &quot;Bansenshukai&quot;, featuring spikes at both ends to anchor the ladder.Spiked or hooked climbing gear worn on the hands and feet also doubled as weapons. Other implements include chisels, hammers, drills, picks, and so forth.

The &quot;kunai&quot; was a heavy pointed tool, possibly derived from the Japanese masonry trowel, which it closely resembles. Although it is often portrayed in popular culture as a weapon, the &quot;kunai&quot; was primarily used for gouging holes in walls. Knives and small saws (&quot;hamagari&quot;) were also used to create holes in buildings, where they served as a foothold or a passage of entry. A portable listening device (&quot;saoto hikigane&quot;) was used to eavesdrop on conversations and detect sounds.
A line reel device known as a Toihikinawa (間引縄 / probing pulling rope) was used in pitch dark for finding the distance and route of entry.

The &quot;mizugumo&quot; was a set of wooden shoes supposedly allowing the ninja to walk on water. They were meant to work by distributing the wearer&#x27;s weight over the shoes&#x27; wide bottom surface. The word &quot;mizugumo&quot; is derived from the native name for the Japanese water spider (&quot;Argyroneta aquatica japonica&quot;). The &quot;mizugumo&quot; was featured on the show &quot;MythBusters&quot;, where it was demonstrated unfit for walking on water. The &quot;ukidari&quot;, a similar footwear for walking on water, also existed in the form of a flat round bucket, but was probably quite unstable. Inflatable skins and breathing tubes allowed the ninja to stay underwater for longer periods of time.

&quot;Goshiki-mai&quot; (go, &quot;five&quot;; shiki, &quot;color&quot;; mai, &quot;rice&quot;) colored (red, blue, yellow, black, purple) rice grains were used in a code system, and to make trails that could be followed later.

Despite the large array of tools available to the ninja, the &quot;Bansenshukai&quot; warns one not to be overburdened with equipment, stating &quot;a successful ninja is one who uses but one tool for multiple tasks&quot;.

===Weaponry===
Although shorter swords and daggers were used, the &quot;katana&quot; was probably the ninja&#x27;s weapon of choice, and was sometimes carried on the back. The &quot;katana&quot; had several uses beyond normal combat. In dark places, the scabbard could be extended out of the sword, and used as a long probing device. The sword could also be laid against the wall, where the ninja could use the sword guard (&quot;tsuba&quot;) to gain a higher foothold. The &quot;katana&quot; could even be used as a device to stun enemies before attacking them, by putting a combination of red pepper, dirt or dust, and iron filings into the area near the top of the scabbard, so that as the sword was drawn the concoction would fly into the enemy&#x27;s eyes, stunning him until a lethal blow could be made. While straight swords were used before the invention of the &quot;katana&quot;, there&#x27;s no known historical information about the straight &quot;ninjatō&quot; pre-20th century. The first photograph of a &quot;ninjatō&quot; appeared in a booklet by Heishichirō Okuse in 1956.{{Full citation needed|date=January 2025}} A replica of a &quot;ninjatō&quot; is on display at the Ninja Museum of Igaryu.

An array of darts, spikes, knives, and sharp, star-shaped discs were known collectively as &quot;shuriken&quot;. While not exclusive to the ninja, they were an important part of the arsenal, where they could be thrown in any direction. Bows were used for sharpshooting, and some ninjas&#x27; bows were intentionally made smaller than the traditional &quot;yumi&quot; (longbow). The chain and sickle (&quot;kusarigama&quot;) was also used by the ninja. This weapon consisted of a weight on one end of a chain, and a sickle (&quot;kama&quot;) on the other. The weight was swung to injure or disable an opponent, and the sickle used to kill at close range.

Explosives introduced from China were known in Japan by the time of the Mongol Invasions in the 13th century. Later, explosives such as hand-held bombs and grenades were adopted by the ninja. Soft-cased bombs were designed to release smoke or poison gas, along with fragmentation explosives packed with iron or ceramic shrapnel.

Along with common &quot;shinobi buki&quot; (ninja weapons), a large assortment of miscellaneous arms were associated with the ninja. Some examples include poison, &quot;makibishi&quot; (caltrops), &quot;shikomizue&quot; (cane swords), land mines, &quot;fukiya&quot; (blowguns), poisoned darts, acid-spurting tubes, and &quot;teppo jutsu&quot; (firearms). The &quot;happō&quot;, a small eggshell filled with &quot;metsubushi&quot; (blinding powder), was also used to facilitate escape.
==Legendary abilities==
Perceived control over the elements may be grounded in real tactics, which were categorized by association with forces of nature. For example, the practice of starting fires to cover a ninja&#x27;s trail falls under &quot;katon-no-jutsu&quot; (&quot;fire techniques&quot;). By dressing in identical clothing, a coordinated team of ninjas could instill the perception of a single assailant being in multiple locations.
The ninja&#x27;s adaption of kites in espionage and warfare is another subject of legends. Accounts exist of ninja being lifted into the air by kites, where they flew over hostile terrain and descended into, or dropped bombs on enemy territory. Kites were indeed used in Japanese warfare, but mostly for the purpose of sending messages and relaying signals. Turnbull suggests that kites lifting a man into midair might have been technically feasible, but states that the use of kites to form a human &quot;hang glider&quot; falls squarely in the realm of fantasy.

===Kuji-kiri===
&quot;Kuji-kiri&quot; is an esoteric practice which, when performed with an array of hand &quot;seals&quot; (&quot;kuji-in&quot;), was meant to allow the ninja to enact superhuman feats.

The &quot;kuji&quot; (&quot;nine characters&quot;) is a concept originating from Taoism, where it was a string of nine words used in charms and incantations. In China, this tradition mixed with Buddhist beliefs, assigning each of the nine words to a Buddhist deity. The &quot;kuji&quot; may have arrived in Japan via Buddhism, where it flourished within Shugendō. Here too, each word in the &quot;kuji&quot; was associated with Buddhist deities, animals from Taoist mythology, and later, Shinto kami. The &quot;mudrā&quot;, a series of hand symbols representing different Buddhas, was applied to the &quot;kuji&quot; by Buddhists, possibly through the esoteric &quot;Mikkyō&quot; teachings. The &quot;yamabushi&quot; ascetics of Shugendō adopted this practice, using the hand gestures in spiritual, healing, and exorcism rituals. Later, the use of &quot;kuji&quot; passed onto certain &quot;bujutsu&quot; (martial arts) and &quot;ninjutsu&quot; schools, where it was said to have many purposes. The application of &quot;kuji&quot; to produce a desired effect was called &quot;cutting&quot; (&quot;kiri&quot;) the &quot;kuji&quot;. Intended effects range from physical and mental concentration, to more incredible claims about rendering an opponent immobile, or even the casting of magical spells. These legends were captured in popular culture, which interpreted the &quot;kuji-kiri&quot; as a precursor to magical acts.

==See also==
* &quot;Kunoichi&quot;
* Ninjas in popular culture

==References==
{{Reflist}}

==Further reading==
{{Further reading cleanup|date=September 2017}}
* {{cite journal | last1 = Bertrand | first1 = John | year = 2006 | title = Techniques that made ninjas feared in 15th-century Japan still set the standard for covert ops | journal = Military History | volume = 23 | issue = 1| pages = 12–19 }}
* Cummins, Antony. &quot;The Book of Ninja: The Bansenshukai - Japan&#x27;s Premier Ninja Manual&quot; 2013
* Cummins, Antony. &quot;Ninja Skills: The Authentic Ninja Training Manual&quot; 2018
* {{cite book |title = Invisible Armor: An Introduction to the Esoteric Dimension of Japan&#x27;s Classical Warrior Arts |last=Mol|first=Serge|place=Belgium |publisher=Eibusha|year = 2008 |isbn=978-90-8133610-9 }}
* {{cite book |title = Takeda Shinobi Hiden: Unveiling Takeda Shingen&#x27;s Secret Ninja Legacy |last=Mol|first=Serge|publisher=Eibusha|year = 2016 |isbn=978-90-813361-3-0|pages = 1–192}}
* Toshitora, Yamashiro. &quot;Secret Guide to Making Ninja Weapons&quot;, Butokukai Press, 1986. {{ISBN|978-99942-913-1-1}}
* Zoughari, Kacem. &quot;The Ninja: Ancient Shadow Warriors of Japan&quot;, Tuttle Publishing, 2010. {{ISBN|0-8048-3927-1}}

==External links==
{{Commons category}}
{{Japanese martial arts}}
{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6888856" start="341" end="378" title="Modern schools of ninjutsu" label="modern styles of &amp;quot;ninjutsu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q891382" start="669" end="684" title="survival skills" label="survival skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="1171" end="1181" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="1581" end="1587" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="1593" end="1602" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334437" start="1966" end="1976" title="Ii Naomasa" label="Ii Naomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234188" start="2012" end="2032" title="Battle of Sekigahara" label="Battle of Sekigahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="2174" end="2180" title="Daimyo" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2380" end="2386" title="Shogun#Shogunate" label="bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q855048" start="2499" end="2503" title="koku" label="koku"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907317" start="2781" end="2789" title="Ninpiden" label="Ninpiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q806956" start="2814" end="2826" title="Bansenshūkai" label="Bansenshūkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440811" start="2855" end="2863" title="Shōninki" label="Shōninki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888856" start="2879" end="2934" title="Modern schools of ninjutsu" label="Modern schools that claim to train &amp;quot;ninjutsu&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q506649" start="2975" end="2990" title="Masaaki Hatsumi" label="Masaaki Hatsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q851493" start="2992" end="3000" title="Bujinkan" label="Bujinkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q343382" start="3003" end="3019" title="Stephen K. Hayes" label="Stephen K. Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992037" start="3021" end="3031" title="To-Shin Do" label="To-Shin Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149263" start="3038" end="3054" title="Jinichi Kawakami" label="Jinichi Kawakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="3690" end="3697" title="Leaf" label="foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q161429" start="3826" end="3834" title="Lemnoideae" label="duckweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="4056" end="4061" title="Rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212418" start="4290" end="4295" title="rōnin" label="rōnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309838" start="4672" end="4681" title="yamabushi" label="yamabushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q654077" start="4876" end="4881" title="tantō" label="tantō"/>
<link wikidata="Q841192" start="4889" end="4897" title="Minstrel" label="Minstrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204318" start="4907" end="4915" title="sarugaku" label="sarugaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386368" start="5033" end="5039" title="komusō" label="komusō"/>
<link wikidata="Q524526" start="5092" end="5102" title="shakuhachi" label="shakuhachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q806956" start="5506" end="5518" title="Bansenshūkai" label="Bansenshūkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="5574" end="5580" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q243170" start="6312" end="6319" title="bunraku" label="bunraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="6387" end="6391" title="prop" label="prop"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="6661" end="6668" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403941" start="6767" end="6774" title="tenugui" label="tenugui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671179" start="7210" end="7223" title="Japanese armour" label="samurai armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538428" start="7286" end="7304" title="Kusari (Japanese mail armour)" label="&amp;quot;kusari&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373736" start="7351" end="7369" title="Karuta (armour)" label="&amp;quot;karuta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287607" start="7732" end="7746" title="grappling hook" label="grappling hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="8016" end="8022" title="chisel" label="chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="8025" end="8031" title="hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58964" start="8034" end="8039" title="drill" label="drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q232254" start="8042" end="8047" title="pickaxe" label="picks"/>
<link wikidata="Q860340" start="8074" end="8079" title="kunai" label="kunai"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="8147" end="8154" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q747382" start="8155" end="8161" title="trowel" label="trowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884757" start="8733" end="8741" title="mizugumo" label="mizugumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159171" start="8999" end="9020" title="Japanese water spider" label="Japanese water spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q486844" start="9121" end="9132" title="MythBusters" label="MythBusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q47107" start="9301" end="9307" title="bucket" label="bucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="9970" end="9976" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10328" end="10333" title="Japanese sword mountings#Tsuba" label="tsuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q842884" start="10858" end="10865" title="ninjatō" label="ninjatō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306401" start="11086" end="11108" title="Ninja Museum of Igaryu" label="Ninja Museum of Igaryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602034" start="11123" end="11128" title="Dart (missile)" label="darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="11138" end="11144" title="Knife" label="knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q47098" start="11208" end="11216" title="shuriken" label="shuriken"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="11347" end="11351" title="Bow and arrow" label="Bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q918499" start="11467" end="11471" title="yumi" label="yumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q684945" start="11517" end="11527" title="kusarigama" label="kusarigama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189687" start="11640" end="11644" title="Kama (weapon)" label="kama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="11766" end="11775" title="Explosive" label="Explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="11838" end="11854" title="Mongol invasions of Japan" label="Mongol Invasions"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="11922" end="11929" title="grenade" label="grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="12085" end="12093" title="Fragmentation (weaponry)" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="12251" end="12257" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886378" start="12265" end="12274" title="makibishi" label="makibishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q736050" start="12282" end="12289" title="caltrop" label="caltrop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12299" end="12309" title="Japanese sword mountings#Shikomizue" label="shikomizue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032111" start="12317" end="12328" title="Swordstick" label="cane swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="12331" end="12340" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004277" start="12349" end="12355" title="fukiya" label="fukiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q373543" start="12363" end="12370" title="blowgun" label="blowgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15402866" start="12374" end="12388" title="Arrow poison" label="poisoned darts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="12390" end="12394" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052668" start="12421" end="12432" title="teppo jutsu" label="teppo jutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="12440" end="12447" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825440" start="12509" end="12519" title="metsubushi" label="metsubushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42861" start="13052" end="13056" title="kite" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="13529" end="13540" title="Hang gliding" label="hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086135" start="13610" end="13619" title="Kuji-kiri" label="Kuji-kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086135" start="13719" end="13726" title="kuji-in" label="kuji-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="13873" end="13879" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13986" end="13994" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483875" start="14146" end="14154" title="Shugendō" label="Shugendō"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="14287" end="14291" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q208030" start="14303" end="14308" title="Mudra" label="mudrā"/>
<link wikidata="Q336102" start="14459" end="14465" title="Mikkyō" label="Mikkyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309838" start="14493" end="14502" title="yamabushi" label="yamabushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="14604" end="14612" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14683" end="14690" title="Budō#Bujutsu" label="bujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153622" start="15235" end="15243" title="Kunoichi" label="Kunoichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11490774" start="15252" end="15277" title="Ninjas in popular culture" label="Ninjas in popular culture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87418" wikidata="Q264699" url="?curid=87418" title="Wil Wheaton">
<text>Richard William &quot;Wil&quot; Wheaton III (born July 29, 1972) is an American actor and writer. He portrayed Wesley Crusher on the television series &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;, Gordie Lachance in the film &quot;Stand by Me&quot;, Joey Trotta in &quot;Toy Soldiers&quot;, and Bennett Hoenicker in &quot;Flubber&quot;. 

Wheaton has also appeared in recurring voice acting roles as Aqualad in &quot;Teen Titans&quot;, Cosmic Boy in &quot;Legion of Super Heroes&quot;, and Mike Morningstar/Darkstar in the &quot;Ben 10&quot; franchise&#x27;s original continuity. He appeared regularly as a fictionalized version of himself on the sitcom &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot; and in the roles of Fawkes on &quot;The Guild&quot;, Colin Mason on &quot;Leverage&quot;, and Dr. Isaac Parrish on &quot;Eureka&quot;. 

Wheaton was the host and co-creator of the YouTube board game show &quot;TableTop&quot;. He has narrated numerous audio books, including &quot;Ready Player One&quot; and &quot;The Martian&quot;.

==Early life==
Wheaton was born July 29, 1972, in Burbank, California, to Debra &quot;Debbie&quot; Nordean (née O&#x27;Connor), an actress, and Richard William Wheaton Jr., a medical specialist. He has a brother, Jeremy, and a sister, Amy, both of whom appeared uncredited in the &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; episode &quot;When the Bough Breaks&quot;. Amy appeared alongside Wil in the 1987 film &quot;The Curse&quot;.

As an adult, Wheaton described his father as being emotionally abusive to him as a child and his mother as being an enabler of that abuse. He also stated that his parents forced him to become an actor; he is currently estranged from them.

==Acting career==
===Early work and &quot;Stand By Me&quot;===
Wheaton made his acting debut in the television film &quot;A Long Way Home&quot; (1981), which starred Timothy Hutton. He voiced the character of Martin in the animated film &quot;The Secret of NIMH&quot; (1982), the film adaptation of Robert C. O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s book &quot;Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH&quot; (1971). Wheaton also appeared in &quot;Hambone and Hillie&quot; (1983), &quot;The Buddy System&quot; (1984) (opposite Richard Dreyfuss and Susan Sarandon), and &quot;The Last Starfighter&quot;. He had a few lines in &quot;Starfighter&quot; which were ultimately cut from the theatrical release, but Wheaton is still visible in several scenes.

Wheaton first gained widespread attention for his work in &quot;Stand by Me&quot; (1986), the film adaptation of Stephen King&#x27;s novella &quot;The Body&quot;. In &quot;Stand by Me&quot;, Wheaton played the lead role of Gordie Lachance, a 12-year-old storyteller mourning the loss of his elder brother. In her review of the film, Sheila Benson of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote that &quot;Wheaton makes Gordie&#x27;s &#x27;sensitivity&#x27; tangible, but not effete. He&#x27;s a gem&quot;. In addition to being successful at the box office, &quot;Stand by Me&quot; was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama and became known as a coming-of-age classic.

===&quot;Star Trek&quot;===

Wheaton played Wesley Crusher, a &quot;boy genius and Starfleet hopeful&quot;, during the first four seasons of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot;. He appeared in an additional four episodes of the remaining three seasons. The Wesley Crusher character is a &quot;polarizing&quot; character; while some Star Trek fans love him, others are vocal about their hatred for the character. Wheaton commented about his critics in a 2004 interview for WebTalk Radio:
Wheaton left &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; due to concerns over how the production team addressed a scheduling conflict related to his wish to appear in the 1989 film &quot;Valmont&quot;.

Wheaton returned to &quot;Star Trek&quot; in 2002, 2022 and 2024, reprising his Wesley Crusher role in cameo appearances in &quot;Star Trek: Nemesis&quot;, the season 2 finale of &quot;Star Trek: Picard&quot;, and as a voice actor in the second season of the animated show &quot;Star Trek: Prodigy&quot;.

===Post-&quot;Star Trek&quot;===

Wheaton played Joey Trotta in the action film &quot;Toy Soldiers&quot; (1991). After leaving &quot;Star Trek&quot;, he moved to Topeka, Kansas, to work for NewTek, where he helped to develop the Video Toaster 4000 doing product testing and quality control and later used his public profile to serve as a technology evangelist for the product.

Afterward, he returned to Los Angeles, attended acting school for five years, and then re-entered the acting world.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Wheaton appeared in several independent films, including the award-winning &quot;The Good Things&quot; (2001), in which he portrays a frustrated Kansas tollbooth worker. For his performance in &quot;Jane White Is Sick &amp; Twisted&quot; (2002) he received the award for Best Actor at the Melbourne Underground Film Festival.

Wheaton regularly portrayed a fictionalized version of himself on &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;, becoming a recurring guest star and then side character on the show.

In June 2024, Wheaton announced that he was retired from on-screen acting.

===Voice work===

Wheaton is known for his voice acting career. He voiced the role of Martin Brisby in &quot;The Secret of NIMH&quot; in 1981. In August 2021. Wheaton voiced the villainous John Juniper in the video game, &quot;I Expect You to Die 2: The Spy and the Liar&quot;.

===Television and web===

Wheaton appeared in 12 episodes in a recurring, guest-starring role on &quot;Eureka&quot;, playing Dr. Isaac Parrish, the head of the Non-Lethal Weapons Lab at Global Dynamics and a thorn in Fargo&#x27;s side. Wheaton also voices the character of the former scoutmaster and current sous-chef Earl Harlan in the popular dark, surreal-comedy podcast &quot;Welcome to Night Vale&quot;.

==Non-acting professional ventures==

=== Hosting ===
From September 2006 to September 2007, Wheaton hosted a Revision3 syndicated video podcast called &quot;InDigital&quot; along with Jessica Corbin and Hahn Choi. He hosted a NASA video on the Mars Curiosity rover which landed on Monday August 6, 2012. He has hosted &quot;2nd Watch&quot;, interviews with cast members and producers of the science-fiction series &quot;Falling Skies&quot; that appears online after each episode. On April 3, 2014, Wheaton announced on his blog that his new show called &quot;The Wil Wheaton Project&quot; would premiere on the SyFy network at 10 pm on May 27 for an initial projected run of twelve episodes. However, on August 29, Wheaton blogged that SyFy canceled the show after only one season. Wheaton has hosted &quot;Star Trek&quot; aftershow &quot;The Ready Room&quot; since the second season in 2020.

=== Games ===

Wheaton is a &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; player, and played during the PAX 2010 event using the 4th edition rules. Wheaton, along with webcartoonists Jerry Holkins and Mike Krahulik of Penny Arcade, and Scott Kurtz of &quot;PvP&quot;, played in front of a live audience. The game was hosted and recorded by Wizards of the Coast with Chris Perkins as the dungeonmaster.

Wheaton starred in the Kickstarter-funded game &quot;There Came an Echo&quot; by Iridium Studios. In &quot;Dungeons and Dragons Online&quot;, he became the dungeon master of the Temple of Elemental Evil quests.

Nintendo of America announced on Twitter that Wheaton would be voicing Abraham Lincoln in &quot;Code Name: STEAM&quot;. Wheaton does the voice narration on the &quot;Secret Hitler&quot; companion app for the &quot;Secret Hitler&quot; social deduction game.

Wheaton has spoken out against misogyny in video game culture, and wrote a profile of Anita Sarkeesian for the 2015 Time 100.

===Comic book===
A fictionalized version of Wheaton was included in the comic book &quot;PS 238&quot;, in which he harbors the power of telekinesis. Wheaton&#x27;s debut comic book &quot;The Guild: Fawkes,&quot; which he wrote alongside Felicia Day, was released on May 23, 2012.

===Narrations===
Wil Wheaton has been a narrator for dozens of audiobooks, including his own works. He has been a finalist for the prestigious Audie Award multiple times, and received an Earphones Award from AudioFile magazine.

===Live shows===
Wheaton has performed improvisational and sketch comedy at the ACME Comedy Theater in Hollywood. He has a traveling sketch comedy/improv troupe called &quot;EarnestBorg9&quot; that performs science fiction-related comedy at conventions.

===Writing===
Wheaton is the author of &quot;Dancing Barefoot&quot; (2004) and &quot;Just a Geek&quot; (2004). He released a revised follow-up, &quot;Still Just a Geek&quot;, in 2022.

Wheaton runs his own blog, &quot;Wil Wheaton Dot Net&quot;. In June 2005, he became that month&#x27;s featured Tech writer for the SuicideGirls Newswire.
In 2017, Wheaton wrote the short story &quot;Laina&quot; for the &quot;Star Wars&quot; anthology &quot;From a Certain Point of View&quot;. The book features 40 short stories, each by a different author, to commemorate the 40th anniversary of &quot;Star Wars&quot;.

==Personal life==
Wheaton married Anne Prince on November 7, 1999, and lives in Arcadia, California, with her and her two sons from a previous relationship. Upon reaching maturity, both sons asked Wheaton to legally adopt them, which he did.

Wheaton was roommates with Chris Hardwick while Chris attended UCLA. They met at a showing of &quot;Arachnophobia&quot; in Burbank, California.

Wheaton has struggled with alcohol addiction. In January 2021, Wheaton announced he had been sober from alcohol for five years.

Wheaton lives with complex post-traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and chronic depression. He supports mental health nonprofit organizations in raising awareness for these conditions.

He criticized Dave Chappelle for making jokes about transgender people during Chappelle&#x27;s comedy film &quot;The Closer&quot;. Wheaton said popular comics had influenced him to think homophobic humor was acceptable when he was young.

In 2022, Wheaton participated in &quot;Celebrity Jeopardy!&quot;, playing for the National Women&#x27;s Law Center. He reached the finals, defeating Troian Bellisario and Hasan Minhaj in the quarterfinals, and John Michael Higgins and Joel Kim Booster in the semifinals. He finished in third place, behind winner Ike Barinholtz and runner-up Patton Oswalt, earning $100,000.

===Politics===

Wheaton campaigned for Hillary Clinton in the 2016 general election.

Immediately following the Sutherland Springs church shooting on November 5, 2017, Wheaton on Twitter stated in response to Congressman Paul Ryan&#x27;s call for prayers for the victims that &quot;The murdered victims were in a church. If prayers did anything, they&#x27;d still be alive, you worthless sack of shit.&quot; Wheaton subsequently clarified his opinion after receiving criticism, writing &quot;I apologize to those of you who are sincere people of Faith, who felt attacked by me&quot;, but accused &quot;the right wing noise machine&quot; of using his comments &quot;to deflect attention and anger away from the role that unfettered access to weapons of mass murder played in the latest incidence of mass murder in America&quot;.

In September 2024, Wheaton joined other actors from the Star Trek franchise on a livestream to support the campaign of Vice President Kamala Harris in the 2024 United States presidential election.

==Honors==
*Young Artist Awards: 1989 &amp; 1987
*Melbourne Underground Film Festival: Best Actor (2002)
*International Academy of Web Television Awards: Best Host (Pre-Recorded) (2014)
* Saturn Awards: Lifetime Achievement Award – The Cast of &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; (2024)

An asteroid was named after him: 391257 Wilwheaton.

==Filmography==
===Films and television films===
===TV shows and appearances===
===Web shows and series===
===Animation===
===Video games===
==Bibliography==

* &quot;Dancing Barefoot&quot; () (2004)
* &quot;Just a Geek&quot; () (2004)
* &quot;Stories of Strength&quot; () (2005; contributor)
* &quot;The Happiest Days of Our Lives&quot; () (2007)
* &quot;Sunken Treasure&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Memories of the Future Vol. 1&quot; () (2009)
* &quot;Wil Wheaton&#x27;s Criminal Minds Production Diary&quot; (2009)
* &quot;Clash of the Geeks&quot; (2010; contributor)
* &quot;The Day After, and Other Stories&quot; (2010)
* &quot;The Monster in My Closet&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Hunter&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Dead Trees Give No Shelter&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Star Wars: From a Certain Point of View&quot; (2017; contributor) 
* &quot;Still Just a Geek&quot; () (2022)
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Holmstrom, John. &quot;The Moving Picture Boy: An International Encyclopaedia from 1895 to 1995&quot;. Norwich, Michael Russell, 1996, p. 390-391.
* Wheaton, Wil. &quot;My name is Wil Wheaton. I Live With Chronic Depression and Generalized Anxiety. I Am Not Ashamed.&quot; Medium.com, June 1, 2018.

==External links==
* 
* Wil Wheaton talks about his depression and anxiety 
* WWdN: In Exile
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="0" end="43" title="Wil Wheaton" label="Richard William &amp;quot;Wil&amp;quot; Wheaton III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000355" start="111" end="125" title="Wesley Crusher" label="Wesley Crusher"/>
<link wikidata="" start="157" end="187" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494722" start="229" end="240" title="Stand by Me (film)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q895856" start="269" end="281" title="Toy Soldiers (1991 film)" label="Toy Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325217" start="320" end="327" title="Flubber (film)" label="Flubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="376" end="388" title="voice acting" label="voice acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782683" start="398" end="405" title="Aqualad" label="Aqualad"/>
<link wikidata="Q638600" start="415" end="426" title="Teen Titans (TV series)" label="Teen Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998274" start="434" end="444" title="Cosmic Boy" label="Cosmic Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567343" start="454" end="476" title="Legion of Super Heroes (TV series)" label="Legion of Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594233" start="527" end="533" title="Ben 10" label="Ben 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="658" end="677" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q579563" start="720" end="729" title="The Guild (web series)" label="The Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q868835" start="758" end="766" title="Leverage (American TV series)" label="Leverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q614574" start="805" end="811" title="Eureka (2006 TV series)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673465" start="894" end="902" title="TableTop" label="TableTop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906523" start="964" end="980" title="Ready Player One" label="Ready Player One"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111624" start="997" end="1008" title="The Martian (Weir novel)" label="The Martian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="1067" end="1086" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank, California"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1354" end="1375" title="When the Bough Breaks (Star Trek: The Next Generation)" label="When the Bough Breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822287" start="1433" end="1442" title="The Curse (1987 film)" label="The Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q93478275" start="1813" end="1828" title="A Long Way Home (1981 film)" label="A Long Way Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q310324" start="1857" end="1871" title="Timothy Hutton" label="Timothy Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q174374" start="1934" end="1952" title="The Secret of NIMH" label="The Secret of NIMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156711" start="1990" end="2012" title="Robert C. O&amp;#x27;Brien (author)" label="Robert C. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929758" start="2031" end="2063" title="Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH" label="Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q29410216" start="2109" end="2127" title="Hambone and Hillie" label="Hambone and Hillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q574746" start="2148" end="2164" title="The Buddy System (film)" label="The Buddy System"/>
<link wikidata="Q181799" start="2188" end="2204" title="Richard Dreyfuss" label="Richard Dreyfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="2209" end="2223" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888138" start="2236" end="2256" title="The Last Starfighter" label="The Last Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q494722" start="2478" end="2489" title="Stand by Me (film)" label="Stand by Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="2527" end="2539" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214391" start="2561" end="2569" title="The Body (novella)" label="The Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="2774" end="2791" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011509" start="3013" end="3063" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q718644" start="3193" end="3202" title="Starfleet" label="Starfleet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3257" end="3287" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347278" start="3790" end="3797" title="Valmont (film)" label="Valmont"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3936" end="3954" title="Star Trek: Nemesis" label="Star Trek: Nemesis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3991" end="4008" title="Star Trek: Picard" label="Star Trek: Picard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4085" end="4103" title="Star Trek: Prodigy" label="Star Trek: Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q895856" start="4198" end="4210" title="Toy Soldiers (1991 film)" label="Toy Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="4274" end="4288" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875172" start="4302" end="4308" title="NewTek" label="NewTek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011359" start="4341" end="4354" title="Video Toaster" label="Video Toaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q139648" start="4450" end="4471" title="technology evangelist" label="technology evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="4670" end="4686" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737288" start="4723" end="4738" title="The Good Things (film)" label="The Good Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="4794" end="4803" title="Toll road" label="tollbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398702" start="4841" end="4873" title="Jane White Is Sick &amp;amp; Twisted" label="Jane White Is Sick &amp;amp; Twisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951328" start="4931" end="4966" title="Melbourne Underground Film Festival" label="Melbourne Underground Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="5041" end="5060" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174374" start="5323" end="5341" title="The Secret of NIMH" label="The Secret of NIMH"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5441" end="5484" title="I Expect You to Die 2: The Spy and the Liar" label="I Expect You to Die 2: The Spy and the Liar"/>
<link wikidata="Q614574" start="5596" end="5602" title="Eureka (2006 TV series)" label="Eureka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992785" start="5710" end="5715" title="Douglas Fargo" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15987193" start="5873" end="5894" title="Welcome to Night Vale" label="Welcome to Night Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995428" start="6013" end="6022" title="Revision3" label="Revision3"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="6040" end="6047" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318445" start="6061" end="6070" title="Geekdrome" label="InDigital"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6130" end="6134" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="6153" end="6168" title="Curiosity rover" label="Curiosity rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q928429" start="6324" end="6337" title="Falling Skies" label="Falling Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635345" start="6463" end="6486" title="The Wil Wheaton Project" label="The Wil Wheaton Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="6515" end="6519" title="SyFy" label="SyFy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="6711" end="6720" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25360500" start="6727" end="6736" title="aftershow" label="aftershow"/>
<link wikidata="Q96409564" start="6743" end="6757" title="The Ready Room" label="The Ready Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="6832" end="6854" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077926" start="6970" end="6983" title="Jerry Holkins" label="Jerry Holkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847562" start="6988" end="7001" title="Mike Krahulik" label="Mike Krahulik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069159" start="7005" end="7017" title="Penny Arcade" label="Penny Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436647" start="7023" end="7034" title="Scott Kurtz" label="Scott Kurtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q745381" start="7044" end="7047" title="PvP (webcomic)" label="PvP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="7127" end="7147" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="7213" end="7224" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321000" start="7243" end="7261" title="There Came an Echo" label="There Came an Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196795" start="7297" end="7324" title="Dungeons and Dragons Online" label="Dungeons and Dragons Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773301" start="7346" end="7360" title="dungeon master" label="dungeon master"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768362" start="7364" end="7392" title="the Temple of Elemental Evil" label="the Temple of Elemental Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="7402" end="7410" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="7473" end="7488" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7498" end="7514" title="Code Name: STEAM" label="Code Name: STEAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339944" start="7568" end="7581" title="Secret Hitler" label="Secret Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="7691" end="7699" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927912" start="7703" end="7721" title="video game culture" label="video game culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q510653" start="7746" end="7762" title="Anita Sarkeesian" label="Anita Sarkeesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="7776" end="7784" title="Time 100" label="Time 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120564" start="7876" end="7882" title="PS 238" label="PS 238"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="7923" end="7934" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q234314" start="8024" end="8035" title="Felicia Day" label="Felicia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819749" start="8211" end="8222" title="Audie Award" label="Audie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819803" start="8276" end="8285" title="AudioFile (magazine)" label="AudioFile"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="8356" end="8369" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650704" start="8377" end="8396" title="ACME Comedy Theater" label="ACME Comedy Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="8758" end="8762" title="weblog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150498" start="8868" end="8880" title="SuicideGirls" label="SuicideGirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="8962" end="8971" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q534536" start="9237" end="9256" title="Arcadia, California" label="Arcadia, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q313049" start="9427" end="9441" title="Chris Hardwick" label="Chris Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="9463" end="9467" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q624609" start="9500" end="9513" title="Arachnophobia (film)" label="Arachnophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q477502" start="9693" end="9731" title="complex post-traumatic stress disorder" label="complex post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="9733" end="9761" title="generalized anxiety disorder" label="generalized anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q427810" start="9767" end="9785" title="chronic depression" label="chronic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q40321" start="9895" end="9909" title="Dave Chappelle" label="Dave Chappelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284708" start="9994" end="10004" title="The Closer (2021 film)" label="The Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819541" start="10159" end="10178" title="Celebrity Jeopardy! (2022 TV series)" label="Celebrity Jeopardy!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979439" start="10202" end="10234" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Law Center" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461" start="10269" end="10286" title="Troian Bellisario" label="Troian Bellisario"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348652" start="10291" end="10303" title="Hasan Minhaj" label="Hasan Minhaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q967130" start="10330" end="10350" title="John Michael Higgins" label="John Michael Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q60048482" start="10355" end="10371" title="Joel Kim Booster" label="Joel Kim Booster"/>
<link wikidata="Q739062" start="10433" end="10447" title="Ike Barinholtz" label="Ike Barinholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="10462" end="10475" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="10535" end="10550" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="10558" end="10579" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q42725753" start="10608" end="10642" title="Sutherland Springs church shooting" label="Sutherland Springs church shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q203966" start="10717" end="10726" title="Paul Ryan" label="Paul Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642412" start="10743" end="10766" title="thoughts and prayers" label="prayers for the victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="11381" end="11390" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="11459" end="11472" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="11480" end="11520" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q494588" start="11535" end="11554" title="Young Artist Awards" label="Young Artist Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951328" start="11573" end="11608" title="Melbourne Underground Film Festival" label="Melbourne Underground Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123690297" start="11711" end="11724" title="51st Saturn Awards" label="Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11773" end="11803" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349100" start="11851" end="11868" title="391257 Wilwheaton" label="391257 Wilwheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="12038" end="12054" title="Dancing Barefoot (book)" label="Dancing Barefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316521" start="12079" end="12090" title="Just a Geek" label="Just a Geek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12694" end="12711" title="Still Just a Geek (book)" label="Still Just a Geek"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87422" wikidata="Q827758" url="?curid=87422" title="Þrúðr">
<text> (Old Norse: &#x27;strength&#x27;), sometimes anglicized as Thrúd or Thrud, is a daughter of the major god Thor and the goddess Sif in Norse mythology. Þrúðr is also the name of one of the valkyries who serve ale to the einherjar in Valhalla (&quot;Grímnismál&quot;, stanza 36). The two may or may not be the same figure.

==Attestations==
Þrúðr is attested in the following sources:
===&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;===
The &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; poem &quot;Alvíssmál&quot;, in which a dwarf, Alvíss, claims to be engaged to Thor&#x27;s daughter, may be about Þrúðr, but the daughter is not named.

In the poem &quot;Grímnismál&quot;, Odin (disguised as &quot;Grímnir&quot;), tortured, starved and thirsty, tells the young Agnar that he wishes that the valkyries Hrist (&quot;shaker&quot;) and Mist (&quot;cloud&quot;) would &quot;bear him a [drinking] horn&quot;, then provides a list of 11 more valkyries who he says &quot;bear ale to the einherjar&quot;; Skeggjöld (&quot;axe-age&quot;), Skögul, Hildr, Þrúðr (&quot;power&quot;), Hlökk (&quot;noise&quot;, or &quot;battle&quot;), Herfjötur (&quot;host-fetter&quot;), Göll (&quot;tumult&quot;), Geirahöð (&quot;spear-fight&quot;), Randgríð (&quot;shield-truce&quot;), Ráðgríð (&quot;council-truce&quot;) and Reginleif (&quot;power-truce&quot;).

===&quot;Prose Edda&quot;===
The &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; tells that Thor can be referred to by the kenning &quot;father of Þrúðr&quot; (&quot;faðir Þrúðar&quot;). Eysteinn Valdason uses it in his poem about Thor . The &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; adds that her mother is Sif.

In Bragi Boddason&#x27;s &quot;Ragnarsdrápa&quot;, the jötunn Hrungnir is called &quot;thief of Þrúðr&quot; (&quot;Þrúðar þjófr&quot;). But there is no direct reference to this myth in any other source. &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; , in which Snorri relates the fight between Thor and Hrungnir, mentions a very different cause, and Þjóðólfr of Hvinir&#x27;s &quot;Haustlöng&quot; only describes the fight without giving the reason for it. This poem depicts two mythological scenes painted on a shield, the first being Iðunn&#x27;s abduction by the giant Þjazi. Margaret Clunies Ross suggested that the two episodes might be complementary, both dealing with the abduction of a goddess by a giant, its failure and the death of the abductor. Another kenning may allude to this myth: in Eilífr Goðrúnarson&#x27;s &quot;Þórsdrápa&quot; , Thor is called &quot;he who longs fiercely for Þrúðr&quot; (&quot;þrámóðnir Þrúðar&quot;).

===Karlevi Runestone===

Þrúðr is mentioned on the 10th-century Karlevi runestone on the island of Öland, Sweden, where a chieftain is referred to as the &quot;tree of Þrúðr&quot;.

==Kennings==
The name Þrúðr could be used in kennings for chieftains, as exemplified on the Karlevi Runestone. The name is also used in kennings for women. For instance, Ormr Steinþórsson in his poem about a woman uses the kenning &quot;&quot;, which, according to Anthony Faulkes, can be rendered &quot;keeper of the malt-box (mash-tub) or ale-vessel&quot;.

==See also==
*Þrúðvangr, the field of Thor
*Torunn, the daughter of Thor in the Marvel Comics universe
*Drude
*Trude
*Trudy
*Alvíss

==Notes==

==References==

* Clunies Ross, Margaret (1994). &quot;Prolonged Echoes. Old Norse Myths in medieval Northern Society. Vol. 1: The myths.&quot; Odense: Odense University Press. The Viking Collection; vol. 7. .
* Faulkes, Anthony (1998), edition of: Snorri Sturluson. &quot;Edda. Skáldskaparmál. 2. Glossary and Index of Names.&quot; London: Viking Society for Northern Research. .
* Lindow, John (2001). &quot;Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs&quot;. Oxford University Press. .
* Rundata 2.0 for Windows.
* Simek, Rudolf (1987). &quot;Dictionary of Northern Mythology&quot;. Translated by Angela Hall. Cambridge: D. S. Brewer, 1996. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q827758" start="0" end="0" title="Þrúðr" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2" end="11" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q827758" start="60" end="65" title="Þrúðr" label="Thrúd"/>
<link wikidata="Q827758" start="69" end="74" title="Þrúðr" label="Thrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="103" end="106" title="Æsir" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="107" end="111" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q211613" start="128" end="131" title="Sif" label="Sif"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="135" end="150" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131087" start="189" end="197" title="valkyrie" label="valkyrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="220" end="229" title="einherjar" label="einherjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="233" end="241" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429923" start="249" end="259" title="Grímnismál" label="Grímnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="424" end="435" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848239" start="453" end="462" title="Alvíssmál" label="Alvíssmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="481" end="486" title="Norse dwarves" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143134" start="488" end="494" title="Alvíss" label="Alvíss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429923" start="612" end="622" title="Grímnismál" label="Grímnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q269118" start="655" end="662" title="List of names of Odin" label="Grímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606620" start="718" end="723" title="Agnarr Geirröðsson" label="Agnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="758" end="763" title="Hrist" label="Hrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879975" start="789" end="793" title="Mist (valkyrie)" label="Mist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192771" start="848" end="852" title="drinking horn" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="925" end="928" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="936" end="945" title="einherjar" label="einherjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="953" end="962" title="Skeggjöld" label="Skeggjöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q827758" start="1001" end="1006" title="Þrúðr" label="Þrúðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873597" start="1028" end="1033" title="Hlökk" label="Hlökk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10531639" start="1078" end="1087" title="Herfjötur" label="Herfjötur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="1115" end="1119" title="Göll" label="Göll"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="1142" end="1150" title="Geirahöð" label="Geirahöð"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="1178" end="1186" title="Randgríð" label="Randgríð"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="1215" end="1222" title="Ráðgríð" label="Ráðgríð"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644536" start="1255" end="1264" title="Reginleif" label="Reginleif"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="1332" end="1342" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="1360" end="1374" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="1423" end="1430" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722870" start="1487" end="1504" title="Eysteinn Valdason" label="Eysteinn Valdason"/>
<link wikidata="Q211613" start="1593" end="1596" title="Sif" label="Sif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367169" start="1602" end="1616" title="Bragi Boddason" label="Bragi Boddason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970724" start="1630" end="1642" title="Ragnarsdrápa" label="Ragnarsdrápa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="1654" end="1660" title="jötunn" label="jötunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338670" start="1661" end="1669" title="Hrungnir" label="Hrungnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q612925" start="1929" end="1947" title="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir" label="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591358" start="1961" end="1970" title="Haustlöng" label="Haustlöng"/>
<link wikidata="Q204691" start="2115" end="2120" title="Iðunn" label="Iðunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346913" start="2151" end="2156" title="Þjazi" label="Þjazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759282" start="2158" end="2179" title="Margaret Clunies Ross" label="Margaret Clunies Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304165" start="2380" end="2398" title="Eilífr Goðrúnarson" label="Eilífr Goðrúnarson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335866" start="2412" end="2421" title="Þórsdrápa" label="Þórsdrápa"/>
<link wikidata="Q239276" start="2621" end="2626" title="Öland" label="Öland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2628" end="2634" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="2749" end="2757" title="kennings" label="kennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158980" start="2874" end="2891" title="Ormr Steinþórsson" label="Ormr Steinþórsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769480" start="3078" end="3087" title="Þrúðvangr" label="Þrúðvangr"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121909" start="3108" end="3114" title="Torunn" label="Torunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="3144" end="3157" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247995" start="3168" end="3173" title="Drude" label="Drude"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810826" start="3175" end="3180" title="Trude" label="Trude"/>
<link wikidata="Q19677024" start="3182" end="3187" title="Trudy" label="Trudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143134" start="3189" end="3195" title="Alvíss" label="Alvíss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759282" start="3226" end="3248" title="Margaret Clunies Ross" label="Clunies Ross, Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044423" start="3591" end="3603" title="John Lindow" label="Lindow, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="3692" end="3715" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q492230" start="3721" end="3744" title="Rundata" label="Rundata 2.0 for Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="3748" end="3761" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Simek, Rudolf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87424" wikidata="Q1143134" url="?curid=87424" title="Alvíss">
<text>Alvíss (Old Norse: ; &quot;All-Wise&quot;) was a dwarf in Norse mythology.

In the &quot;Alvíssmál&quot; poem within the 12th century &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, Thor&#x27;s daughter, Þrúðr, was promised in marriage to Alvíss. Thor was unhappy with the match, however, so he devised a plan: Thor told Alvíss that, because of his small height, he had to prove his wisdom. Alvíss agreed, but Thor made his tests last until dawn, when Alviss, because he was a dwarf, was petrified on being exposed to the sunlight.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143134" start="0" end="6" title="Alvíss" label="Alvíss"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="8" end="17" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="49" end="54" title="Norse dwarves" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="58" end="73" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848239" start="89" end="98" title="Alvíssmál" label="Alvíssmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="140" end="151" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="159" end="163" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q827758" start="181" end="186" title="Þrúðr" label="Þrúðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178803" start="465" end="474" title="Petrifaction in mythology and fiction" label="petrified"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87430" wikidata="Q534156" url="?curid=87430" title="Andhrímnir">
<text>Andhrímnir (Old Norse &quot;the one exposed to soot&quot; A combination of &#x27;and-&#x27; and &#x27;hrīm&#x27;) is the chef of the Æsir and einherjar in Norse mythology. Every day in Valhalla, he slaughters the beast Sæhrímnir and cooks it in Eldhrímnir, his cauldron. At night, Sæhrímnir is restored to life to be eaten again the next day. He also makes the Æsir&#x27;s mead from the milk of Heiðrún, a goat.

==Notes==
==References==
* Rudolf Simek: &quot;Dictionary of Northern Mythology&quot; (1993) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q534156" start="0" end="10" title="Andhrímnir" label="Andhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="12" end="21" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="121" end="125" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="133" end="137" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="142" end="151" title="einherjar" label="einherjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="155" end="170" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="185" end="193" title="Valhalla" label="Valhalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q912587" start="219" end="228" title="Sæhrímnir" label="Sæhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266544" start="245" end="255" title="Eldhrímnir" label="Eldhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q912587" start="281" end="290" title="Sæhrímnir" label="Sæhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="373" end="377" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141525" start="395" end="402" title="Heiðrún" label="Heiðrún"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87433" wikidata="Q912587" url="?curid=87433" title="Sæhrímnir">
<text>In Norse mythology, Sæhrímnir is the creature killed and eaten every night by the Æsir and einherjar. The cook of the gods, Andhrímnir, is responsible for the slaughter of Sæhrímnir and its preparation in the cauldron Eldhrímnir. After Sæhrímnir is eaten, the beast is brought back to life again to provide sustenance for the following day. Sæhrímnir is attested in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional material, and the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson.

The enthroned figure of High quotes this stanza in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; and specifically states that Sæhrímnir is a boar. However, some scholars have translated the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; attestation, which the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; attestation quotes, as not referring to the creature as any specific type. Those scholars who recognize a difference in the taxonomy of the creature between the two sources have commented on the matter, further issues have been raised about the apparently contradictory etymology of the name of the creature in relation to its apparent status as a boar, and some scholars have theorized that the ritual killing of the animal may ultimately stem from religious practices in Germanic paganism.

==Etymology==
The etymology of the Old Norse name &quot;Sæhrímnir&quot; is problematic; in contradiction to the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; (and, depending upon translator, &quot;Grímnismál&quot;) description of the animal as a boar, &quot;Sæhrímnir&quot; is, in modern scholarship, commonly proposed to mean &quot;sooty sea-beast&quot; or &quot;sooty sea-animal&quot; (which may be connected to Old Norse &quot;seyðir&quot;, meaning &#x27;cooking ditch&#x27;). Attempts at explaining the apparent contradiction have been made by scholars (see &quot;theories&quot; section below).

==Attestations==
Sæhrímnir is mentioned once in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; and twice in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;. In the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; poem &quot;Grímnismál&quot;, Grímnir (the god Odin in disguise) comments on the creature. Translations of the stanza vary:


In chapter 38 of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Gylfaginning&quot;, Gangleri (king Gylfi in disguise) comments that &quot;you say that all those men that have fallen in battle since the beginning of the world have now come to Odin in Val-hall. What has he got to offer them food? I should have thought that there must be a pretty large number there.&quot; High replies that it is true there are a pretty large number of men there, adding many more have yet to arrive, yet that &quot;there will seem too few when the wolf comes.&quot; However, High adds that food is not a problem because there will never be so many people in Valhalla that the meat of Sæhrímnir (which he specifically calls a boar) cannot sufficiently feed them. High adds that Sæhrímnir is cooked every day by the cook Andhrímnir in the pot Eldhrimnir, and is again whole every evening. High then quotes the above-mentioned &quot;Grímnismál&quot; stanza in support. Gangleri then asks if Odin eats the same, to which High responds that Odin gives the food on his table to his wolves, for Odin himself consumes only wine and needs no food (and again High thereafter quotes a stanza from &quot;Grímnismál&quot; in support).

A final mention of the beast appears in a list of hog names in the &quot;Nafnaþulur&quot; section of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot;.

==Theories==
Scholar Rudolf Simek comments that the theme of the eternally renewing beast is also found in myths of the god Thor&#x27;s goats (Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr) and may point to sacrificial rites in shamanic practices. Simek finds a difference between the &quot;Grímnismál&quot; and &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; and explains it as a result of an embellishment on Snorri&#x27;s part, which he says owes more to the introduction of &quot;characteristics of a medieval paradise&quot;.

19th century scholar Jacob Grimm says that no information has survived about the worship of heroes in Germanic paganism (as opposed to the worship of the gods) but proposes a potential connection between Sæhrímnir and hero worship:

:Grecian sacrifices to heroes differed from those offered to gods: a god had only the viscera and fat of the beast presented to him, and was content with the mounting odour; a deified hero must have the very flesh and blood to consume. Thus the einherjar admitted into Valhöll feast on the boiled flesh of the boar Sæhrîmnir, and drink with the Ases; it is never said that the Ases shared in the food [...]. Are we to infer from this a difference in the sacrifices offered to gods and to demigods?&quot;
==See also==
* Rebirth in Norse religion

==Notes==
==References==

* Bellows, Henry Adams (1923). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. The American-Scandinavian Foundation.
* Faulkes, Anthony (Trans.) (1995). &quot;Edda&quot;. Everyman. 
* Grimm, Jacob (James Steven Stallybrass Trans.) (1882). &quot;Teutonic Mythology: Translated from the Fourth Edition with Notes and Appendix by James Stallybrass&quot;. Volume I. London: George Bell and Sons.
* Hollander, Lee M. (Trans.) (1990). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. University of Texas Press. 
* Lindow, John (2001). &quot;Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Orchard, Andy (1997). &quot;Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend&quot;. Cassell. 
* Simek, Rudolf (2007) translated by Angela Hall. &quot;Dictionary of Northern Mythology&quot;. D.S. Brewer. 
* Thorpe, Benjamin (Trans) (1866). &quot;The Elder Edda of Saemund Sigfusson&quot;. Norrœna Society.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q912587" start="20" end="29" title="Sæhrímnir" label="Sæhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="82" end="86" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="91" end="100" title="einherjar" label="einherjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q534156" start="124" end="134" title="Andhrímnir" label="Andhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266544" start="218" end="228" title="Eldhrímnir" label="Eldhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="376" end="387" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="473" end="483" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="522" end="538" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q421981" start="565" end="569" title="High, Just-As-High, and Third" label="High"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="630" end="642" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="693" end="697" title="wild boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="1285" end="1302" title="Germanic paganism" label="Germanic paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1340" end="1349" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q269118" start="2061" end="2068" title="List of names of Odin" label="Grímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="2078" end="2082" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="2247" end="2252" title="Gylfi" label="Gylfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="2676" end="2684" title="Fenrir" label="the wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="2857" end="2861" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q826455" start="3204" end="3214" title="Geri and Freki" label="his wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757589" start="3428" end="3438" title="Nafnaþulur" label="Nafnaþulur"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="3494" end="3508" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="3538" end="3550" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Rudolf Simek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="3641" end="3645" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047946" start="3660" end="3687" title="Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr" label="Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="3727" end="3735" title="shamanism" label="shamanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="3887" end="3893" title="Snorri_Sturluson" label="Snorri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="3990" end="3998" title="paradise" label="paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="4028" end="4039" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="4088" end="4105" title="Greek hero cult" label="worship of heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="4109" end="4126" title="Germanic paganism" label="Germanic paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="4241" end="4259" title="Religion in ancient Greece" label="Grecian sacrifices"/>
<link wikidata="Q177860" start="4509" end="4516" title="Valhalla" label="Valhöll"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="4585" end="4589" title="Æsir" label="Ases"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681289" start="4759" end="4784" title="Rebirth in Norse religion" label="Rebirth in Norse religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336703" start="4814" end="4834" title="Henry Adams Bellows (businessman)" label="Bellows, Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713416" start="4872" end="4908" title="The American-Scandinavian Foundation" label="The American-Scandinavian Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417845" start="4964" end="4972" title="Everyman&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="4977" end="4989" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Grimm, Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203584" start="5038" end="5137" title="Deutsche Mythologie" label="Teutonic Mythology: Translated from the Fourth Edition with Notes and Appendix by James Stallybrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514431" start="5187" end="5204" title="Lee M. Hollander" label="Hollander, Lee M."/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="5251" end="5276" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044423" start="5281" end="5293" title="John Lindow" label="Lindow, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="5382" end="5405" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="5481" end="5488" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Cassell"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="5493" end="5506" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Simek, Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952408" start="5587" end="5598" title="Boydell &amp;amp; Brewer" label="D.S. Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382004" start="5603" end="5619" title="Benjamin Thorpe" label="Thorpe, Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053387" start="5685" end="5700" title="Norrœna Society" label="Norrœna Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87436" wikidata="Q3266544" url="?curid=87436" title="Eldhrímnir">
<text>In Norse mythology, Eldhrímnir (Old Norse &quot;fire-sooty&quot;) is the cauldron in which the cook of the gods, Andhrímnir, prepares Sæhrímnir every evening.

==Notes==
==References==
* Orchard, Andy (1997). &quot;Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend&quot;. Cassell. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266544" start="20" end="30" title="Eldhrímnir" label="Eldhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="32" end="41" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="73" end="81" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q534156" start="113" end="123" title="Andhrímnir" label="Andhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q912587" start="134" end="143" title="Sæhrímnir" label="Sæhrímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="258" end="265" title="Orion Publishing Group" label="Cassell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87438" wikidata="Q1141525" url="?curid=87438" title="Heiðrún">
<text>Heiðrún or Heidrun is a nanny goat in Norse mythology, that consumes the foliage of the tree Læraðr and produces mead from her udders for the einherjar. She is described in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; and &quot;Prose Edda&quot;.

==Etymology==
The etymology of &quot;Heiðrún&quot; remains debatable. Anatoly Liberman suggests that &quot;Heiðþyrnir&quot;, the name of the lowest heaven in Scandinavian mythology (from &quot;heið&quot; &quot;bright sky&quot;), was cut into two, and on the basis of those halves the names the heavenly goat &quot;Heiðrún&quot; and of the heavenly stag Eikþyrnir were formed (the element &quot;rún ~ run&quot; concealed several puns, but it is a common suffix of female names). The etymology of the New High German name &quot;Heidrun&quot; is also debatable.

Heiðrún&#x27;s name is sometimes anglicized &quot;Heidrun&quot;, &quot;Heidhrun&quot;, &quot;Heithrun&quot;, &quot;Heidrún&quot;, &quot;Heithrún&quot; or &quot;Heidhrún&quot;.

==&quot;Prose Edda&quot;==
==&quot;Poetic Edda&quot;==
In the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; Heiðrún is mentioned twice. She is described in the &quot;Grímnismál&quot; in a way similar to Snorri&#x27;s description.

Since Snorri quotes other strophes of &quot;Grímnismál&quot; it seems reasonable to assume that he knew this strophe too and used it as his source for his description of Heiðrún.

In the &quot;Hyndluljóð&quot; the giantess Hyndla (lit. &quot;bitch/she-dog&quot;) used the term &quot;Heiðrún&quot; to insult the goddess Freyja. Thorpe and some other translators translated the name straight to &quot;she-goat&quot;.

== In Popular Culture ==

* Heidrun is a song by Amon Amarth, a Swedish melodic death metal band, about the goat Heiðrún.
* Portland, Oregon-based metal band Agalloch mentions Heiðrún in the lyrics to their 2006 song &quot;Not Unlike the Waves&quot; from the album &quot;Ashes Against the Grain&quot;.
* Heiðrún is a character in &quot;Fire Emblem Heroes&quot;, first revealed in June 2024.

==See also==
* Auðumbla, a primeval cow in Norse mythology whose udders produce four rivers of milk, from which Ymir fed
* List of people named Heidrun
* Amalthea (mythology), mother of Zeus sometimes depicted as a goat

==Bibliography==
* Bellows, Henry Adams. Translation of the Poetic Edda.
* Eysteinn Björnsson (ed.) (2005). &quot;Snorra-Edda: Formáli &amp; Gylfaginning : Textar fjögurra meginhandrita&quot;.
* Hollander, Lee M. (1962). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. Austin: University of Texas. .
* Jón Helgason (Ed.). (1955). &quot;Eddadigte&quot; (3 vols.). Copenhagen: Munksgaard. 
* Liberman, Anatoly (2016). &quot;In Prayer and Laughter. Essays on Medieval Scandinavian and Germanic Mythology, Literature, and Culture&quot;. Paleograph Press. .
* Young, Jean I. (1964). &quot;Snorri Sturluson : the Prose Edda&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press. .

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1141525" start="0" end="7" title="Heiðrún" label="Heiðrún"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141525" start="11" end="18" title="Heiðrún" label="Heidrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="24" end="34" title="nanny goat" label="nanny goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="38" end="53" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q821500" start="93" end="99" title="Læraðr" label="Læraðr"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="113" end="117" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q337168" start="142" end="151" title="einherjar" label="einherjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="183" end="194" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="211" end="221" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845644" start="300" end="316" title="Anatoly Liberman" label="Anatoly Liberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303861" start="583" end="592" title="Eikþyrnir" label="Eikþyrnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q454476" start="729" end="744" title="New High German" label="New High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449034" start="823" end="833" title="Old Norse orthography" label="anglicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="1035" end="1046" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429923" start="1111" end="1121" title="Grímnismál" label="Grímnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546812" start="1369" end="1379" title="Hyndluljóð" label="Hyndluljóð"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="1495" end="1501" title="Freyja" label="Freyja"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468540" start="1620" end="1627" title="The Great Heathen Army" label="Heidrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q192863" start="1641" end="1652" title="Amon Amarth" label="Amon Amarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q253918" start="1664" end="1683" title="melodic death metal" label="melodic death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1716" end="1732" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1739" end="1744" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q390300" start="1750" end="1758" title="Agalloch" label="Agalloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618028" start="1863" end="1886" title="Ashes Against the Grain" label="Ashes Against the Grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382640" start="1928" end="1946" title="Fire Emblem Heroes" label="Fire Emblem Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q215041" start="1999" end="2007" title="Auðumbla" label="Auðumbla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447211" start="2107" end="2135" title="Heidrun (disambiguation)" label="List of people named Heidrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q107785" start="2138" end="2158" title="Amalthea (mythology)" label="Amalthea (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514431" start="2400" end="2417" title="Lee M. Hollander" label="Hollander, Lee M."/>
<link wikidata="Q984003" start="2488" end="2500" title="Jón Helgason (poet)" label="Jón Helgason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845644" start="2576" end="2593" title="Anatoly Liberman" label="Liberman, Anatoly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87440" wikidata="Q505174" url="?curid=87440" title="Carillon">
<text>A carillon is a pitched percussion instrument that is played with a keyboard and consists of at least 23 bells. The bells are cast in bronze, hung in fixed suspension, and tuned in chromatic order so that they can be sounded harmoniously together. They are struck with clappers connected to a keyboard of wooden batons played with the hands and pedals played with the feet. Often housed in bell towers, carillons are usually owned by churches, universities, or municipalities. They can include an automatic system through which the time is announced and simple tunes are played throughout the day.

Carillons come in many designs, weights, sizes, and sounds. They are among the world&#x27;s heaviest instruments, and the heaviest carillon weighs over . Most weigh between . To be considered a carillon, a minimum of 23 bells are needed; otherwise, it is called a chime. Standard-sized instruments have about 50, and the world&#x27;s largest has 77 bells. The appearance of a carillon depends on the number and weight of the bells and the tower in which it is housed. They may be found in towers which are free-standing or connected to a building. The bells of a carillon may be directly exposed to the elements or hidden inside the structure of their tower.

The origins of the carillon can be traced to the Low Countries—present-day Belgium, the Netherlands, and the French Netherlands—in the 16th century. The modern carillon was invented in 1644 when Jacob van Eyck and the Hemony brothers cast the first tuned carillon. The instrument experienced a peak until the late-18th century, a decline during the French Revolution, a revival in the late 19th century, a second decline during the First and Second World Wars, and a second revival thereafter. UNESCO has designated 56 belfries in Belgium and France as a World Heritage Site and recognized the carillon culture of Belgium as an intangible cultural heritage.

According to counts by various registries, there are about 700 carillons worldwide. Most are in and around the Low Countries, though nearly 200 have been constructed in North America. Almost all extant carillons were constructed in the 20th century. Additionally, there are about 500 &quot;non-traditional&quot; carillons, which due to some component of its action being electrified or computerized, most registries do not consider to be carillons. A plurality are located in the United States, and most of the others in Western Europe. A few &quot;traveling&quot; or &quot;mobile&quot; carillons are fixed to a frame that enables them to be transported.

==Etymology and terminology==
The word &quot;carillon&quot; is a loanword from French dating to the late 18th century. It is derived from Old French (an alteration of ) . The word originates from Latin ; from . It is often stated that &quot;carillon&quot; may have referred originally to a set of four forestrike bells whose melodies announced the time signal of public hour bells, but this is not confirmed by archival sources. There is convincing evidence that the term referred initially to the medieval custom of chiming on sets of four church bells by pulling the clappers by means of ropes. In German, as well as using the French term, a carillon is sometimes called a (). This should not be confused with the identically named glockenspiel, which itself is sometimes called a &quot;carillon&quot; in French. Dutch speakers use the word , which has an uncertain etymology.

A musician who plays the carillon is commonly called a carillonneur ( , ), also loaned from French. It and &quot;carillon&quot; were adopted by English speakers after the introduction of the instrument to British troops following the War of the Spanish Succession in the 18th century. Though the word &quot;carillonneur&quot; literally refers to carillon players that are men, the French to denote women is not used in English. Another common term is carillonist, which some players of the carillon have wished to replace &quot;carillonneur&quot; because of the former&#x27;s gender inclusivity, simple spelling, and unambiguous pronunciation. In 2018, the World Carillon Federation adopted &quot;carillonist&quot; as the preferred term for its communications.

==Characteristics==
===Construction===
The carillon is a keyboard instrument. Though it shares similarities with other instruments in this category, such as the organ or pedal piano, its playing console is unique. Playing is done with the hands on a manual keyboard composed of rounded, wooden batons. The manual has short chromatic keys (i.e. &quot;black keys&quot;) raised above the diatonic keys (&quot;white keys&quot;) and arranged like a piano; however, they are spaced far apart, and the chromatic keys are raised above the rest, about . To operate, the keys are depressed with a closed fist. The lowest 1.5 to 2.5 octaves of the manual are connected to a pedal keyboard played with the feet. The connection is direct, meaning that when a pedal is pressed, its corresponding key on the manual is pulled down with it. Since the mid-20th century, there have been two competing keyboard design standards for a carillon&#x27;s console: the North American standard and the North European standard. They differ over several design elements, such as whether the outer pedals curve toward the center or the specific distance a key is depressed. In 2006, the World Carillon Federation developed the WCF Keyboard 2006, which is a compromise between the two standards. The organization recommends that its keyboard standard be used as a guideline when constructing new carillons or renovating existing keyboards.

Each key is connected to a transmission system via a wire, usually made of stainless steel. When a particular key is depressed, it pulls on the wire which, after interacting with other wires and pulleys, causes a clapper to swing towards the inner wall of the key&#x27;s corresponding bell. At rest, these clappers are about away from the bell wall. Small bells are fitted with springs to pull their clappers back immediately after the stroke, so that the bell is not sounded more than once with each keystroke. This is not necessary for large bells, which have sufficiently heavy clappers. Immediately above each key is a wire adjuster called a turnbuckle. These allow the performer to adjust the length of the wire, which often changes with temperature fluctuations.

The carillon&#x27;s cast bronze, cup-shaped bells are housed at the top of a tower in a structure typically made of steel or wooden beams. The arrangement of the bells depends on the space, height and construction of the tower, and the number and size of bells. When the heaviest bells are especially large, they are usually placed below the playing cabin to achieve a better tonal distribution. The bells themselves do not move during operation, only the clappers. With some instruments, the heaviest bells may be outfitted with a mechanism enabling them to swing.

===Mechanization with clock and playing drum===
Carillons may also feature an automatic mechanism by which simple tunes or the Westminster Quarters are played on the lower bells. The mechanism on European carillons is often a playing drum, which is a large metal cylinder connected to a clock mechanism. Metal pegs are screwed onto the outside of the drum. When the clock mechanism sets the drum in motion, the pegs catch onto levers, connected to hammers that rest just a short distance from the outside of the bell. The hammers are briefly raised, and then fall onto the bell as the peg continues to rotate away from the lever. The pegs are arranged such that simple tunes can be programmed to play at specific quarter hours. In North America, automatic playing drum systems are not common; instead, carillons may have pneumatic systems which ring the instrument.

===Sound===
Carillons produce sound by striking stationary bells, categorizing them as percussion idiophones in the Hornbostel–Sachs classification of musical instruments (111.242.222 – sets of bells with internal strikers). Carillon bells are made of bell bronze, a specialized copper–tin alloy used for its above-average rigidity and resonance. A bell&#x27;s profile (shape) and weight determine its note and the quality of its tone. Therefore, apart from changes in its profile, such as chipping or corrosion, a bell will never lose its original sound. It produces a sound with overtones, also known as partial tones, which are not necessarily harmonically related. To produce a pleasing, harmonically related series of tones, the bell&#x27;s profile must be carefully adjusted. Bellfounders typically focus on five principal tones when tuning, most notably the minor third overtone called the tierce, which gives rise to the unique sound of carillons and has been the subject of further research, such as the major third bell. Since the casting process does not reliably produce perfectly tuned bells, they are cast slightly thicker and metal is shaved off with a lathe. On older European carillons, bells were tuned with each other by using the meantone temperament tuning system. Modern carillons, particularly those in North America, are tuned to equal temperament.

The carillon has a dynamic range similar to a piano, if not more versatile. Through variation of touch, performers can express many volumes. The larger the bell, the larger its dynamic range. Bigger bells will also sound naturally louder than smaller, higher-pitched bells.

Along with pipe organs, carillons are one of the world&#x27;s heaviest musical instruments. Most carillons weigh (counting only the weight of the bells) between , with extremes ranging from very light instruments to the world&#x27;s heaviest at over —the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial Carillon of the Riverside Church in New York City, US. Its bourdon, or largest bell, is the largest tuned bell ever cast for a carillon. It sounds a full octave below most other bourdons. The entire ensemble of fixed and swinging bells, clappers, and steel framework weighs more than .

===Range===
A carillon&#x27;s range is determined by the number of bells it has. The number of bells usually depends on funds available for the creation of the instrument: more money allows more bells to be cast, especially the larger, more costly ones. It is generally accepted that a carillon must have a minimum of 23 bells, or else it is called a chime. There is no standard pitch range for the carillon, so several subcategories are used to categorize them:

* Carillons with 23 to 27 bells and 35 to 39 bells are classified as two-octave and three-octave carillons, respectively. Players of these instruments often use music written specifically for the limited ranges.
* A &quot;concert&quot; or &quot;standard&quot; carillon typically has 45 to 50 bells, or a range of about four octaves.
* Carillons with more than 50 bells are often referred to as &quot;great&quot; or &quot;grand&quot; carillons.
* Carillons of 15 to 22 bells which were built before 1940 may be classified as &quot;historical carillons&quot; by the World Carillon Federation.

The title of &quot;world&#x27;s largest carillon by number of bells&quot; is shared between two instruments: the carillon of the Kirk in the Hills Presbyterian Church in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, US, and the carillon at the in Daejeon, South Korea; both have 77 bells.

Since a carillon is seldom played in concert with other instruments, its bourdon may be any pitch—whichever is advantageous for the location and funds available; to simplify the writing and playing of music, keyboards often have a C-compass. As a result, many carillons are transposing instruments, especially those that are small, have many bells, or were constructed on limited funds. The transposition can be anywhere from down a perfect fourth to up an octave. In North America, an increasing number of new carillons have been installed in concert pitch as a result of the desire to establish the carillon as a full-fledged concert instrument.

Many carillons, according to a C-compass, are missing the lowest C and E bells (equating to the second- and fourth-largest bells if they were included). The reason is often financial: by omitting these bells, the construction of a carillon can be reduced significantly, sometimes by 20 percent for large installations. Since the early 1900s, European installations will often reintroduce the E bell, and instead of adding the C bell, they will include a B bell (which is a major second below the C-compass bell).

==History==
===Origins===

The carillon originated from two earlier functions of bells: ringing bells to send messages and ringing bells to indicate the time of day.

In the Middle Ages, bellringers attached ropes to the clappers of swinging bells and rung them while stationary in a technique called chiming. Chiming bells gave the ringer more control compared to swinging bells, and so was used to send messages to those within earshot. For example, sounding bells was often used to warn of a fire or impending attack. At celebratory events, a bellringer could gather ropes together to chime multiple bells in rhythmic patterns. By the end of the 15th century, chimers are recorded to have used their technique to play music on bells. A 1478 chronicle recounts a man in Dunkirk having made a &quot;great innovation in honor of God&quot; by playing melodies on bells. Another recounts in 1482 a jester from Aalst playing bells in Antwerp with ropes and batons, the latter term suggesting the existence of a keyboard.

In the 14th century, the newly developed escapement technology for mechanical clocks spread throughout European clock towers and gradually replaced the water clock. Since the earliest clocks lacked faces, they announced the time by striking a bell a number of times corresponding to the current hour. Eventually, these striking clocks were modified to make a warning signal just before the hour count to draw the attention of listeners to the incoming announcement. This signal is called the forestrike (). Originally the forestrike consisted of striking one or two bells, and the systems slowly grew in complexity. By the middle of the 15th century, forestrikes, with three to seven bells, could play simple melodies.

As late as 1510, these two functions were combined into one primitive carillon in the Oudenaarde Town Hall. One set of nine bells were connected to both a keyboard and to the clock&#x27;s forestrike. The Low Countries—present day Belgium, the Netherlands, and the French Netherlands—were most interested in the potential of using bells to make music. In this region, bellfounding had reached an advanced stage relative to other regions in Europe.

===Development===
The new instrument developed in the favorable conditions in the Low Countries during the 17th century. Bellfounders found increased financial and technological support as the region traded by sea through ports. Moreover, the political situation under Margaret of Austria and Holy Roman emperor Charles V brought relative wealth and power to cities. Carillons quickly became a fashionable symbol of civic prestige. Cities and towns competed against one another to possess the largest, highest-quality instruments. The demand was met by a successful industry of bellfounding families, notably the Waghevens and Vanden Gheyns. Together, they produced over 50 carillons during the 16th and early 17th centuries. By 1600, the primitive carillon had become an established feature of the region.

A critical development for the modern carillon occurred in the 17th century, which involved a partnership between Pieter and François Hemony and Jacob van Eyck. The Hemony brothers were prominent bellfounders known for their precise tuning technique. Van Eyck was a renowned blind carillonneur of Utrecht, who was commissioned by several Dutch cities to maintain and make improvements to their clock chimes and carillons. He was particularly interested in the sounds of bells. In 1633, he developed the ability to isolate and describe a bell&#x27;s five main overtones and discovered a bell&#x27;s partial tones can be tuned harmoniously with each other by adjusting the bell&#x27;s thickness. The Hemony brothers were commissioned in 1644 to cast 19 bells for Zutphen&#x27;s with Van Eyck as their consultant. By tuning the bells with the advice from Van Eyck, they created the first carillon by the modern definition. According to carillonneur John Gouwens, the quality of the bells was so impressive that Van Eyck recommended casting a full two octaves, or 23 bells. This range has been considered the standard minimum range for carillons ever since. During the next 36 years, the Hemony brothers produced 51 carillons. Carillon culture experienced a peak around this time and until the late-18th century.

===Decline===
The French Revolution had far-reaching consequences on the Low Countries and the carillon. France conquered and annexed the Austrian Netherlands in 1795 and the United Provinces in 1810. After publishing instructions for extracting copper from bell bronze, France sought to dismantle local carillons to reduce its copper shortage. Carillon owners resisted by, for example, petitioning the new governments to declare their instruments as &quot;culturally significant&quot; or by disconnecting the bells and burying them in secret. During this period, there were as many as 110 carillons. About 50 of them were destroyed as a result of war, fire, and dismantling. The majority were melted down to produce cannons for the French Revolutionary Wars.

Between 1750 and the end of the 19th century, interest in the carillon declined greatly. An increasing number of households had access to grandfather clocks and pocket watches, which eroded the carillon&#x27;s monopoly on announcing the time. As a musical instrument, the carillon lagged behind during the Romantic era, which featured music of a wandering, story-like nature. Many carillons were tuned using meantone temperament, which meant they were not suited for the chromaticism of the newer musical styles. The production of new musical works for the instrument essentially came to a standstill. The standard skill level of carillonneurs had also dropped significantly, so much so that in 1895, the music publisher Schott frères issued Matthias Vanden Gheyn&#x27;s 11 carillon preludes for piano with a foreword claiming &quot;no carillonneur of our time knows how to play them on the carillon&quot;. Also, with a reduced demand for new carillons, the tuning techniques developed by the Hemony brothers, but not Van Eyck&#x27;s underlying theory, were forgotten. Subsequent carillons were generally inferior to earlier installations.

===Revival===
In the early 1890s, an English change ringer and canon Arthur Simpson published a set of articles on bell tuning, where he argued bell founders had been complacent with their poor tuning methods and proposed solutions to the existing problems. John William Taylor, who had been trying to replicate the tuning techniques of the Hemony brothers and the Vanden Gheyns at his foundry, began working with Simpson. In 1904, they founded the first tuned bells in over a century. The rediscovery initiated a revival of carillon building.

In Mechelen, Belgium, Jef Denyn was a major figure in the carillon&#x27;s revival as a musical instrument. In 1887, after his father had become completely blind, Denyn took over as the city carillonneur and was responsible for playing the carillon in the tower of St. Rumbold&#x27;s Cathedral. From the beginning of his career, Denyn advocated for better playability of the instrument. He further developed the tumbler rack system of transmission cables that his father had installed on the cathedral carillon. This allowed the player to have better control over dynamic variations, fast musical passages and tremolos. Tremolos offered a solution to a Romantic-era limitation of the carillon: its inability to expressively sustain the sound of individual notes.

With his improving skills as a carillonneur and the upgraded cathedral carillon, Denyn&#x27;s performances began attracting crowds of listeners. He established regular Monday night concerts at the suggestion of the city council. On 1 August 1892, Denyn hosted the first carillon concert in history. From this point forward, the instrument garnered a reputation as a concert instrument, rather than as an instrument tasked with providing background music.

===Impact of the World Wars===
Because of his concerts, Denyn met William Gorham Rice, an American state and federal government official from Albany, New York, US. Having traveled to The Hague and been exposed to the carillon, Rice was regularly touring the region to interview carillonneurs for his research. After Denyn&#x27;s 18 August 1913 evening concert, he and Rice exchanged ideas about the societal and educational value of carillon performances for large audiences. Rice&#x27;s book &quot;Carillons of Belgium and Holland&quot;, the first in the English language written specifically about carillons, was published in December 1914 and reprinted three times. The book painted an idealized picture of the region that resonated with the American public, particularly in light of the rape of Belgium. Its success motivated Rice to publish two more books in 1915 and 1925. Rice became an authority on carillons in the United States; besides his books, he gave 35 lectures in several cities, published articles in magazines, spoke on radio programs, and presented exhibition material on the subject between 1912 and 1922. In 1922, Rice garnered financial support from Herbert Hoover and John D. Rockefeller Jr. to establish a carillon school in Mechelen with Denyn as its first director. It was later named the Royal Carillon School &quot;Jef Denyn&quot;.

Stephen Thorne of the Canadian military history magazine &quot;Legion&quot; writes that the Allied Powers of World War I and of World War II saw the destruction of carillons during the respective wars as a &quot;brutal annihilation of a unique democratic music instrument&quot;. The destruction was highly publicized among the allies of Belgium and the Netherlands. In the latter war, British investigators claimed Germany seized two thirds of all bells in Belgium and every bell in the Netherlands. Between 1938 and 1945, 175,000 bells were stolen and stored in (). Some 150,000 were sent to foundries and melted down for their copper. Following the war, with the bells out of their towers, E. W. Van Heuven and other physicists could research the tonal qualities of bells in laboratory conditions and with modern electrical sound-analyzing equipment. Percival Price, Dominion Carillonneur at the Peace Tower, was tasked with repatriating as many surviving bells as possible. He also used the opportunity to publish similar research. Now, every bellfounder could learn how to cast the highest-quality bells, and the increase in new carillons was greater than ever.

===Movement in North America===
Between 1922 and 1940, bellfounders installed 43 carillons in the United States and Canada. The flood of carillons onto the continent is attributed to Rice&#x27;s widely popular books and persistent education in the United States. His romanticized depiction of the cultural instrument prompted wealthy donors to purchase carillons for their own civil and religious communities. Price was appointed to play the carillon at the Metropolitan United Church in Toronto, Ontario, Canada (before working as Dominion Carillonneur); Mary Mesquita Dahlmer was appointed to play at Our Lady of Good Voyage Church in Gloucester, Massachusetts, US. Both were the first professional carillonneurs in their respective countries. In 1936, The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America was founded at Parliament Hill in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Following the deaths of Denyn in 1941 and Rice in 1945, North American carillonneurs, through their new organization, sought to develop their own authority on education and performance. In the 1950s and 1960s, a distinct North American style of carillon music emerged at the University of Kansas. Led by Ronald Barnes, the university&#x27;s carillonneur, he encouraged his peers to compose for the carillon and produced many of his own compositions.

===International recognition===
In the 1970s, the idea for a global carillon organization took shape, and the was later formed as the central organization of carillon players and enthusiasts. It is a federation of the preexisting national or regional carillon associations that had been founded throughout the 20th century.

In 1999, UNESCO designated 32 bell towers in Belgium as a World Heritage Site, in recognition of their architectural diversity and significance. The list was expanded in 2005 to include 23 in France, as well as the tower of Gembloux, Belgium. In 2014, UNESCO recognized the carillon culture of Belgium as an intangible cultural heritage, stating that it &quot;recognizes the creativity of carillonneurs and others who ensure that this cultural form remains relevant to today&#x27;s local societies.&quot;

In 2008, the carillon was featured in the film &quot;Welcome to the Sticks&quot;, a box office success as the highest-grossing French film ever released in France 

In 2019, playing the carillon of St. Coleman&#x27;s Cathedral in Cobh, Ireland, was recognized by the Irish government as key element of the country&#x27;s living cultural heritage.

==Usage and repertoire==
===Music===
The carillon repertoire skews heavily toward newer works in stark contrast to that of its relative the organ repertoire. Some 15 collections of carillon music written in the 17th and 18th centuries are known to exist. Like with the pipe organ, early carillon performances consisted mostly of improvisations. In the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras, keyboard music was not written for one instrument or another, but rather was written to be played on keyboard instrument. For this reason, much of the carillon&#x27;s repertoire in its early history was likely the same as that of the harpsichord, organ, and piano. One of the few surviving examples is the De Gruytters carillon book, dated 1746. The music is arranged for, rather than composed for, performance on the carillon and could easily be played on other keyboard instruments. Baroque keyboard music is well suited for carillon transcription, particularly the works of Bach, Corelli, Couperin, Handel, Mozart, and Vivaldi.
The earliest known original compositions specifically for the carillon, and not simply any keyboard, are the 11 preludes of Matthias Vanden Gheyn. The structure of his works suggests he had been playing non-specific keyboard music on the carillon for many years and that he wanted to play music that is idiomatic to the instrument. Technically challenging, his preludes have been the standard repertoire among carillonneurs since the early 1900s.

Jef Denyn made many public statements about what music should be performed on the carillon, and he persuaded several composers of the time to write for it. Among those composers were his students, like , Léon Henry, and , and composers for other instruments, such as Jef van Hoof. The carillon school began publishing carillon music in 1925. Through his school, Denyn was the early proponent of the &quot;Mechelen style&quot; of carillon music, which consists of virtuosic flourishes, tremolos, and other Baroque and Romantic elements.

Ronald Barnes was the leading figure behind the North American style of carillon music, which developed in the 1950s and 1960s. He encouraged his University of Kansas peers to compose for the carillon, and he produced many of his own compositions. Barnes&#x27; campaign was most successful with Roy Hamlin Johnson, a piano professor who introduced a whole category of music exclusively native to the carillon featuring the octatonic scale. Many of Johnson&#x27;s works are acknowledged as masterpieces. Barnes produced 56 original compositions and hundreds of arrangements to expand the available repertoire. Other major 20th-century contributors were Albert Gerken, Gary C. White, Johan Franco, John Pozdro, and Jean W. Miller. The new American style developed into the antithesis of the Mechelen style: instead of exciting, tremolo-filled performances that demonstrate the showmanship of the carillonneur, it features slow passages, sparse harmonies and impressionist themes to draw the listener&#x27;s attention to the natural sound of the bells.

Carillon music was first published in North America in 1934. G. Schirmer, Inc. published the compositions of Curtis Institute of Music students Samuel Barber, Gian Carlo Menotti, and Nino Rota as part of the institute&#x27;s short-lived publishing series. The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America opened the first dedicated publishing house for carillon music in North America in 1961. In 1968, the Anton Brees Carillon Library was established at Bok Tower Gardens in Lake Wales, Florida, US; it contains large collections of carillon music and related materials.

In the late 2010s, University of Michigan professor Tiffany Ng analyzed the diversity of the carillon repertoire. In a bibliography focusing on African-American music and composers, Ng claims that &quot;while African-American music permeates the carillon repertoire,&quot; mostly in the form of spirituals, &quot;almost none of the carillon arrangements and compositions are authored by African Americans.&quot; In a second bibliography with Emmet Lewis focusing on women, transgender, and non-binary composers, they assert that while many works have been written by these groups, they are often not published through traditional means, and &quot;gender inequality remains systemic and common practice in carillon concerts.&quot;

===Performances===


Performances on the carillon are commonly categorized as either recitals or concerts. Carillon recitals are traditional performances that take place on fixed schedules throughout the week. They may supplement regularly scheduled events, or take place at the convenience of the carillonneur. Traditional since the instrument&#x27;s inception, this method is the foundation of carillon performance. Concerts refer to special carillon performances, typically featuring a program and a place for the audience to sit and listen. Some carillonneurs may livestream the event so the audience can watch them at the keyboard. The first carillon concert was held on 1 August 1892 as part of Jef Denyn&#x27;s Monday evening concert series.

The lack of consistent interest in traditional performances among the general public has caused carillonneurs to engage in musical collaborations and experiments, collectively referred to as &quot;Carillon Plus&quot;. Carillonneur duos explore the possibility of duet playing and producing new music for the configuration. Others seek to play the carillon in orchestras, bands, and other ensembles. Carillon Plus performances are not new, but have been explored more intensely since the mid-20th century.

==Organization and education==
The World Carillon Federation is the central organization of carillon players and enthusiasts. It is a federation of preexisting regional, national, and supranational carillon organizations. it is composed of 15 member organizations:

* Carillon Association Luxembourg
* Carillon Society of Australia
* Carillon Society of Britain and Ireland
* Confraternity of Bell Ringers and Carillonists of Catalonia
* Flemish Carillon Association
* German Carillon Association
* Guild of Carillonneurs and Campanologists of Switzerland
* The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America
* Guild of Carillonneurs of France
* Lithuanian Carillonist Guild
* Nordic Society for Campanology and Carillons
* Polish Carillon Association
* Royal Dutch Carillon Association
* Russian Carillon Foundation
* Walloon Carillon Association
Every three years, the federation hosts an international congress in a home country of one of the member organizations. The congresses host lectures, workshops, and committee meetings about the topics related to the carillon, for example: news, tutorials and demos, and research developments. Most member organizations give periodical updates to their members on the current state of carillon culture in their respective regions.

Training to perform on a carillon can be obtained at several institutions, though the Royal Carillon School &quot;Jef Denyn&quot; has been the most popular. The LUCA School of Arts in Leuven, Belgium, offers a master&#x27;s degree in the carillon, and the Utrecht School of the Arts in Amersfoort, Netherlands, has a dedicated school. The is located in Denmark, and there are schools in the United Kingdom and France.

The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America organizes carillon examinations during its annual congresses. Those who pass are certified as carillonneur-members of the guild. It also partners with the North American Carillon School, founded in 2012 as an affiliate of the Royal Carillon School &quot;Jef Denyn&quot;. Several American universities offer a carillon program within their curriculum. For example, the University of California, Berkeley; the University of California, Santa Barbara; the University of Denver; the University of Florida; and the University of Michigan offer complete courses of study. Clemson University, Indiana University, Iowa State University, the University of Kansas, and Marquette University offer limited credit for carillon performance. Employed carillonneurs will often offer private lessons at their carillons. Universities that possess a carillon but do not offer course credit often have a student organization or education program, such as the Yale Guild of Carillonneurs, which manages performances on the Yale Memorial Carillon, and the University of Chicago Guild of Carillonists.

Music competitions for carillon are held regularly, with the international Queen Fabiola Competition being the most important.

==Distribution==

Several institutions register and count carillons worldwide. Some registries specialize in counting specific types of carillons. For example, the War Memorial and Peace Carillons registry counts instruments which serve as war memorials or were built in the name of promoting world peace. TowerBells counts carillons played via a baton keyboard as &quot;traditional carillons&quot; and those with computerized or electronic mechanisms as &quot;non-traditional carillons&quot;, among other bell instruments. It also publishes maps, technical specifications, and summary statistics. As the World Carillon Federation does not consider non-traditional carillons to be carillons, it counts only those which are played via a baton keyboard and without computerized or electronic mechanisms.

According to TowerBells and the World Carillon Federation, there are about 700 existing traditional carillons. At least three can be found on every continent except Antarctica; however, of the countries in which traditional carillons can be found, only six have more than 20. The &quot;great carillon&quot; countries—the Netherlands, Belgium, and the United States—account for two-thirds of the world total. Over 90 percent are in either Western Europe (mainly the Low Countries) or North America. In North America, about 80 percent of carillons are owned by religious or educational institutions, while in Europe, nearly all carillons are municipally owned. Almost all extant traditional carillons were constructed in the last 100 years; only some 50 historical carillons from the 18th century or earlier still exist. According to TowerBells, there are another 483 non-traditional carillons, which are located mainly in the United States and Western Europe.


==Traveling carillons==

Traveling or mobile carillons are those which are not housed in a tower. Instead, the bells and playing console are installed on a frame that allows it to be transported. These carillons have to be much lighter than their non-mobile counterparts. Nora Johnston conceived the idea of a traveling carillon between 1933 and 1938. She connected a traditional baton keyboard to a system of chime bars and fixed the structure to a portable frame. Johnston traveled twice to the United States to perform in radio documentaries, orchestral concerts, and commercials. Subsequent constructions by others used actual carillon bells.

According to counts by the World Carillon Federation and TowerBells, there are about 20 existing traveling carillons with only three being non-traditional. Many were or are currently owned by bell foundries as a promotional tool. Almost all traveling carillons are headquartered in Western Europe and the United States. Two American traveling carillons are part of the musical group Cast in Bronze, which features the &quot;Spirit of the Bells&quot; playing the carillon in concert with other instruments or a recording. Cast in Bronze is credited with introducing the carillon to the United States&#x27; public in its mission to promote and preserve the instrument.

==See also==
* Bianzhong, an Eastern instrument having clapperless bells that are struck with hammers
* Italian bell ringing
* Electronic carillon
* Full circle ringing
** Bolognese bell ringing
** Change ringing
** Veronese bell ringing
* Russian Orthodox bell ringing

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Rombouts, Luc. Article &#x27;Carillon&#x27;, The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, Second Edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2000, part 5, pp. 128–134. 
* 

===Magazines and journals===
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Internet===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* English-speaking carillon organizations
** World Carillon Federation
** Carillon Society of Britain and Ireland
** Carillon Society of Australia
** The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America
* North American Carillon School
* Short educational video about the carillon from the World Carillon Federation
* Short video tutorial on composing for the carillon
* Tutorial website on arranging for the carillon
* (Carillon museum in the Netherlands)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="2" end="10" title="Carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198871" start="16" end="45" title="pitched percussion instrument" label="pitched percussion instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q901207" start="68" end="76" title="musical keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="105" end="109" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308314" start="126" end="130" title="Bellfounding" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660564" start="134" end="140" title="Bell metal" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="172" end="177" title="Musical tuning" label="tuned"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="181" end="196" title="Chromatic scale" label="chromatic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758965" start="345" end="351" title="Pedal keyboard" label="pedals"/>
<link wikidata="Q200334" start="390" end="400" title="bell tower" label="bell tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099323" start="863" end="868" title="chime (bell instrument)" label="chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1308" end="1321" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="1368" end="1386" title="French Netherlands" label="French Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1454" end="1468" title="Jacob van Eyck" label="Jacob van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q141451" start="1477" end="1492" title="Hemony brothers" label="Hemony brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1608" end="1625" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1691" end="1696" title="First World War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1701" end="1717" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1753" end="1759" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q750675" start="1775" end="1808" title="Belfries of Belgium and France" label="56 belfries in Belgium and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1814" end="1833" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="1887" end="1915" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608841" start="1971" end="2000" title="List of carillons" label="about 700 carillons worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q113141016" start="2383" end="2411" title="List of carillons in the United States" label="located in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="2639" end="2647" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2712" end="2722" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q626035" start="3308" end="3320" title="glockenspiel" label="glockenspiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="3688" end="3717" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404524" start="4030" end="4048" title="gender inclusivity" label="gender inclusivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="4273" end="4292" title="keyboard instrument" label="keyboard instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="4377" end="4382" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631948" start="4386" end="4397" title="pedal piano" label="pedal piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978691" start="4466" end="4472" title="manual (music)" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q202021" start="4539" end="4548" title="chromatic scale" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702413" start="4601" end="4609" title="Diatonic scale" label="diatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="4838" end="4844" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758965" start="4879" end="4893" title="pedal keyboard" label="pedal keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="5911" end="5915" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q376793" start="6272" end="6282" title="turnbuckle" label="turnbuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032728" start="7090" end="7110" title="Westminster Quarters" label="Westminster Quarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280486" start="7917" end="7937" title="percussion idiophone" label="percussion idiophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q496327" start="7946" end="7962" title="Hornbostel–Sachs" label="Hornbostel–Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660564" start="8082" end="8093" title="bell bronze" label="bell bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558427" start="8166" end="8175" title="Acoustic resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="8411" end="8419" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308314" start="8612" end="8623" title="Bellfounder" label="Bellfounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q858576" start="8670" end="8676" title="Musical tuning" label="tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711875" start="8695" end="8706" title="minor third" label="minor third"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8843" end="8859" title="Bell#Major third bell" label="major third bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="8998" end="9003" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q846648" start="9080" end="9100" title="meantone temperament" label="meantone temperament"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="9184" end="9201" title="equal temperament" label="equal temperament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9223" end="9236" title="dynamic range#Music" label="dynamic range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9490" end="9501" title="List of pipe organs#The largest pipe organs in the world" label="pipe organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156586" start="9785" end="9801" title="Riverside Church" label="Riverside Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950133" start="9828" end="9835" title="bourdon (bell)" label="bourdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042979" start="10086" end="10091" title="range (music)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099323" start="10407" end="10412" title="chime (bell instrument)" label="chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361058" start="11241" end="11258" title="Kirk in the Hills" label="Kirk in the Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q885355" start="11282" end="11308" title="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan" label="Bloomfield Hills, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20921" start="11341" end="11348" title="Daejeon" label="Daejeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q118819" start="11476" end="11481" title="pitch (music)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q843813" start="11615" end="11616" title="C (music)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q217306" start="11658" end="11680" title="transposing instrument" label="transposing instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028629" start="11817" end="11831" title="perfect fourth" label="perfect fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267651" start="12098" end="12099" title="C-sharp (musical note)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q633464" start="12104" end="12105" title="E-flat (musical note)" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418258" start="12487" end="12488" title="B-flat (musical note)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q17442397" start="12506" end="12518" title="major second" label="major second"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="12721" end="12732" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12780" end="12793" title="swinging bell" label="swinging bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="13291" end="13300" title="chronicle" label="chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="13319" end="13326" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q215548" start="13443" end="13449" title="jester" label="jester"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121" start="13455" end="13460" title="Aalst, Belgium" label="Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="13478" end="13485" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137941" start="13607" end="13617" title="escapement" label="escapement"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="13633" end="13649" title="mechanical clock" label="mechanical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q853854" start="13678" end="13689" title="clock tower" label="clock tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q194173" start="13718" end="13729" title="water clock" label="water clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q199301" start="13764" end="13769" title="Clock face" label="faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480017" start="13885" end="13899" title="striking clock" label="striking clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456667" start="14263" end="14283" title="Clock chime" label="play simple melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752664" start="14372" end="14392" title="Oudenaarde Town Hall" label="Oudenaarde Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="14490" end="14503" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="14550" end="14568" title="French Netherlands" label="French Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308314" start="14653" end="14665" title="bellfounding" label="bellfounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q157100" start="15003" end="15022" title="Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy" label="Margaret of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15027" end="15055" title="Holy Roman emperor Charles V" label="Holy Roman emperor Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15361" end="15373" title="Vanden Gheyn" label="Vanden Gheyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q141451" start="15656" end="15682" title="Pieter and François Hemony" label="Pieter and François Hemony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15687" end="15701" title="Jacob van Eyck" label="Jacob van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926655" start="15817" end="15835" title="Blind musician" label="blind carillonneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="15839" end="15846" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535" start="16303" end="16310" title="Zutphen" label="Zutphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="16870" end="16887" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="16990" end="17010" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="17027" end="17043" title="United Provinces (Low Countries)" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="17585" end="17610" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q10781974" start="17751" end="17769" title="grandfather clocks" label="grandfather clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q849813" start="17774" end="17786" title="pocket watch" label="pocket watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="17919" end="17931" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458157" start="18084" end="18096" title="chromaticism" label="chromaticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151149" start="18334" end="18347" title="Schott frères" label="Schott frères"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18355" end="18376" title="Matthias Vanden Gheyn" label="Matthias Vanden Gheyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q461406" start="18799" end="18812" title="change ringer" label="change ringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="18817" end="18822" title="canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902232" start="19012" end="19031" title="John William Taylor" label="John William Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260315" start="19136" end="19147" title="John Taylor &amp;amp; Co" label="his foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="19302" end="19310" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296369" start="19321" end="19330" title="Jef Denyn" label="Jef Denyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19563" end="19591" title="St. Rumbold&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Rumbold&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="19862" end="19869" title="Dynamics (music)" label="dynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064632" start="19908" end="19915" title="tremolo" label="tremolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25752963" start="20584" end="20603" title="William Gorham Rice" label="William Gorham Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="20660" end="20676" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="20701" end="20710" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054700" start="21309" end="21324" title="rape of Belgium" label="rape of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="21691" end="21705" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21710" end="21733" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2279602" start="21834" end="21877" title="Royal Carillon School &amp;quot;Jef Denyn&amp;quot;" label="Royal Carillon School &amp;quot;Jef Denyn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659344" start="21902" end="21927" title="Canadian military history" label="Canadian military history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21972" end="22000" title="Allied Powers of World War I" label="Allied Powers of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="22005" end="22020" title="Allied Powers of World War II" label="of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="22599" end="22608" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22733" end="22747" title="Percival Price" label="Percival Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533602" start="22778" end="22789" title="Peace Tower" label="Peace Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331684" start="22807" end="22819" title="repatriating" label="repatriating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825295" start="23505" end="23531" title="Metropolitan United Church" label="Metropolitan United Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="23535" end="23551" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q62675882" start="23603" end="23624" title="Mary Mesquita Dahlmer" label="Mary Mesquita Dahlmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715802" start="23650" end="23680" title="Our Lady of Good Voyage Church (Gloucester, Massachusetts)" label="Our Lady of Good Voyage Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49156" start="23684" end="23709" title="Gloucester, Massachusetts" label="Gloucester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982681" start="23802" end="23845" title="The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America" label="The Guild of Carillonneurs in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="23861" end="23876" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="23880" end="23895" title="Ottawa, Ontario" label="Ottawa, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="24180" end="24200" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180672" start="24209" end="24222" title="Ronald Barnes (carillonist)" label="Ronald Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="24690" end="24696" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q750675" start="24708" end="24733" title="Belfries of Belgium and France" label="32 bell towers in Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="24739" end="24758" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q223927" start="24905" end="24913" title="Gembloux" label="Gembloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="24989" end="25017" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144330" start="25240" end="25261" title="Welcome to the Sticks" label="Welcome to the Sticks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25297" end="25313" title="List of highest-grossing films in France#French productions" label="highest-grossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548801" start="25385" end="25413" title="St Colman&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Cobh" label="St. Coleman&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="25417" end="25421" title="Cobh" label="Cobh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="25454" end="25470" title="Irish government" label="Irish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003283" start="25675" end="25691" title="organ repertoire" label="organ repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="25804" end="25814" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q201405" start="25892" end="25903" title="Renaissance music" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8361" start="25914" end="25926" title="Baroque music" label="Baroque eras"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="26162" end="26173" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q107304915" start="26234" end="26260" title="De Gruytters carillon book" label="De Gruytters carillon book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="26505" end="26509" title="Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q164475" start="26511" end="26518" title="Arcangelo Corelli" label="Corelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q50186" start="26520" end="26528" title="François Couperin" label="Couperin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="26530" end="26536" title="Handel" label="Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="26538" end="26544" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="26550" end="26557" title="Vivaldi" label="Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212148" start="26671" end="26678" title="prelude (music)" label="prelude"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092494" start="26862" end="26889" title="Instrumental idiom" label="idiomatic to the instrument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27211" end="27221" title="Léon Henry" label="Léon Henry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27274" end="27286" title="Jef van Hoof" label="Jef van Hoof"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27839" end="27857" title="Roy Hamlin Johnson" label="Roy Hamlin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325245" start="27967" end="27982" title="octatonic scale" label="octatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="28033" end="28044" title="masterpiece" label="masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018558" start="28240" end="28251" title="John Pozdro" label="John Pozdro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28656" end="28673" title="G. Schirmer, Inc." label="G. Schirmer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q60450" start="28704" end="28729" title="Curtis Institute of Music" label="Curtis Institute of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q216870" start="28739" end="28752" title="Samuel Barber" label="Samuel Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q270662" start="28754" end="28772" title="Gian Carlo Menotti" label="Gian Carlo Menotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="28778" end="28787" title="Nino Rota" label="Nino Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="28922" end="28938" title="publishing house" label="publishing house"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203163" start="28997" end="29025" title="Anton Brees Carillon Library" label="Anton Brees Carillon Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q891197" start="29045" end="29062" title="Bok Tower Gardens" label="Bok Tower Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647959" start="29066" end="29085" title="Lake Wales, Florida" label="Lake Wales, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="29182" end="29204" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29215" end="29225" title="Tiffany Ng" label="Tiffany Ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033233" start="29282" end="29294" title="Bibliographic index" label="bibliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="29307" end="29323" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q212024" start="29458" end="29468" title="spirituals" label="spirituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="29636" end="29647" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q48270" start="29653" end="29663" title="non-binary" label="non-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891097" start="29810" end="29827" title="gender inequality" label="gender inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="29979" end="29986" title="recital" label="recital"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="29991" end="29998" title="concert" label="concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248423" start="30383" end="30390" title="Concert program" label="program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="30462" end="30472" title="livestream" label="livestream"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="30907" end="30911" title="duet" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="31003" end="31012" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="31015" end="31020" title="Concert band" label="bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="31032" end="31041" title="Musical ensemble" label="ensembles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623380" start="32583" end="32602" title="LUCA School of Arts" label="LUCA School of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="32606" end="32612" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="32632" end="32652" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422926" start="32678" end="32704" title="Utrecht School of the Arts" label="Utrecht School of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q992" start="32708" end="32718" title="Amersfoort" label="Amersfoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="33253" end="33287" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="33293" end="33332" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="33338" end="33358" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="33364" end="33385" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q631066" start="33451" end="33469" title="Clemson University" label="Clemson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="33471" end="33489" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="33491" end="33512" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="33544" end="33564" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q782369" start="33579" end="33585" title="Course credit" label="credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047400" start="33887" end="33909" title="Yale Memorial Carillon" label="Yale Memorial Carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955280" start="33965" end="33982" title="Music competition" label="Music competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q121069415" start="34040" end="34065" title="Queen Fabiola Competition" label="Queen Fabiola Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="34333" end="34345" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608841" start="34965" end="35005" title="List of carillons" label="about 700 existing traditional carillons"/>
<link wikidata="Q62669701" start="36129" end="36142" title="Nora Johnston" label="Nora Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099329" start="36267" end="36276" title="chime bar" label="chime bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125867" start="36382" end="36401" title="radio documentaries" label="radio documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36888" end="36902" title="Cast in Bronze" label="Cast in Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q133722" start="37188" end="37197" title="Bianzhong" label="Bianzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358336" start="37300" end="37319" title="Electronic carillon" label="Electronic carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003256" start="37322" end="37341" title="Full circle ringing" label="Full circle ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651788" start="37345" end="37367" title="Bolognese bell ringing" label="Bolognese bell ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q461406" start="37371" end="37385" title="Change ringing" label="Change ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651789" start="37389" end="37410" title="Veronese bell ringing" label="Veronese bell ringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382101" start="37413" end="37442" title="Russian Orthodox bell ringing" label="Russian Orthodox bell ringing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87446" wikidata="Q475689" url="?curid=87446" title="Parliament of Canada">
<text>The Parliament of Canada () is the federal legislature of Canada, seated at Parliament Hill in Ottawa, and is composed of three parts: the King, the Senate, and the House of Commons. By constitutional convention, the House of Commons is dominant, with the Senate rarely opposing its will. The Senate reviews legislation from a less partisan standpoint and may initiate certain bills. The monarch or his representative, normally the governor general, provides royal assent to make bills into law. According to Section 16 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the official languages of the parliament are English and French.

The governor general, on behalf of the monarch, summons and appoints the 105 senators on the advice of the prime minister, while each of the 338 members of the House of Commons – called members of Parliament (MPs) – represents an electoral district, commonly referred to as a &quot;riding&quot;, and is elected by Canadian voters residing in the riding. The governor general also summons and calls together the House of Commons, and may prorogue or dissolve Parliament, in order to either end a parliamentary session or call a general election. The governor general also delivers the throne speech at the opening of each new Parliament (the monarch occasionally has done so, instead of the governor general, when visiting Canada).

The current Parliament, summoned by Governor General Mary Simon in November 2021, is the 44th Parliament since Confederation in 1867. On January 6, 2025, the Parliament was prorogued by Simon following prime minister Justin Trudeau&#x27;s request to do so and will remain suspended until March 24.

==Composition==
The body consists of the King of Canada, represented by a viceroy, the governor general; an upper house, the Senate; and a lower house, the House of Commons. Each element has its own officers and organization. Each has a distinct role, but work in conjunction within the legislative process. This format was inherited from the United Kingdom and is a near-identical copy of the Parliament at Westminster, the greatest differences stemming from situations unique to Canada, such as the impermanent nature of the monarch&#x27;s residency in the country and the lack of a peerage to form the upper chamber.

Only those who sit in the House of Commons are usually called members of Parliament (MPs); the term is not usually applied to senators (except in legislation, such as the &quot;Parliament of Canada Act&quot;), even though the Senate is a part of Parliament. Though legislatively less powerful, senators take higher positions in the national order of precedence. No individual may serve in more than one chamber at the same time.

===Monarch===
The sovereign&#x27;s place in the legislature, formally known as the King-in-Parliament, is defined by the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;, and various conventions. Neither he nor his viceroy, however, participates in the legislative process save for signifying the King&#x27;s approval to a bill passed by both houses of Parliament, known as the granting of Royal Assent, which is necessary for a bill to be enacted as law. All federal bills thus begin with the phrase &quot;Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows ...&quot; and, as such, the Crown is immune from acts of Parliament unless expressed otherwise in the act itself. The governor general will normally perform the task of granting Royal Assent, though the monarch may also do so, at the request of either the Cabinet or the viceroy, who may defer assent to the sovereign as per the constitution.

As both the monarch and his or her representatives are traditionally barred from the House of Commons, any parliamentary ceremonies in which they are involved take place in the Senate chamber. The upper and lower houses do, however, each contain a mace, which indicates the authority of the King-in-Parliament and the privilege granted to that body by him, both bearing a crown at their apex. The original mace for the Senate was that used in the Legislative Council of the Province of Canada after 1849, while that of the House of Commons was inherited from the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada, first used in 1845. Following the burning of the Centre Block on 3 February 1916, the City of London, England, donated a replacement, which is still used today. The temporary mace, made of wood, and used until the new one arrived from the United Kingdom in 1917, is still carried into the Senate each 3 February. The Senate&#x27;s 1.6-metre-long mace comprises brass and gold. The Senate may not sit if its mace is not in the chamber; it typically sits on the table with the crown facing the throne, though it may, during certain ceremonies, be held by the mace bearer, standing adjacent to the governor general or monarch in the Senate.

Members of the two houses of Parliament must also express their loyalty to the sovereign and defer to his authority, as the Oath of Allegiance must be sworn by all new parliamentarians before they may take their seats. Further, the official opposition is formally called His Majesty&#x27;s Loyal Opposition, to signify that, though they may be opposed to the incumbent Cabinet&#x27;s policies, they remain dedicated to the apolitical Crown.

=== Senate ===
The upper house of the Parliament of Canada, the Senate (), is a group of 105 individuals appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister; all those appointed must, per the constitution, be a minimum of 30 years old, be a subject of the monarch, and own property with a net worth of at least $4,000, in addition to owning land worth no less than $4,000 within the province the candidate seeks to represent. Senators served for life until 1965, when a constitutional amendment imposed a mandatory retirement age of 75. Senators may, however, resign their seats prior to that mark, and can lose their position should they fail to attend two consecutive sessions of Parliament.

The principle underlying the Senate&#x27;s composition is equality amongst Canada&#x27;s geographic regions (called Divisions in the Constitution): 24 for Ontario, 24 for Quebec, 24 for the Maritimes (10 for Nova Scotia, 10 for New Brunswick, and four for Prince Edward Island), and 24 for the Western provinces (six each for Manitoba, British Columbia, Saskatchewan, and Alberta). Additionally, senators are appointed from two geographic areas not part of any senatorial division. Newfoundland and Labrador (since 1949 the &quot;newest&quot; province, although &quot;oldest&quot; English settlement), is represented by six senators. Since 1975 each of Canada&#x27;s territories is represented by 1 senator—the Northwest Territories, Yukon, and (since its formation in 1999) Nunavut. An additional 4 or 8 senators may be appointed by the governor general, provided the approval of the King is secured and the four divisions are equally represented. This power has been employed once since 1867: to ensure the passage of the bill establishing the Goods and Services Tax, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney advised Queen Elizabeth II to appoint extra senators in 1990. This results in a temporary maximum number of senators of 113, which must through attrition return to its normal number of 105.

===House of Commons===
The elected component of the Canadian Parliament is the House of Commons (), with each member chosen by a plurality of voters in each of the country&#x27;s federal electoral districts, or ridings. To run for one of the 338 seats in the lower house, an individual must be at least 18 years old. Each member holds office until Parliament is dissolved, after which they may seek re-election. The ridings are regularly reorganized according to the results of each decennial national census; however, the &quot;senatorial clause&quot; of the &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot; guarantees each province at least as many MPs as it has senators, and the &quot;grandfather clause&quot; permits each province as many MPs as it had in either 1976 or 1985. The existence of this legislation has pushed the size of the House of Commons above the required minimum of 282 seats.

==Jurisdiction==
The powers of the Parliament of Canada are limited by the constitution, which divides legislative abilities between the federal and provincial legislatures; in general, provincial legislatures may only pass laws relating to topics explicitly reserved for them by the constitution (such as education, provincial officers, municipal government, charitable institutions, and &quot;matters of a merely local or private nature&quot;) while any matter not under the exclusive authority of the provincial legislatures is within the scope of the federal Parliament&#x27;s power. Thus, Parliament alone can pass laws relating to, among other things, the postal service, census, military, navigation and shipping, fishing, currency, banking, weights and measures, bankruptcy, copyrights, patents, First Nations, and naturalization. In some cases, however, the jurisdictions of the federal and provincial parliaments may be more vague. For instance, the federal parliament regulates marriage and divorce in general, but the solemnization of marriage is regulated only by the provincial legislatures. Other examples include the powers of both the federal and provincial parliaments to impose taxes, borrow money, punish crimes, and regulate agriculture.

The powers of Parliament are also limited by the &quot;Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms&quot;, though most of its provisions can be overridden by use of the notwithstanding clause. Such clause, however, has never been used by the federal parliament, though it has been employed by some provincial legislatures. Laws violating any part of the constitution are invalid and may be ruled unconstitutional by the courts.

==Officers==
Each of Parliament&#x27;s two chambers is presided over by a speaker; that for the Senate is a member appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister, while the equivalent for the House of Commons is a member of Parliament, who is elected by the other members of that body. In general, the powers of the latter are greater than those of the former. Following the British model, the upper chamber is essentially self-regulating, but the lower chamber is controlled by the chair, in a majoritarian model that gives great power and authority to the chair. In 1991, however, the powers of the speaker of the Senate were expanded, which reorganized the balance of power to be closer to the framework of the Commons.

The usher of the black rod of the Senate of Canada is the most senior protocol position in Parliament, being the personal messenger to the legislature of the sovereign and governor general. The usher is also a floor officer of the Senate responsible for security in that chamber, as well as for protocol, administrative, and logistical details of important events taking place on Parliament Hill, such as the Speech from the Throne, Royal Assent ceremonies, state funerals, or the investiture of a new governor general.

Other officers of Parliament include the auditor general, chief electoral officer, official languages commissioner, privacy commissioner, information commissioner, conflict of interest and ethics commissioner, public sector integrity commissioner, and commissioner of lobbying. These individuals are appointed by either one or both houses, to which they report through the speaker of that house. They are sometimes referred to as &quot;Agents of Parliament&quot;. Another key official is the parliamentary librarian, a position established in 1871 under the &quot;Library of Parliament Act&quot;, charged with directing the Library of Parliament.

==Term==
The &quot;Constitution Act, 1867&quot;, outlines that the governor general alone is responsible for summoning Parliament, though it remains the monarch&#x27;s prerogative to prorogue and dissolve the legislature, after which the writs for a general federal election are usually dropped by the governor general at Rideau Hall. Upon completion of the election, the governor general, on the advice of the prime minister, then issues a royal proclamation summoning Parliament to assemble. On the date given, new MPs are sworn in and then are, along with returning MPs, called to the Senate, where they are instructed to elect their speaker and return to the House of Commons to do so before adjourning.
The new parliamentary session is marked by the opening of Parliament, a ceremony where a range of topics can be addressed in a Speech From the Throne given by the monarch, the governor general, or a royal delegate. The usher of the black rod invites MPs to these events, knocking on the doors of the lower house that have been slammed shut—a symbolic arrangement designed to illustrate the Commons&#x27; right to deny entry to anyone, including even the monarch (but with an exception for royal messengers). Once the MPs are gathered behind the Bar of the Senate—save for the prime minister, the only MP permitted into the Senate proper to sit near the throne dais—the House of Commons speaker presents to the monarch or governor general, and formally claims the rights and privileges of the House of Commons; and then the speaker of the Senate, on behalf of the Crown, replies in acknowledgement after the sovereign or viceroy takes their seat on the throne. The speech is then read aloud. It can outline the program of the Cabinet for the upcoming legislative session, as well as other matters chosen by the speaker.

A parliamentary session lasts until a prorogation, after which, without ceremony, both chambers of the legislature cease all legislative business until the governor general issues another proclamation calling for a new session to begin; except for the election of a speaker for the House of Commons and his or her claiming of that house&#x27;s privileges, the same procedures for the opening of Parliament are again followed. After a number of such sessions—having ranged from one to seven—a Parliament comes to an end via dissolution, and a general election typically follows. Subject to the governor general&#x27;s discretion, general elections are held four years after the previous on the third Monday in October or, on the recommendation of the chief electoral officer, the following Tuesday or Monday. The governor general may dissolve Parliament and call a general election outside of these fixed dates, conventionally on the advice of the prime minister, which may be preceded by a successful motion of no confidence. The timing of such dissolutions may be politically motivated.

==Procedure==
Both houses determine motions by voice vote; the presiding officer puts the question and, after listening to shouts of &quot;yea&quot; and &quot;nay&quot; from the members, announces which side is victorious. This decision by the Speaker is final, unless a recorded vote is demanded by members—requiring at least two in the Senate and five in the House of Commons. Members of both houses vote by rising in their places to be counted; the speaker of the Senate is permitted to vote on a motion or bill—though does so irregularly, in the interest of impartiality—and, if there is no majority, the motion is defeated. In the Commons, however, the speaker cannot vote, unless to break a tie. The speaker customarily votes in favour of the status quo. The constitution establishes the quorums to be 15 senators in the upper house and 20 members in the lower house, the speaker of each body being counted within the tally.

Voting can thus take three possible forms: whenever possible, leaving the matter open for future consideration and allowing for further discussion by the house; when no further discussion is possible, taking into account that the matter could somehow be brought back in future and be decided by a majority in the house; or, leaving a bill in its existing form rather than having it amended. For example, during the vote on the 2005 budget, which was considered a vote of confidence, the speaker of the House of Commons cast the tie-breaking vote during the second reading, moving in favour of the budget and allowing its passage. If the vote on the third reading had again been tied, the speaker would have been expected to vote against the bill, bringing down the government.

Simultaneous interpretation for both official languages, English and French, is provided at all times during sessions of both houses.

==Legislative functions==
Laws, known in their draft form as bills, may be introduced by any member of either house. However, most bills originate in the House of Commons, of which most are put forward by ministers of the Crown, making them government bills, as opposed to private members&#x27; bills or private senators&#x27; bills, which are launched by MPs and senators, respectively, who are not in cabinet. Draft legislation may also be categorized as public bills, if they apply to the general public, or private bills, if they concern a particular person or limited group of people. Each bill then goes through a series of stages in each chamber, beginning with the first reading. It is not, however, until the bill&#x27;s second reading that the general principles of the proposed law are debated; though rejection is a possibility, such is not common for government bills.

Next, the bill is sent by the house where it is being debated to one of several committees. The Standing Orders outline the general mandate for all committees, allowing them to review: bills as they pertain to relevant departments; the program and policy plans, as well as the projected expenditures, and the effectiveness of the implementation thereof, for the same departments; and the analysis of the performance of those departments. Most often, bills end up before a standing committee, which is a body of members or senators who specialize in a particular subject (such as foreign affairs), and who may hear testimony from ministers and experts, debate the bill, and recommend amendments. The bill may also be committed to the Committee of the Whole, a body consisting of, as the name suggests, all the members of the chamber in question. Finally, the bill could be referred to an &quot;ad hoc&quot; committee established solely to review the piece of legislation in question. Each chamber has their own procedure for dealing with this, with the Senate establishing special committees that function like most other committees, and the House of Commons establishing legislative committees, the chair of the latter being appointed by the speaker of the House of Commons, and is normally one of his deputies. Whichever committee is used, any amendments proposed by the committee are considered by the whole house in the report stage. Furthermore, additional amendments not proposed by the committee may also be made.

After the report stage (or, if the committee made no amendments to the bill, immediately after the committee stage), the final phase of the bill—the third reading—occurs, at which time further amendments are not permitted in the House of Commons, but are allowed in the Senate. If it passes the third reading, the bill is sent to the other house of Parliament, where it passes through the same stages; amendments made by the second chamber require the assent of the original house in order to stand part of the final bill. If one house passes amendments that the other will not agree to, and the two houses cannot resolve their disagreements, the bill fails.

Once the bill is passed in identical form by both houses, it is presented for Royal Assent; in theory, the governor general has three options: grant Royal Assent, thereby making the bill into law; withhold Royal Assent, thereby vetoing the bill; or reserve the bill for the signification of the King&#x27;s pleasure, which allows the sovereign to personally grant or withhold assent. If the governor general does grant Royal Assent, the monarch may, within two years, disallow the bill, thus annulling the law in question. In the federal sphere, no bill has ever been denied royal approval.

In conformity with the British model, only the House of Commons may originate bills for the imposition of taxes or for the appropriation of Crown funds. The constitutional amendment procedure does make provision for the Commons overcoming an otherwise-required Senate resolution in most cases. Otherwise, the theoretical power of both houses over bills is equal, with the assent of each being required for passage. In practice, however, the House of Commons is dominant, with the Senate rarely exercising its powers in a way that opposes the will of the democratically elected house.

==Relationship with the executive==
The federal government consists of the monarch (represented by the governor general)-in-council, which is a collection of ministers of the Crown appointed by the governor general to direct the use of executive powers. Per the tenets of responsible government, these individuals are almost always drawn from Parliament, and are predominantly from the House of Commons, the only body to which ministers are held accountable, typically during Question Period, wherein ministers are obliged to answer questions posed by members of the opposition. Hence, the person who can command the confidence of the lower chamber—usually the leader of the party with the most seats therein—is typically appointed as prime minister. Should that person not hold a seat in the House of Commons, the prime minister will, by convention, seek election to one at the earliest possible opportunity; frequently, in such situations, a junior member of Parliament who holds a safe seat will resign to allow the prime minister to run for that riding in a by-election. If no party holds a majority, it is customary for the governor general to summon a minority government or coalition government, depending on which the commons will support.

The lower house may attempt to bring down the government by either rejecting a motion of confidence—generally initiated by a minister to reinforce the Cabinet&#x27;s support in the commons—or by passing a motion of no confidence—introduced by the opposition to display its distrust of the Cabinet. Important bills that form part of the government&#x27;s agenda will usually be considered matters of confidence; the budget is always a matter of confidence. Where a government has lost the confidence of the House of Commons, the prime minister is obliged to either resign (allowing the governor general to appoint the leader of the Opposition to the office) or seek the dissolution of Parliament and the call of a general election. A precedent, however, was set in 1968, when the government of Lester B. Pearson unexpectedly lost a confidence vote but was allowed to remain in power with the mutual consent of the leaders of the other parties.

In practice, the House of Commons&#x27; scrutiny of the government is quite weak in comparison to the equivalent chamber in other countries using the Westminster system. With the plurality voting system used in parliamentary elections tending to provide the governing party with a large majority, and a party system that gives leaders strict control over their caucus (to the point that MPs may be expelled from their parties for voting against the instructions of party leaders), there is often limited need to compromise with other parties. Additionally, Canada has fewer MPs, a higher turnover rate of MPs after each election, and an Americanized system for selecting political party leaders, leaving them accountable to the party membership rather than caucus, as is the case in the United Kingdom; John Robson of the &quot;National Post&quot; opined that Canada&#x27;s parliament had become a body akin to the American Electoral College, &quot;its sole and ceremonial role to confirm the executive in power.&quot;

At the end of the 20th century and into the 21st, analysts—such as Jeffrey Simpson, Donald Savoie, and John Gomery—argued that both Parliament and the Cabinet had become eclipsed by prime ministerial power. Thus, defeats of majority governments on issues of confidence are very rare. In contrast, a minority government is more volatile, and is more likely to fall due to loss of confidence. The last prime ministers to lose confidence votes were Stephen Harper in 2011, Paul Martin in 2005 and Joe Clark in 1979, all involving minority governments. The passage of the &quot;Reform Act&quot; and resulting changes to the &quot;Parliament of Canada Act&quot;, in 2015, were a response to this trend and an attempt to increase the power and independence of MPs.

==Privileges==
Parliament possesses a number of privileges, collectively and accordingly known as parliamentary privilege, each house being the guardian and administrator of its own set of rights. Parliament itself determines the extent of parliamentary privilege, each house overseeing its own affairs, but the constitution bars it from conferring any &quot;exceeding those at the passing of such an Act held, enjoyed, and exercised by the [British House of] Commons... and by the Members thereof.&quot;

The foremost dispensation held by both houses of Parliament is that of freedom of speech in debate; nothing said within the chambers may be questioned by any court or other institution outside of Parliament. In particular, a member of either house cannot be sued for slander based on words uttered in the course of parliamentary proceedings, the only restraint on debate being set by the standing orders of each house. Further, MPs and senators are immune to arrest in civil (but not criminal) cases, from jury service and attendance in courts as witnesses. They may, however, be disciplined by their colleagues for breach of the rules, including contempt of Parliament—disobedience of its authority; for example, giving false testimony before a parliamentary committee—and breaches of its own privileges.

The Canadian Heraldic Authority, on 15 April 2008, granted the Parliament of Canada, as an institution, a heraldic achievement composed of symbols of the three elements of Parliament: the escutcheon of the Royal Arms of Canada with the maces of the House of Commons and Senate crossed behind.

The budget for the Parliament of Canada for the 2010 fiscal year was $583,567,000.

==History==
Following the cession of New France to the United Kingdom in the 1763 Treaty of Paris, Canada was governed according to the Royal Proclamation issued by King George III in that same year. To this was added the Quebec Act, by which the power to make ordinances was granted to a governor-in-council, both the governor and council being appointed by the British monarch in Westminster, on the advice of his or her ministers there. In 1791, the Province of Quebec was divided into Upper and Lower Canada, each with an elected legislative assembly, an appointed legislative council, and a governor, mirroring the parliamentary structure in Britain.

During the War of 1812, American troops set fire to the buildings of the Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada in York (now Toronto). In 1841, the British government united the two Canadas into the Province of Canada, with a single legislature composed of, again, an assembly, council, and governor general; the 84 members of the lower chamber were equally divided among the two former provinces, though Lower Canada had a higher population. The governor still held significant personal influence over Canadian affairs until 1848, when responsible government was implemented in Canada.

The actual site of Parliament shifted on a regular basis: From 1841 to 1844, it sat in Kingston, where the present Kingston General Hospital now stands; from 1844 until the 1849 fire that destroyed the building, the legislature was in Montreal; and, after a few years of alternating between Toronto and Quebec City, the legislature was finally moved to Ottawa in 1856, Queen Victoria having chosen that city as Canada&#x27;s capital in 1857.

The modern-day Parliament of Canada came into existence in 1867, in which year the Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland passed the &quot;British North America Act, 1867&quot;, uniting the provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Canada—with the Province of Canada split into Quebec and Ontario—into a single federation called the Dominion of Canada. Though the form of the new federal legislature was again nearly identical to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, the decision to retain this model was made with heavy influence from the just-concluded American Civil War, which indicated to many Canadians the faults of the American federal system, with its relatively powerful states and a less powerful federal government. The &quot;British North America Act&quot; limited the powers of the provinces, providing that all subjects not explicitly delegated to them by that document remain within the authority of the Canadian Parliament, while simultaneously giving the provinces unique powers in certain agreed-upon areas of jurisdiction.

Full legislative autonomy was granted by the Statute of Westminster, 1931, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Though the statute allowed the Parliament of Canada to repeal or amend previously British laws as they applied to Canada, it did not permit amendment to Canada&#x27;s constitution, including the British North America Acts. Hence, whenever a constitutional amendment was sought by the Canadian Parliament, the enactment of a British law was necessary, though Canada&#x27;s consent was required. The Parliament of Canada was granted limited power to amend the constitution by a British Act of Parliament in 1949, but it was not permitted to affect the powers of provincial governments, the official positions of the English and French languages, rights of any class of persons with respect to schools, or the maximum five-year term of the legislature.

While her father, King George VI, had been the first Canadian monarch to grant royal assent in the legislature—doing so in 1939—Queen Elizabeth II was the first sovereign to deliver the speech from the throne. This event, in 1957, was the first time television cameras were allowed into the chambers of parliament, as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation broadcast the speech nation-wide.

The Canadian House of Commons and Senate last requested the Parliament of the United Kingdom to enact a constitutional amendment in 1982, in the form of the &quot;Canada Act 1982&quot; which included the &quot;Constitution Act, 1982&quot;. This legislation terminated the power of the British Parliament&#x27;s ability to legislate for Canada and the authority to amend the constitution was transferred to the Canadian House of Commons, the Senate, and the provincial legislative assemblies, acting jointly. Most amendments require the consent of the Senate, the House of Commons, and the legislative assemblies of two-thirds of the provinces representing a majority of the population; the unanimous consent of provincial legislative assemblies is required for certain amendments, including those affecting the sovereign, the governor general, the provincial lieutenant governors, the official status of the English and French languages, the Supreme Court of Canada, and the amending formulas themselves.
== See also ==

*Canadian Parliament Buildings
*Hansard
*Joint address (Canada)
*List of Canadian federal parliaments
*List of legislatures by country
*Politics of Canada
*Procedural officers and senior officials of the Parliament of Canada
*Records of members of the Parliament of Canada

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* House of Commons Table Research Branch. (2005). &quot;Précis of Procedure&quot;. 
* Thomas, Paul G. (2004). &quot;Parliament, Canadian.&quot;
* 
* 


== External links ==
*Canadian Governments Compared
*Open Parliament: MP vote and speech tracker – keep tabs on Parliament</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="4" end="24" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088188" start="35" end="42" title="Canadian federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="43" end="54" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="58" end="64" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589289" start="76" end="91" title="Parliament Hill" label="Parliament Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="95" end="101" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="139" end="143" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="149" end="155" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="165" end="181" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="186" end="211" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="432" end="448" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="459" end="471" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="527" end="566" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="613" end="620" title="Canadian English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075394" start="625" end="631" title="French language in Canada" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="727" end="733" title="Advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="741" end="755" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964890" start="820" end="841" title="Member of Parliament (Canada)" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="864" end="882" title="electoral district (Canada)" label="electoral district"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931237" start="1071" end="1079" title="Prorogation in Canada" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1083" end="1102" title="Dissolution of parliament#Canada" label="dissolve Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812889" start="1129" end="1150" title="parliamentary session" label="parliamentary session"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="1154" end="1177" title="Dropping the writ" label="call a general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="1218" end="1231" title="Speech from the throne" label="throne speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q108651352" start="1370" end="1388" title="44th Canadian Parliament" label="current Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780723" start="1419" end="1429" title="Mary Simon" label="Mary Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="1477" end="1490" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099714" start="1583" end="1597" title="Justin Trudeau" label="Justin Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="1706" end="1720" title="King of Canada" label="King of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="1739" end="1746" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="1752" end="1768" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="1773" end="1784" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="1790" end="1796" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="1804" end="1815" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1821" end="1837" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q221911" start="1952" end="1971" title="Parliamentary procedure" label="legislative process"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2008" end="2022" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="2059" end="2084" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament at Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="2250" end="2257" title="peerage" label="peerage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2348" end="2369" title="Members of Parliament#Canada" label="members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q117219528" start="2463" end="2487" title="Parliament of Canada Act" label="Parliament of Canada Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111069" start="2618" end="2646" title="Canadian order of precedence" label="national order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270153" start="2799" end="2817" title="King-in-Parliament" label="King-in-Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="2843" end="2865" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="Constitution Act, 1867"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2885" end="2896" title="Convention (norm)#Government" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="3092" end="3104" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="3361" end="3370" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="3593" end="3600" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3929" end="3933" title="Ceremonial mace#Canada" label="mace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444027" start="4128" end="4173" title="Legislative Council of the Province of Canada" label="Legislative Council of the Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444061" start="4244" end="4290" title="Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada" label="Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4326" end="4353" title="Centre Block#Great fire" label="burning of the Centre Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="4378" end="4392" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074464" start="5055" end="5073" title="Oath of Allegiance (Canada)" label="Oath of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015173" start="5163" end="5182" title="Official Opposition (Canada)" label="official opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354420" start="5202" end="5237" title="Loyal opposition" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Loyal Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="5392" end="5403" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="6241" end="6248" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="6257" end="6263" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="6276" end="6285" title="Maritimes" label="Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="6294" end="6305" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="6314" end="6327" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="6342" end="6362" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="6380" end="6397" title="Western Canada" label="Western provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="6412" end="6420" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6422" end="6438" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="6440" end="6452" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="6458" end="6465" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="6568" end="6593" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6648" end="6685" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador#The oldest European settlement in North America controversy" label="&amp;quot;oldest&amp;quot; English settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="6797" end="6818" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="6820" end="6825" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023" start="6861" end="6868" title="Nunavut" label="Nunavut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="7132" end="7154" title="Goods and Services Tax (Canada)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="7171" end="7185" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="7564" end="7583" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="electoral districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q375928" start="7636" end="7647" title="lower house" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7879" end="7885" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867136" start="8414" end="8437" title="Provincial Legislatures of Canada" label="provincial legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153777" start="8462" end="8474" title="Legislative Assembly" label="legislatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="8951" end="8959" title="Canadian Forces" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="9069" end="9082" title="Aboriginal people in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q841440" start="9088" end="9102" title="naturalization" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="9580" end="9619" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865565" start="9689" end="9711" title="Section Thirty-three of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="notwithstanding clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509428" start="9936" end="9946" title="Canadian court system" label="the courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="10023" end="10030" title="Speaker (politics)" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505705" start="10032" end="10051" title="Speaker of the Senate of Canada" label="that for the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506685" start="10145" end="10180" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (Canada)" label="equivalent for the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505705" start="10573" end="10594" title="Speaker of the Senate of Canada" label="speaker of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901924" start="10700" end="10746" title="Usher of the Black Rod (Canada)" label="usher of the black rod of the Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="11105" end="11127" title="Speech from the Throne" label="Speech from the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="11154" end="11167" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564227" start="11258" end="11273" title="Auditor General of Canada" label="auditor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096725" start="11275" end="11298" title="Chief Electoral Officer (Canada)" label="chief electoral officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q481371" start="11300" end="11331" title="Official Languages Commissioner" label="official languages commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q638154" start="11333" end="11353" title="Privacy Commissioner of Canada" label="privacy commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030692" start="11355" end="11379" title="Information Commissioner of Canada" label="information commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403450" start="11381" end="11425" title="Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner" label="conflict of interest and ethics commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257585" start="11427" end="11463" title="Public Sector Integrity Commissioner" label="public sector integrity commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152822" start="11469" end="11493" title="Commissioner of Lobbying" label="commissioner of lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758037" start="11590" end="11597" title="Speaker (politics)" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139000" start="11709" end="11732" title="Parliamentary Librarian of Canada" label="parliamentary librarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125633" start="11841" end="11862" title="Library of Parliament" label="Library of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12033" end="12044" title=":Royal prerogative" label="prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931237" start="12048" end="12056" title="Prorogation in Canada" label="prorogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="12061" end="12069" title="dissolution of Parliament" label="dissolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038380" start="12103" end="12108" title="Writ of election" label="writs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12115" end="12139" title="Elections in Canada#National elections" label="general federal election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12152" end="12183" title="Dropping the writ#Canada" label="dropped by the governor general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151874" start="12187" end="12198" title="Rideau Hall" label="Rideau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572600" start="12312" end="12324" title="proclamation" label="proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190774" start="12620" end="12641" title="Opening of the Canadian parliament" label="opening of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="12700" end="12722" title="Speech from the throne" label="Speech From the Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="13598" end="13605" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812889" start="13695" end="13716" title="Legislative session" label="parliamentary session"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="14216" end="14227" title="Dissolution of parliament" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096725" start="14443" end="14466" title="Chief Electoral Officer (Canada)" label="chief electoral officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="14694" end="14717" title="motion of no confidence" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q452237" start="14818" end="14825" title="Motion (parliamentary procedure)" label="motions"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147134" start="14829" end="14839" title="voice vote" label="voice vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="15531" end="15541" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="15576" end="15582" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604096" start="16141" end="16152" title="2005 Canadian federal budget" label="2005 budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="16177" end="16195" title="Motion of no confidence" label="vote of confidence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16271" end="16285" title="Reading (legislature)#Second reading" label="second reading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16363" end="16376" title="Reading (legislature)#Third reading" label="third reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="16505" end="16519" title="Language interpretation" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16549" end="16556" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="16561" end="16567" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="16688" end="16692" title="Bill (proposed law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="16832" end="16854" title="Minister of the Crown" label="ministers of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587581" start="16900" end="16927" title="private members&amp;#x27; bills" label="private members&amp;#x27; bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q876477" start="17138" end="17151" title="private bills" label="private bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="17300" end="17313" title="first reading" label="first reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="17357" end="17371" title="second reading" label="second reading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17982" end="18000" title="Committee#Standing committees" label="standing committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="18089" end="18104" title="foreign affairs" label="foreign affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153033" start="18243" end="18265" title="Committee of the Whole" label="Committee of the Whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="19180" end="19193" title="third reading" label="third reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="19769" end="19781" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q752940" start="19998" end="20006" title="At His Majesty&amp;#x27;s pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="20908" end="20926" title="Government of Canada" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="20943" end="20999" title="King-in-Council" label="monarch (represented by the governor general)-in-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="21104" end="21120" title="Executive (government)" label="executive powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="21140" end="21162" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271525" start="21344" end="21359" title="Question Period" label="Question Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398544" start="21852" end="21861" title="safe seat" label="safe seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="21930" end="21941" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112702" start="22026" end="22045" title="minority governments in Canada" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="22049" end="22069" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="22206" end="22216" title="Confidence and supply" label="confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506651" start="22734" end="22758" title="Leader of the Opposition (Canada)" label="leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q128604" start="22910" end="22927" title="Lester B. Pearson" label="Lester B. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="23211" end="23229" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="23240" end="23263" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="23976" end="24002" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="American Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176732" start="24148" end="24163" title="Jeffrey Simpson" label="Jeffrey Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198689" start="24165" end="24178" title="Donald Savoie" label="Donald Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181606" start="24184" end="24195" title="John Gomery" label="John Gomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="24527" end="24541" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128529" start="24551" end="24562" title="Paul Martin" label="Paul Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="24575" end="24584" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q111168858" start="24655" end="24665" title="Reform Act (Canada)" label="Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q117219528" start="24707" end="24731" title="Parliament of Canada Act" label="Parliament of Canada Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404273" start="24939" end="24962" title="parliamentary privilege" label="parliamentary privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="25418" end="25435" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="25614" end="25621" title="slander and libel" label="slander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358649" start="25994" end="26016" title="contempt of parliament" label="contempt of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="26158" end="26185" title="Canadian Heraldic Authority" label="Canadian Heraldic Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="26260" end="26280" title="coat of arms" label="heraldic achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="26342" end="26352" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41549" start="26360" end="26380" title="Arms of Canada" label="Royal Arms of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="26501" end="26512" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104069" start="26517" end="26518" title="Canadian dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="26569" end="26579" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="26587" end="26601" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="26609" end="26629" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="1763 Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="26668" end="26686" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="26697" end="26712" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q764479" start="26754" end="26764" title="Quebec Act" label="Quebec Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="26821" end="26840" title="Queen-in-Council" label="governor-in-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="27021" end="27026" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="27031" end="27043" title="Lower Canada" label="Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153777" start="27066" end="27086" title="legislative assembly" label="legislative assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994119" start="27101" end="27120" title="legislative council" label="legislative council"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="27200" end="27211" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="27213" end="27228" title="United States Army" label="American troops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27229" end="27237" title="Battle of York#Burning of York" label="set fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27245" end="27254" title="Ontario Legislative Building#History" label="buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518216" start="27262" end="27298" title="Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada" label="Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600811" start="27302" end="27306" title="York, Upper Canada" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="27312" end="27319" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="27386" end="27404" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365530" start="27420" end="27431" title="Parliament of the Province of Canada" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="27724" end="27746" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="27862" end="27870" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3145338" start="27890" end="27915" title="Kingston General Hospital" label="Kingston General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149831" start="27948" end="27985" title="Burning of the Parliament Buildings in Montreal" label="1849 fire that destroyed the building"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="28010" end="28018" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="28078" end="28089" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="28128" end="28134" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="28144" end="28158" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="28319" end="28362" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q868884" start="28374" end="28417" title="Constitution Act, 1867" label="&amp;quot;British North America Act, 1867&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="28444" end="28457" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="28459" end="28470" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="28522" end="28528" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="28533" end="28540" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="28577" end="28595" title="British Dominions" label="Dominion of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="28800" end="28818" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="28844" end="28853" title="Canadians" label="Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="28872" end="28880" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="29334" end="29362" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster, 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="30186" end="30195" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="30297" end="30309" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q787020" start="30349" end="30371" title="speech from the throne" label="speech from the throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="30485" end="30518" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q736882" start="30717" end="30732" title="Canada Act 1982" label="Canada Act 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="30764" end="30786" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153777" start="31143" end="31165" title="Legislative Assembly" label="legislative assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="31402" end="31433" title="Lieutenant Governor (Canada)" label="provincial lieutenant governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="31496" end="31519" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090999" start="31576" end="31605" title="Canadian Parliament Buildings" label="Canadian Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="31607" end="31614" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269483" start="31616" end="31638" title="Joint address (Canada)" label="Joint address (Canada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q59422137" start="31640" end="31676" title="List of Canadian federal parliaments" label="List of Canadian federal parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676242" start="31678" end="31709" title="List of legislatures by country" label="List of legislatures by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q276861" start="31711" end="31729" title="Politics of Canada" label="Politics of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247150" start="31731" end="31799" title="Procedural officers and senior officials of the Parliament of Canada" label="Procedural officers and senior officials of the Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126204" start="31801" end="31847" title="Records of members of the Parliament of Canada" label="Records of members of the Parliament of Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87447" wikidata="Q104813412" url="?curid=87447" title="Cumberland Games &amp; Diversions">
<text>Cumberland Games &amp; Diversions is an electronic publishing company specializing in indie roleplaying games and TrueType fonts.

==History==
In 1993, S. John Ross wrote a light-hearted role-playing game called &quot;Risus: The Anything RPG&quot;. Six years later, in 1999, he founded Cumberland Games &amp; Diversions to publish &quot;Risus&quot;, as well as the HexPaper mapping font. Ross uses it to publish indie role-playing games such as &quot;&quot;, assisted by his wife Sandra, and by freelance creators including friend and artist Dan Smith. 

Cumberland offers several commercial titles in multiple lines, including more than a dozen fonts called Sparks which produced simple paper models to be used as gaming miniatures. Other commercial lines include the &quot;All-Systems Library&quot; of rules-free resource books.

==Reception==
The website &quot;RPG Resource&quot; called Cumberland Games &amp; Diversions &quot;a shining example of how the Internet has opened up the games market to those with ideas and talent, but who do not have the resources, time or inclination to go into business in a big way... Here, S. John Ross shares RPGs and other goodies via PDF files, many being free downloads and others for a small charge.&quot;

==Publications==

===Roleplaying Games===

* Encounter Critical: A Science-Fiction Fantasy Role Play Game 
* Pokéthulhu Adventure Game 
* Risus: The Anything RPG

==References==
==External links==
* Cumberland website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104813412" start="0" end="33" title="Cumberland Games &amp;amp; Diversions" label="Cumberland Games &amp;amp; Diversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="92" end="109" title="roleplaying games" label="roleplaying games"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="114" end="122" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213743" start="152" end="164" title="S. John Ross (game designer)" label="S. John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154880" start="218" end="241" title="Risus" label="Risus: The Anything RPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214397" start="542" end="551" title="Dan Smith (artist)" label="Dan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1295" end="1355" title="Encounter Critical: A Science-Fiction Fantasy Role Play Game" label="Encounter Critical: A Science-Fiction Fantasy Role Play Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1359" end="1384" title="Pokéthulhu Adventure Game" label="Pokéthulhu Adventure Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154880" start="1388" end="1411" title="Risus" label="Risus: The Anything RPG"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87451" wikidata="Q1179247" url="?curid=87451" title="Amphibious">
<text>Amphibious means able to use either land or water. In particular it may refer to:
== Animals ==
* Amphibian, a vertebrate animal of the class Amphibia (many of which live on land and breed in water)
* Amphibious caterpillar
* Amphibious fish, a fish that is able to leave water for extended periods of time
* Amphibious insect, an insect which lives in the air or on land and breeds in water
* Amphibious rat (disambiguation)
* &quot;Scolopendra cataracta&quot;, a species of amphibious centipede

==Arts and media==
* &quot;Amphibious&quot; (2010 film), a thriller film
* &quot;Amphibious&quot; (2020 film), a drama film
* Amphibius (comics), a minor comic book character

==Technology==
* Amphibious aircraft, an aircraft capable of landing on either water or land
* Amphibious vehicle, a vehicle capable of being driven on both land and water
* Amphibious warfare, warfare carried out on both land and water

== See also ==
* Amphibian (disambiguation)
* Amphibia (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1179247" start="0" end="10" title="Amphibious" label="Amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="98" end="107" title="Amphibian" label="Amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191224" start="201" end="223" title="Amphibious caterpillar" label="Amphibious caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748197" start="226" end="241" title="Amphibious fish" label="Amphibious fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185481" start="309" end="326" title="Aquatic insect" label="Amphibious insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748199" start="394" end="425" title="Amphibious rat (disambiguation)" label="Amphibious rat (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25229927" start="434" end="455" title="Scolopendra cataracta" label="Scolopendra cataracta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614660" start="519" end="553" title="Amphibious (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;Amphibious&amp;quot; (2010 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85970954" start="573" end="607" title="Amphibious (2020 film)" label="&amp;quot;Amphibious&amp;quot; (2020 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330930" start="624" end="642" title="Amphibius (comics)" label="Amphibius (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="691" end="710" title="Amphibious aircraft" label="Amphibious aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="769" end="787" title="Amphibious vehicle" label="Amphibious vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="848" end="866" title="Amphibious warfare" label="Amphibious warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179758" start="929" end="955" title="Amphibian (disambiguation)" label="Amphibian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106943114" start="958" end="983" title="Amphibia (disambiguation)" label="Amphibia (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87454" wikidata="Q47184" url="?curid=87454" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska">
<text>The U.S. state of Alaska is divided into 19 organized boroughs and 11 census areas in the unorganized borough. Alaska, and the states of Connecticut and Louisiana are the only states that do not call their first-order administrative subdivisions counties (Connecticut uses councils of government and Louisiana uses parishes instead). Delegates to the Alaska Constitutional Convention wanted to avoid the traditional county system and adopted their own unique model with different classes of boroughs varying in powers and duties.

Many of the most densely populated regions of the state are part of Alaska&#x27;s boroughs, which function similarly to counties in other states. There are four different classifications of organized boroughs: &quot;Unified Home Rule&quot; or &quot;Non-unified Home Rule&quot; (may exercise all legislative powers not prohibited by law or charter); &quot;First Class&quot; (may exercise any power not prohibited by law on a non-area wide basis by adopting ordinances); and &quot;Second Class&quot; (must gain voter approval for authority to exercise many non-area wide powers).

However, unlike county-equivalents in the other 49 states, the organized boroughs do not cover the entire land area of the state. The area not part of any organized borough is referred to as the Unorganized Borough. The U.S. Census Bureau, in cooperation with the state, divides the Unorganized Borough into 11 census areas, each roughly corresponding to an election district, thus totaling 30 county equivalents. However, these areas exist solely for the purposes of statistical analysis and presentation; they have no government of their own. Boroughs and census areas are both treated as county-level equivalents by the Census Bureau.

Some areas in the Unorganized Borough receive limited public services directly from the Alaska state government, usually law enforcement from the Alaska State Troopers and educational funding.

Seven consolidated city-borough governments exist—Juneau City and Borough, Skagway Municipality, Sitka City and Borough, Yakutat City and Borough, Wrangell City and Borough, Haines Borough, as well as the state&#x27;s largest city, Anchorage. Though its legal name is the &quot;Municipality of Anchorage,&quot; it is considered a consolidated city-borough under state law.

The Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 55-2,3,4 codes, which are used by the United States Census Bureau to uniquely identify states and counties, is provided with each entry. Alaska&#x27;s code is 02, so each code is of the format 02XXX. The FIPS code for each county equivalent links to census data for that county equivalent.
There are 30 divisions in Alaska.

==List of boroughs==


 





==Census areas in the Unorganized Borough==

The Unorganized Borough is the portion of the U.S. state of Alaska not contained in any of its 19 organized boroughs. While referred to as the &quot;Unorganized Borough&quot;, it is not a borough itself. It encompasses over half of Alaska&#x27;s area, 970,500 km2. If the unorganized Borough were a state in itself, it would be the largest state in the United States of America, larger than the rest of Alaska and larger than Texas or California. (374,712 mi2). As of the 2023 Census estimate, 10% of Alaskans (75,362 people) reside in it.

Currently unique among the United States, Alaska is not entirely subdivided into organized county equivalents. For the 1980 census, the United States Census Bureau divided the unorganized borough into 12 census areas to facilitate census taking in the vast unorganized area. As new boroughs incorporate, these areas have been altered or eliminated to accommodate, such that there are currently 11 census areas:




|}

==See also==
* List of cities in Alaska
* List of census-designated places in Alaska
* List of United States counties and county equivalents

== References ==
*Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development - maps and profiles of boroughs and census areas, including those that have changed since the 2000 census

===Other sources===

*Division of Community and Regional Affairs, Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development
:*Local Government On-Line, Division of Community and Regional Affairs, Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development
::*
*
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="4" end="14" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="18" end="24" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="44" end="62" title="Borough (United States)" label="organized boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="90" end="109" title="Unorganized Borough, Alaska" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="137" end="148" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="153" end="162" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="246" end="254" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683520" start="273" end="295" title="Local government in Connecticut" label="councils of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q47205" start="315" end="323" title="List of parishes in Louisiana" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164163" start="351" end="383" title="Alaska Constitutional Convention" label="Alaska Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="1305" end="1324" title="Unorganized Borough, Alaska" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1330" end="1348" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708614" start="1895" end="1916" title="Alaska State Troopers" label="Alaska State Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="1949" end="1974" title="consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city-borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="1993" end="2016" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau City and Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="2018" end="2038" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="2040" end="2062" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka City and Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="2064" end="2088" title="Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska" label="Yakutat City and Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="2090" end="2115" title="Wrangell City and Borough" label="Wrangell City and Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q512981" start="2117" end="2131" title="Haines Borough" label="Haines Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="2175" end="2184" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q917824" start="2321" end="2360" title="Federal Information Processing Standard" label="Federal Information Processing Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2406" end="2433" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="2772" end="2791" title="Unorganized Borough" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="2814" end="2824" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="2828" end="2834" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="2876" end="2884" title="boroughs" label="boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="3245" end="3251" title="United States Census" label="Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3336" end="3349" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="3400" end="3406" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3445" end="3472" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="3513" end="3524" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869" start="3743" end="3767" title="List of cities in Alaska" label="List of cities in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q24229376" start="3770" end="3812" title="List of census-designated places in Alaska" label="List of census-designated places in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360157" start="3815" end="3868" title="List of United States counties and county equivalents" label="List of United States counties and county equivalents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708524" start="4114" end="4179" title="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development" label="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708524" start="4252" end="4317" title="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development" label="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87455" wikidata="Q504371" url="?curid=87455" title="Aleutians East Borough, Alaska">
<text>Aleutians East Borough () is a 2nd class borough in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census the borough&#x27;s population was 3,420. The borough seat is Sand Point.

==History==
According to archaeological evidence, the area has been inhabited by the Aleuts since the last ice age. Early contact was with Russian fur traders who sought sea otters in these islands. Whaling, fishing and cannery operations brought an influx of Scandinavian and European fishermen in the early 1900s. During World War II, the area was a strategic military site for the Aleutian Campaign, and many locals were evacuated to Ketchikan.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , of which is land and (53.5%) is water.

Aleutians East Borough is located at 57° north latitude and 162° west longitude. It comprises the westernmost portion of the Alaska Peninsula, and a small number of the Aleutian Islands, from which the borough name derives. Also included are the Shumagin Islands, as well as the Pavlof Islands and the Sanak Islands. In all, about 63.9 percent of its land area comprises land on the Alaska Peninsula, while 36.1 percent is on the numerous islands. There are five incorporated cities and two unincorporated villages within the borough.

Temperatures range from -9 to 76 degrees Fahrenheit. Annual precipitation is 33 inches and annual snowfall is 52 inches.

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (parts of the Alaska Peninsula and Aleutian Islands units)
** Aleutian Islands Wilderness (part)
** Simeonof Wilderness
** Unimak Wilderness
* Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Izembek National Wildlife Refuge
** Izembek Wilderness

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska to the east
* Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska to the west

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 2,697 people, 526 households, and 344 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 724 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 23.95% White, 1.67% Black or African American, 37.26% Native American, 26.51% Asian, 0.30% Pacific Islander, 7.38% from other races, and 2.93% from two or more races. 12.57% were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 22.25% reported speaking Tagalog at home, while 13.03% speak Spanish, 2.00% speak Ilokano, and 1.20% Aleut.

Of the 526 households 39.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.10% were married couples living together, 14.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.60% were non-families. 27.40% of households were one person and 3.40% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.30.

The age distribution was 16.80% under the age of 18, 10.20% from 18 to 24, 42.30% from 25 to 44, 28.10% from 45 to 64, and 2.60% 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 184.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 207.70 males.

A 2014 analysis by &quot;The Atlantic&quot; found Aleutians East Borough to be the second most racially diverse county-equivalent in the United States, behind the Aleutians West Census Area.

As of the 2020 census, there were 3,420 people and 890 households residing in the borough. The population density was 0.49 people per square mile. There were 755 housing units at a density of 0.11 per square mile. The racial makeup was 43.4% Asian, 21.1% White, 20.2% American Indian or Alaska Native, 14.8% Hispanic or Latino, 10.2% African American, 1.2% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and 3.9% were from two or more races. 2.0% of the population was under the age of 5, 7.6% were under the age of 18, 81.9% were between the ages of 18 and 64, and 10.5% were 65 years old or older. 67.5% of the population were male and 32.5% were female. 4.2% of the population were veterans. The average household size was 2.61 people. 87.3% of households had a computer present with 62.4% having a broadband Internet connection. 85.5% of the population had a high school diploma or higher with 11.5% having a Bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher. 5.1% of the population under the age of 65 had a disability with 23.3% of the same age group having no health insurance. 81.0% of the population over the age of 16 were in the civilian labor force. (77.6% of females) The median household income was $69,250 in 2019 dollars with the per capita income from May 2019 to April 2020 being $33,939 in 2019 dollars. The poverty rate in the borough was 14.8%.

==Government and politics==
Alvin D. Osterback is the mayor of the Aleutians East Borough. The borough has an elected assembly. Members of the assembly are Warren Wilson (King Cove), Paul Gronholdt (Sand Point), Chris Babcock (King Cove), Brenda Wilson (King Cove), Carol Foster (Sand Point), Josephine Shangin (Akutan), and Denise Mobeck (Sand Point). There are three advisory members, Dailey Schaack (Cold Bay), Samantha McNeley (Nelson Lagoon), and Tom Hoblet (False Pass). There is also an elected school board.

There are seven schools located in the Borough, with 273 students enrolled.

The Sand Point Clinic is managed by Eastern Aleutian Tribes, Inc. and inhabited a new facility in 2006. The clinic is staffed by low-level professionals and Community Health Aide/Practitioners (CHAs). The CHA role is unique to Alaska and Native Health Care.







==Economy==
The borough&#x27;s economy is cash-based. Commercial fishing and fish processing dominate and occur almost year-round. 222 borough residents hold commercial fishing permits. Sand Point is home to the largest fishing fleet in the Aleutian Chain. Salmon and Pacific cod processing occur at Peter Pan Seafoods (Port Moller and King Cove), Trident Seafoods (Sand Point and Akutan), and Bering Pacific (False Pass). The Peter Pan cannery in King Cove is one of the largest operations under one roof in Alaska. Transportation and other services provide year-round employment.

==Transportation==
Several airports are accessible in the Borough, and float planes can land in many communities. Marine cargo vessels also provide transportation. The State Ferry operates during the summer. Local transportation is primarily by fishing boats or skiffs since there are no roads.

==Communities==
===Cities===
* Akutan
* Cold Bay
* False Pass
* King Cove
* Sand Point (Borough seat)

===Census-designated place===
* Nelson Lagoon

===Unincorporated communities===
* Pauloff Harbor
* Belkofski

===Ghost town===
* Unga

==See also==

* List of airports in the Aleutians East Borough
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians East Borough, Alaska
==References==
==External links==
* Official site
* Aleutians East Borough at the Community Database Online from the Alaska Division of Community and Regional Affairs
* Maps from the Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development: 2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q504371" start="0" end="22" title="Aleutians East Borough, Alaska" label="Aleutians East Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="41" end="48" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="56" end="66" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="70" end="76" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="88" end="99" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="145" end="157" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79400" start="161" end="171" title="Sand Point, Alaska" label="Sand Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="259" end="265" title="Aleut people" label="Aleuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="313" end="319" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="497" end="509" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="558" end="575" title="Battle of the Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="611" end="620" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="654" end="672" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255484" start="785" end="794" title="57th parallel north" label="57° north"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703428" start="808" end="817" title="162nd meridian west" label="162° west"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="873" end="889" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="917" end="933" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q81181" start="994" end="1010" title="Shumagin Islands" label="Shumagin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155957" start="1027" end="1041" title="Pavlof Islands" label="Pavlof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q195068" start="1050" end="1063" title="Sanak Islands" label="Sanak Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1439" end="1479" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1542" end="1569" title="Aleutian Islands Wilderness" label="Aleutian Islands Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q115152474" start="1580" end="1599" title="Simeonof Wilderness" label="Simeonof Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q375615" start="1603" end="1620" title="Unimak Wilderness" label="Unimak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q258559" start="1623" end="1664" title="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676130" start="1674" end="1706" title="Izembek National Wildlife Refuge" label="Izembek National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676130" start="1710" end="1728" title="Izembek Wilderness" label="Izembek Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="1773" end="1807" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q185533" start="1822" end="1856" title="Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska" label="Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1894" end="1905" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2078" end="2084" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="2347" end="2354" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2383" end="2390" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35936" start="2404" end="2411" title="Ilokano language" label="Ilokano"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="2423" end="2428" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="3108" end="3120" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185533" start="3246" end="3272" title="Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska" label="Aleutians West Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3285" end="3296" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="4067" end="4076" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="4077" end="4085" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="4178" end="4200" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q80120" start="4786" end="4795" title="King Cove, Alaska" label="King Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q79400" start="4814" end="4824" title="Sand Point, Alaska" label="Sand Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q79354" start="4927" end="4933" title="Akutan, Alaska" label="Akutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79523" start="5018" end="5026" title="Cold Bay, Alaska" label="Cold Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q522512" start="5047" end="5060" title="Nelson Lagoon, Alaska" label="Nelson Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79514" start="5079" end="5089" title="False Pass, Alaska" label="False Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202642" start="5528" end="5546" title="Commercial fishing" label="Commercial fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290431" start="5551" end="5566" title="fish processing" label="fish processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841389" start="5822" end="5838" title="Trident Seafoods" label="Trident Seafoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q79354" start="6384" end="6390" title="Akutan, Alaska" label="Akutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79523" start="6393" end="6401" title="Cold Bay, Alaska" label="Cold Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79514" start="6404" end="6414" title="False Pass, Alaska" label="False Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80120" start="6417" end="6426" title="King Cove, Alaska" label="King Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q79400" start="6429" end="6439" title="Sand Point, Alaska" label="Sand Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q522512" start="6488" end="6501" title="Nelson Lagoon, Alaska" label="Nelson Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061347" start="6538" end="6552" title="Pauloff Harbor, Alaska" label="Pauloff Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238403" start="6555" end="6564" title="Belkofski, Alaska" label="Belkofski"/>
<link wikidata="Q787715" start="6585" end="6589" title="Unga, Alaska" label="Unga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="6607" end="6653" title="List of airports in the Aleutians East Borough" label="List of airports in the Aleutians East Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975287" start="6656" end="6735" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians East Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians East Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708524" start="6853" end="6902" title="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development" label="Alaska Division of Community and Regional Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708530" start="6919" end="6971" title="Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development" label="Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87457" wikidata="Q1055040" url="?curid=87457" title="Wave (audience)">
<text>The wave (also Mexican wave outside North America) is a type of metachronal rhythm achieved in a packed stadium or other large seated venue, when successive groups of spectators briefly stand and raise their arms. Immediately upon stretching to full height, the spectator returns to the usual seated position.

The result is a wave of standing spectators that travels through the crowd, even though individual spectators never move away from their seats. In many large arenas the crowd is seated in a contiguous circuit all the way around the sport field, and so the wave is able to travel continuously around the arena; in discontiguous seating arrangements, the wave can instead reflect back and forth through the crowd. When the gap in seating is narrow, the wave can sometimes pass through it. Usually only one wave crest will be present at any given time in an arena, although simultaneous, counter-rotating waves have been produced.

The wave first appeared in U.S. sports events in the late 1970s to early 1980s. Televised instances at many matches of the 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico brought it to a global audience and led to the name &quot;Mexican wave&quot; in English-speaking countries outside North America.

== Origins and variations ==
=== Krazy George Henderson ===
On November 15, 1979, the wave originated at a National Hockey League (NHL) game between the Colorado Rockies and Montreal Canadiens at McNichols Sports Arena in Denver, Colorado.

Krazy George Henderson perfected the wave at National Hockey League games, followed later by the earliest available video documentation of a wave, which he led on October 15, 1981, at a Major League Baseball game in Oakland, California. This wave was broadcast on TV, and George has used a videotape of the event to bolster his claim as the inventor of the wave. On October 31, 1981, a wave was created at a University of Washington football game against Stanford at Husky Stadium in Seattle, and the cheer continued to appear during the rest of that year&#x27;s football season. Although the people who created the first wave in Seattle have acknowledged Henderson&#x27;s wave at a baseball stadium, they claimed to have popularized the phenomenon.

Henderson believes that the wave originally was inspired by accident when he was leading cheers at a Colorado Rockies National Hockey League game at McNichols Sports Arena in Denver, Colorado, in 1979. His routine was to have one side of the arena jump and cheer, then have the opposite side respond. One night in late 1979, there was a delayed response from one section of fans, leading to them jumping to their feet a few seconds later than the section beside them. The next section of fans followed suit, and the first wave circled McNichols Arena of its own accord. In &quot;The Game of Our Lives&quot;, a 1981 book about the Oilers&#x27; 1980-81 season, journalist Peter Gzowski described this routine, which did not yet have a name but was already a standard in Henderson&#x27;s repertoire: &quot;He will start a cheer in one corner and then roll it around the arena, with each section rising from its seat as it yells.&quot;

=== University of Washington ===
Robb Weller, a cheerleader at the University of Washington from 1968 to 1972 and later co-host of the television show &quot;Entertainment Tonight&quot;, indicated in September 1984 that the school&#x27;s early 1970s cheerleading squad developed a version of the wave that went from the bottom to top, instead of side to side, as a result of difficulties in getting the generally inebriated college audience members to timely raise and lower cards: Actually ...there were two Waves. I was a cheerleader at the University of Washington from 1968 to 1972 when we started the first Wave. We tried to have card tricks but the kids would imbibe too much and the card tricks would get all goofed up; then we&#x27;d try card tricks with the kids using their bodies as cards and that wouldn&#x27;t work. Finally we tried a Wave in the student section and it caught on but that Wave was different from this Wave. It would go from the bottom to top instead of side to side. The first wave at the University of Washington&#x27;s Husky Stadium occurred on Halloween 1981, at the prompting of Dave Hunter (Husky band trumpet player) and the visiting alumni cheerleader Weller. In 1982 Husky head coach Don James pointed to crowd noise from the wave as a competitive advantage when playing home games at Husky Stadium.

The wave had been picked up by fans at the nearby Kingdome prior to the Seattle Seahawks&#x27; first playoff appearance in 1983.

=== University of Michigan ===
In the early fall of 1983, the Michigan Wolverines played the Huskies in Seattle and brought the wave back to Michigan Stadium in Ann Arbor. A letter to the sports editor of &quot;The New York Times&quot; claimed, &quot;There are three reasons why the wave caught on at Michigan Wolverine games: It gave the fans something to do when the team was leading its opponent by 40 points, it was thrilling and exciting to see 105,000 people in the stands moving and cheering, and Bo Schembechler asked us not to do it.&quot; The fans responded to his request by doing more waves, including &quot;Silent Waves&quot; (standing and waving arms without cheering), &quot;Shsh Waves&quot; (replacing the cheering with a &quot;shshing&quot; sound), the &quot;Fast Wave&quot;, the &quot;Slow Wave&quot;, and two simultaneous waves traveling in opposite directions. The following spring, fans who had enjoyed the wave in Ann Arbor introduced it to the nearby Tiger Stadium in Detroit. The Tigers won baseball&#x27;s World Series that year and appeared on many televised games throughout 1984, so people all over the US saw it.

=== Mexican Wave ===

On September 18, 1984, in the Monterrey metro area suburb of San Nicolas de los Garza, at the Estadio Universitario, the Mexican national team played a friendly match against Argentina, ending in a 1-1 draw. The wave was being done by college students who had learned the celebrations during college football matches. Former Mexico head coach Bora Milutinovic confessed that everytime he visited another stadium around the world he always thought of the fans in Monterrey.

&quot;We played the unforgettable match against Argentina 1-1, when that famous &#x27;Wave&#x27; began. Now, when I am in stadiums around the world and I see &#x27;waves&#x27; where people express their joy at seeing good football, it always reminds me of the fans of the north&quot;

== Global broadcasts ==
=== 1984 Olympic football final ===
The wave was broadcast internationally during the 1984 Olympic football (soccer) final between Brazil and France on August 11, when it was done among the 100,000 in attendance at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California.

=== 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico ===
Most sports historians agree that the wave began internationally during the 1986 FIFA World Cup in Mexico. It was broadcast to a global audience, and the wave was popularized worldwide after the tournament. This was the first time that most people living outside North America had seen the phenomenon. As a result, English speakers outside of North America call the phenomenon a &quot;Mexican wave&quot;. Likewise in many languages like Polish, Serbian and Turkish, direct translation of the phrase Mexican Wave is used. In Germany, Italy, and other countries the wave is called &quot;la ola&quot; (or simply &quot;ola&quot;) from the Spanish word for &quot;wave&quot;, while in Portuguese-speaking countries, such as Brazil, it is alternatively translated to &quot;a onda&quot;, more commonly &quot;[o] ondão&quot; (augmentative) or simply &quot;onda&quot;, but &quot;a ola&quot; is also used.

== Silent wave ==
A silent wave was created during a blind football match between Turkey and China during the 2024 Paris Paralympic Games. This wave was slow and silent to allow the players to hear the sound of the game.

== Current appearances ==

Today, the wave is often seen during sports events, sometimes during a lull in the action on the field when the spectators want to amuse themselves. There is some controversy as to when the wave is appropriate to perform during a sporting event. Many fans feel that the wave should not be performed in important situations during the game.

Prior to the redevelopment of the Melbourne Cricket Ground between 2002 and 2006, spectators seated in the Members&#x27; Stand (reserved for members of the Melbourne Cricket Club) would refuse to engage in the wave, and would be booed by other spectators at the ground, before the wave would resume on the other side of the stand. Sociologist John Carroll described the practice of &quot;booing the Members&quot; as dismissive of any claim to authority or superior social status on the members&#x27; part, although good-natured and based on the egalitarian nature of watching sports. (As a postscript to the &quot;booing the Members&quot; phenomenon, even when the Members stand was closed due to the reconstruction work, the crowd would still boo, despite the Members&#x27; stand being completely empty. When waves were banned (see below), large sections of the Members participated in the protest waves.) Such a feature is also observed at Lord&#x27;s, another cricket ground, where the Members in that arena also rarely participate and are booed by the crowd.

Cricket Australia formally banned the wave at home games in 2007 on the grounds that liquids and other objects thrown in the air during the wave posed a danger. The move was not well-received and in some cases served to increase the prevalence of the wave at those games. In one such example, Adam Gilchrist, the Australian wicketkeeper, participated in the banned wave from the playing field. The ban continues to be intermittently imposed and lifted by Cricket Australia and Australian police.

=== Metrics ===

In 2002, Tamás Vicsek of the Eötvös Loránd University, Hungary along with his colleagues, analyzed videos of 14 waves at large Mexican football stadiums, developing a standard model of wave behavior (published in &quot;Nature&quot;). He found that it takes only the actions of a few dozen fans to trigger a wave. Once started, it usually rolls in a clockwise direction at a rate of about , or about 22 seats per second. At any given time the wave is about 15 seats wide. These observations appear to be applicable across different cultures and sports, though details vary in individual cases.

=== Records ===
During the 2010 Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear, an event hosted by comedy TV show hosts Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert, about 210,000 people participated in a wave led by &quot;MythBusters&quot; hosts Jamie Hyneman and Adam Savage.

On 23 June 2019, during the Rocket League Championship Series (video game e-sports) Season 7 Finals at the Prudential Center in Newark, New Jersey, the audience set a new record for a longest continuous wave lasting for 28 minutes and 35 seconds. The previous record was 17 minutes and 14 seconds set by Tube and their fans at a concert at the Koshien Stadium in Nishinomiya, Japan on 23 September 2015.

==See also==

* Card stunt

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1055040" start="4" end="8" title="Wave (audience)" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055040" start="15" end="27" title="Wave (audience)" label="Mexican wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="36" end="49" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q56759471" start="64" end="82" title="metachronal rhythm" label="metachronal rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="104" end="111" title="stadium" label="stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="327" end="331" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="681" end="688" title="Reflection (physics)" label="reflect"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="1063" end="1082" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1331" end="1353" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q868358" start="1377" end="1393" title="Colorado Rockies (NHL)" label="Colorado Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="1398" end="1416" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081796" start="1420" end="1442" title="McNichols Sports Arena" label="McNichols Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1446" end="1452" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="1454" end="1462" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436506" start="1465" end="1487" title="Krazy George Henderson" label="Krazy George Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="1510" end="1532" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="1651" end="1672" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="1681" end="1688" title="Oakland" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026180" start="1843" end="1847" title="1981 Washington Huskies football team" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="1873" end="1897" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="1898" end="1906" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598725" start="1920" end="1928" title="Stanford Cardinal football" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136463" start="1932" end="1945" title="Husky Stadium" label="Husky Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1949" end="1956" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="2334" end="2356" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081796" start="2365" end="2387" title="McNichols Sports Arena" label="McNichols Sports Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="2391" end="2397" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="2399" end="2407" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987079" start="2846" end="2873" title="1980–81 Edmonton Oilers season" label="Oilers&amp;#x27; 1980-81 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261810" start="2886" end="2899" title="Peter Gzowski" label="Peter Gzowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340801" start="3182" end="3193" title="Robb Weller" label="Robb Weller"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="3216" end="3240" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055086" start="3306" end="3327" title="Entertainment Tonight" label="Entertainment Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="3561" end="3571" title="inebriated" label="inebriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="4167" end="4191" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136463" start="4199" end="4212" title="Husky Stadium" label="Husky Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="4225" end="4234" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q22026180" start="4235" end="4239" title="1981 Washington Huskies football team" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292831" start="4370" end="4379" title="Don James (American football)" label="Don James"/>
<link wikidata="Q990430" start="4537" end="4545" title="Kingdome" label="Kingdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="4559" end="4575" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581193" start="4610" end="4614" title="1983 Seattle Seahawks season" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581092" start="4669" end="4673" title="1983 Michigan Wolverines football team" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837794" start="4679" end="4698" title="Michigan Wolverines football" label="Michigan Wolverines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640118" start="4758" end="4774" title="Michigan Stadium" label="Michigan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="4778" end="4787" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4828" end="4846" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931165" start="5121" end="5136" title="Bo Schembechler" label="Bo Schembechler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750255" start="5591" end="5604" title="Tiger Stadium (Detroit)" label="Tiger Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="5608" end="5615" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="5621" end="5627" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q518033" start="5648" end="5670" title="1984 World Series" label="World Series that year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6651" end="6687" title="football at the 1984 Summer Olympics#Final" label="1984 Olympic football (soccer) final"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="6696" end="6702" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="6707" end="6713" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="6784" end="6793" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="6797" end="6817" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="6934" end="6953" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="1986 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7493" end="7500" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493605" start="7807" end="7821" title="blind football" label="blind football"/>
<link wikidata="Q30748385" start="7864" end="7891" title="2024 Summer Paralympics" label="2024 Paris Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q330136" start="8378" end="8402" title="Melbourne Cricket Ground" label="Melbourne Cricket Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4289724" start="8500" end="8522" title="Melbourne Cricket Club" label="Melbourne Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q331613" start="9286" end="9297" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002584" start="9408" end="9425" title="Cricket Australia" label="Cricket Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q349516" start="9701" end="9715" title="Adam Gilchrist" label="Adam Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q692525" start="9732" end="9744" title="wicketkeeper" label="wicketkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q390287" start="9951" end="9975" title="Eötvös Loránd University" label="Eötvös Loránd University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="9977" end="9984" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="10141" end="10147" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16726164" start="10271" end="10280" title="Clockwise and counterclockwise" label="clockwise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482795" start="10548" end="10583" title="Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear" label="Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q211987" start="10625" end="10636" title="Jon Stewart" label="Jon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="10641" end="10656" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q486844" start="10715" end="10726" title="MythBusters" label="MythBusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q314110" start="10739" end="10752" title="Jamie Hyneman" label="Jamie Hyneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q297618" start="10757" end="10768" title="Adam Savage" label="Adam Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394466" start="10799" end="10832" title="Rocket League Championship Series" label="Rocket League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q849027" start="10878" end="10895" title="Prudential Center" label="Prudential Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="10899" end="10917" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051312" start="11075" end="11079" title="Tube (band)" label="Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q959811" start="11115" end="11130" title="Koshien Stadium" label="Koshien Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q243853" start="11134" end="11152" title="Nishinomiya, Japan" label="Nishinomiya, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920023" start="11192" end="11202" title="Card stunt" label="Card stunt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87458" wikidata="Q185533" url="?curid=87458" title="Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Aleutians West Census Area () is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 5,232, down from 5,561 in 2010.

It is part of the Unorganized Borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest city is Unalaska, home to about 80% of the population. It contains most of the Aleutian Islands, from Attu Island in the west to Unalaska Island in the east, as well as the Pribilof Islands, which lie north of the Aleutians in the Bering Sea.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (68.9%) is water. It borders the Aleutians East Borough to the east.

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Aleutian Islands and Bering Sea units)
** Aleutian Islands Wilderness (part)
** Bogoslof Wilderness
** Pribilof Islands
* Aleutian World War II National Historic Area

===Cape===
* Moss Point

==Demographics==
A 2014 analysis by &quot;The Atlantic&quot; found the Aleutians West Census Area to be the most racially diverse county-equivalent in the United States. According to the Brookings Institution, Asian Americans are the largest population of color in the census area, a majority of which are Filipino Americans.

===2020 census===


=== 2000 Census ===
At the 2000 census, there were 5,465 people, 1,270 households, and 736 families residing in the census area. The population density was . There were 2,234 housing units at an average density of .

The racial makup of the census area was 40.04% White, 3.02% Black or African American, 20.95% Native American, 24.59% Asian, 0.62% Pacific Islander, 7.32% from other races, and 3.46% from two or more races. 10.48%. were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 13.89% reported speaking Tagalog at home, while 11.22% spoke Spanish, 5.97% Aleut, and 4.51% Vietnamese.

Of the 1,270 households 35.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.00% were married couples living together, 7.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.00% were non-families. 32.00% of households were one person and 2.10% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.26.

The age distribution was 17.20% under the age of 18, 7.80% from 18 to 24, 47.60% from 25 to 44, 25.10% from 45 to 64, and 2.30% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 180.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 202.10 males.

== Communities ==
The largest community in the Aleutians West Census Area is the city of Unalaska.

===Cities===
* Adak
* Atka
* St. George
* St. Paul
* Unalaska

===Census-designated places===
* Attu Station
* Nikolski
* Eareckson Station

==Politics and government==






At the federal level, the Aleutians West Census Area is part of Alaska&#x27;s at-large congressional district along with the rest of the state. The census area is represented by Lyman Hoffman (D) in the Alaska Senate and by Bryce Edgmon (D) in the Alaska House of Representatives. In presidential elections, it has consistently backed Democrats since 2012, although Kamala Harris won the borough by five votes in 2024.

==Education==
School districts within the census area are: Aleutian Region School District, Pribilof School District, and Unalaska City School District.

==See also==

* List of airports in Alaska
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska

==References==
==External links==

* Aleutians West Census Area at the Community Database Online from the Alaska Division of Community and Regional Affairs
* Maps from the Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development: </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185533" start="0" end="26" title="Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska" label="Aleutians West Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="35" end="46" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="62" end="72" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="76" end="82" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="94" end="105" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="177" end="196" title="Unorganized Borough, Alaska" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="218" end="230" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79982" start="252" end="260" title="Unalaska, Alaska" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="323" end="339" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="346" end="357" title="Attu Island" label="Attu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424060" start="373" end="388" title="Unalaska Island" label="Unalaska Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="417" end="433" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="475" end="485" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="519" end="537" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q504371" start="631" end="653" title="Aleutians East Borough, Alaska" label="Aleutians East Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="701" end="741" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="797" end="824" title="Aleutian Islands Wilderness" label="Aleutian Islands Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q890658" start="835" end="854" title="Bogoslof Wilderness" label="Bogoslof Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="858" end="874" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716557" start="877" end="921" title="Aleutian World War II National Historic Area" label="Aleutian World War II National Historic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="990" end="1002" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="1135" end="1156" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="1158" end="1173" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="1190" end="1209" title="Person of color" label="population of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="1254" end="1272" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1322" end="1333" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1516" end="1528" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1559" end="1564" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1572" end="1577" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1581" end="1597" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1606" end="1621" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1630" end="1635" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1643" end="1659" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1732" end="1740" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1744" end="1750" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="1789" end="1796" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1825" end="1832" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="1840" end="1845" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="1857" end="1867" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q79982" start="2611" end="2619" title="Unalaska, Alaska" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79371" start="2637" end="2641" title="Adak, Alaska" label="Adak"/>
<link wikidata="Q748556" start="2644" end="2648" title="Atka, Alaska" label="Atka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79363" start="2651" end="2661" title="St. George, Alaska" label="St. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q80107" start="2664" end="2672" title="St. Paul, Alaska" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q79982" start="2675" end="2683" title="Unalaska, Alaska" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837940" start="2718" end="2730" title="Attu Station, Alaska" label="Attu Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q770944" start="2733" end="2741" title="Nikolski, Alaska" label="Nikolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276973" start="2744" end="2761" title="Eareckson Station, Alaska (CDP)" label="Eareckson Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310314" start="2861" end="2906" title="Alaska&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district" label="Alaska&amp;#x27;s at-large congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708043" start="2975" end="2988" title="Lyman Hoffman" label="Lyman Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q144574" start="3000" end="3013" title="Alaska Senate" label="Alaska Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980675" start="3021" end="3033" title="Bryce Edgmon" label="Bryce Edgmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q720324" start="3045" end="3076" title="Alaska House of Representatives" label="Alaska House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29097074" start="3276" end="3307" title="Aleutian Region School District" label="Aleutian Region School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641772" start="3309" end="3333" title="Pribilof School District" label="Pribilof School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641769" start="3339" end="3368" title="Unalaska City School District" label="Unalaska City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3387" end="3413" title="List of airports in Alaska" label="List of airports in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975289" start="3415" end="3498" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Aleutians West Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708524" start="3606" end="3655" title="Alaska Department of Commerce, Community and Economic Development" label="Alaska Division of Community and Regional Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708530" start="3672" end="3724" title="Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development" label="Alaska Department of Labor and Workforce Development"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87461" wikidata="Q6520861" url="?curid=87461" title="Leleti Khumalo">
<text>Leleti Khumalo (born 30 March 1970) is a South African actress known for her leading role in the movie and stage play &quot;Sarafina!&quot; and for her roles in other films including &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot;, &quot;Yesterday&quot; and &quot;Invictus&quot;, as well as the soap opera &quot;&quot;, where she plays Nokubonga &quot;MaZulu&quot; Bhengu and on &quot;Uzalo&quot; as MaNzuza, and currently on &quot;Muvhango&quot; as Dr Ximba.

==Early life and &quot;Sarafina!&quot;==
Khumalo was born in KwaMashu township, north of Durban, South Africa. Showing an interest in performing from an early age, she joined a youth backyard dance group called Amajika, mentored by Tu Nokwe.

In 1985 she auditioned for the Mbongeni Ngema musical which was to become the international blockbuster &quot;Sarafina!&quot;; Ngema wrote the lead character of Sarafina for Khumalo. She later married him, but they divorced. She is currently married to businessman Skhutazo Winston Khanyile and she gave birth to their twins Ulwenzile and Yamukelani Khanyile.

Khumalo performed the role of Sarafina on stages in South Africa and on Broadway, where she received a 1988 Tony Award nomination for Best Actress in a Musical. &quot;Sarafina!&quot; had a Broadway run lasting two years, after which the production embarked on a worldwide tour. In 1987 Khumalo received an NAACP Image Award for Best Stage Actress. In 1992, she starred alongside Whoopi Goldberg, Miriam Makeba and John Kani in Darrell James Roodt&#x27;s film version of &quot;Sarafina!&quot;, which had a worldwide distribution, and became the biggest film production to be released on the African continent. Khumalo was nominated for an Image Award, together with Angela Bassett, Whoopi Goldberg and Janet Jackson. Based on the 1976 Soweto youth uprisings, Sarafina! tells the story of a young school girl who is not afraid to fight for her rights and inspires her peers to rise up in protest, especially after her inspirational teacher, Mary Masombuka (Goldberg) is imprisoned and murdered.

In 1993, Khumalo released her first album, &quot;Leleti and Sarafina&quot;.

Sarafina! was re-released in South Africa on 16 June 2006 to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the youth uprisings in Soweto.

== Subsequent roles ==
Khumalo co-starred in Mbongeni Ngema&#x27;s international musical &quot;Magic at 4 AM&quot; which was dedicated to Muhammad Ali. She subsequently starred in another Ngema musical, &quot;Mama&quot; (1996), which toured Europe and Australia. In 1997, she starred in &quot;Sarafina 2&quot;.

Khumalo starred in the 2004 movies &quot;Hotel Rwanda&quot; and &quot;Yesterday&quot;; the latter was nominated for a 2005 Academy Award in the category &quot;Best Foreign Language Film&quot;. &quot;Yesterday&quot; also scooped the Best Film award at India&#x27;s Pune International Film Festival and had positive reactions at the Venice and Toronto International Film Festivals.

Khumalo joined the cast of one of South Africa&#x27;s longest running soap operas, &quot;Generations&quot; in 2005 as Busiswe (Busi) Dlomo, a &quot;refined and altruistic no-nonsense woman who heads up her own publishing empire, based in Cape Town&quot;. Her character is the younger sister to Sibusiso Dlomo and has none of the power-hungry, egotistical and callous characteristics he (Sibusiso) has. She has used her intellect and savvy to get where she is today, at the helm of South Africa&#x27;s fictional top communications company, Ezweni, which she runs with her brother and founder Karabo Moroka.

In 2015 Khumalo joined the cast of &quot;Uzalo&quot; and played as Zandile &quot;MaNzuza&quot; Mdletshe. The role marked her first on-screen appearance after a two-year hiatus from acting to raise her children.

In 2015 Leleti was invited to Zanzibar Island, Tanzania, as a chief guest of the famous African film festivals known as the Zanzibar film Festivals, for its 18th anniversary celebrations.

She played a role of Mazulu on e.tv&#x27;s , from 2018 until the series&#x27; end in 2023.

In July 2024, she bagged a role of Dr. Ximba on an upcoming new season of telenova &quot;Muvhango&quot;.

==Filmography==
== Awards and nominations ==
===Simon Sabela KZN Film &amp; TV Awards===
! 
|2024
|&quot;Dear Future Wife&quot; 
|Best actress Film
|
===Golden Elephant Awards ===
! 
|2024 
|Herself 
|Lifetime Achievement
|
==References==
== External links ==
*Images of Khumalo in the movie &quot;Yesterday&quot;
*&quot;Generations&quot; Cast Bio for Khumalo
* Leleti Khumalo at Who&#x27;s Who Southern Africa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6520861" start="0" end="14" title="Leleti Khumalo" label="Leleti Khumalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066402" start="124" end="133" title="Sarafina! (musical)" label="Sarafina!"/>
<link wikidata="Q223884" start="189" end="201" title="Hotel Rwanda" label="Hotel Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679545" start="215" end="224" title="Yesterday (2004 film)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q689842" start="241" end="249" title="Invictus (film)" label="Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982048" start="362" end="367" title="Uzalo" label="Uzalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944281" start="409" end="417" title="Muvhango" label="Muvhango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347043" start="499" end="507" title="KwaMashu" label="KwaMashu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468" start="527" end="533" title="Durban" label="Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799750" start="712" end="726" title="Mbongeni Ngema" label="Mbongeni Ngema"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066402" start="791" end="800" title="Sarafina! (musical)" label="Sarafina!"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1150" end="1160" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="1348" end="1365" title="NAACP Image Award" label="NAACP Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="1421" end="1436" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q146256" start="1438" end="1451" title="Miriam Makeba" label="Miriam Makeba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242471" start="1456" end="1465" title="John Kani" label="John Kani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016485" start="1469" end="1488" title="Darrell James Roodt" label="Darrell James Roodt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577161" start="1518" end="1527" title="Sarafina! (film)" label="Sarafina!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="1680" end="1691" title="NAACP Image Award" label="Image Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q232120" start="1707" end="1721" title="Angela Bassett" label="Angela Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="1723" end="1738" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="1743" end="1756" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153081" start="1776" end="1798" title="Soweto Riots" label="Soweto youth uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q153081" start="2214" end="2229" title="Soweto Riots" label="youth uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q217426" start="2233" end="2239" title="Soweto" label="Soweto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799750" start="2287" end="2301" title="Mbongeni Ngema" label="Mbongeni Ngema"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="2380" end="2392" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066402" start="2535" end="2545" title="Sarafina! (musical)" label="Sarafina 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q223884" start="2595" end="2607" title="Hotel Rwanda" label="Hotel Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679545" start="2624" end="2633" title="Yesterday (2004 film)" label="Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="2677" end="2690" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2805" end="2810" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260105" start="2818" end="2850" title="Pune International Film Festival" label="Pune International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="2885" end="2891" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532614" start="3024" end="3035" title="Generations (South African TV series)" label="Generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="3173" end="3182" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q20982048" start="3583" end="3588" title="Uzalo" label="Uzalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322327" start="3974" end="3978" title="e.tv" label="e.tv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87462" wikidata="Q500312" url="?curid=87462" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Bethel Census Area is a census area in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population is 18,666, up from 17,013 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest community is the city of Bethel, which is also the largest city in the unorganized borough.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the census area has an area of , of which is land and (10.8%) is water. Its territory includes the large Nunivak Island in the Bering Sea.

Its land area is comparable to that of Kentucky, which has an area of slightly under forty thousand square miles.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska - northwest
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska - north
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska - east
* Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska - southeast
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska - south
* Dillingham Census Area, Alaska - south

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Bering Sea unit)
** Bering Sea Wilderness
* Lake Clark National Park and Preserve (part)
** Lake Clark Wilderness (part)
* Togiak National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Togiak Wilderness (part)
* Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Nunivak Wilderness

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 16,006 people, 4,226 households, and 3,173 families living in the census area. The population density was . There were 5,188 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 12.53% White, 0.38% Black or African American, 81.93% Native American, 1.05% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.19% from other races, and 3.85% from two or more races. 0.87% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 4,226 households, 51.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.20% were married couples living together, 15.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.90% were non-families. 19.90% of households were one person, and 2.80% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.73 and the average family size was 4.41.

In the census area the population was spread out, with 39.80% under the age of 18, 9.70% from 18 to 24, 28.90% from 25 to 44, 16.40% from 45 to 64, and 5.20% 65 or older. The median age was 25 years. For every 100 females, there were 113.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 112.80 males.

Bethel Census Area is one of only 38 county-level census divisions of the United States where the most spoken language is not English and one of only 4 where it is neither English nor Spanish. 63.14% of the population speak a Yupik language at home, followed by English at 34.71%.

==Politics==







Like most counties or equivalents with a Native American majority, Bethel tends to support Democratic presidential candidates. However, Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski, who has fared well with Alaska Native voters, carried the census area overwhelmingly in 2022.

==Communities==

===Cities===

*Akiak
*Aniak
*Bethel
*Chefornak
*Chuathbaluk
*Eek
*Goodnews Bay
*Kwethluk
*Lower Kalskag
*Mekoryuk
*Napakiak
*Napaskiak
*Nightmute
*Nunapitchuk
*Platinum
*Quinhagak
*Toksook Bay
*Upper Kalskag
===Census-designated places===

*Akiachak
*Atmautluak
*Crooked Creek
*Kasigluk
*Kipnuk
*Kongiganak
*Kwigillingok
*Lime Village
*Mertarvik
*Newtok
*Oscarville
*Red Devil
*Sleetmute
*Stony River
*Tuluksak
*Tuntutuliak
*Tununak
===Unincorporated communities===
*Crow Village
*Georgetown
*Napaimute
*Umkumiute

==Education==
School districts include:
* Iditarod Area School District
* Kuspuk School District
* Lower Kuskokwim School District
* Lower Yukon School District
* Yupiit School District

==See also==
*List of Airports in the Bethel Census Area
*Nunathloogagamiutbingoi Dunes

==References==
==External links==
* Census Area map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Census Area map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="0" end="18" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="24" end="35" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="43" end="53" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="57" end="63" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="75" end="86" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="156" end="175" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="197" end="209" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80022" start="248" end="254" title="Bethel, Alaska" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="347" end="374" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q530454" start="481" end="495" title="Nunivak Island" label="Nunivak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="503" end="513" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q379474" start="674" end="702" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska" label="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="717" end="750" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="761" end="794" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="804" end="835" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="850" end="884" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q277728" start="895" end="925" title="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska" label="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="968" end="1008" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1042" end="1063" title="Bering Sea Wilderness" label="Bering Sea Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1066" end="1103" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1114" end="1135" title="Lake Clark Wilderness" label="Lake Clark Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380194" start="1145" end="1176" title="Togiak National Wildlife Refuge" label="Togiak National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380194" start="1187" end="1204" title="Togiak Wilderness" label="Togiak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q168074" start="1214" end="1250" title="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge" label="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q530454" start="1261" end="1279" title="Nunivak Wilderness" label="Nunivak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1326" end="1332" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1523" end="1536" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="2698" end="2712" title="Yupik language" label="Yupik language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600921" start="2815" end="2839" title="List of U.S. counties with Native American majority populations" label="Native American majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q22360" start="2929" end="2943" title="Lisa Murkowski" label="Lisa Murkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738004" start="3033" end="3037" title="2022 United States Senate election in Alaska" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q80070" start="3072" end="3077" title="Akiak, Alaska" label="Akiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79540" start="3079" end="3084" title="Aniak, Alaska" label="Aniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q80022" start="3086" end="3092" title="Bethel, Alaska" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80075" start="3094" end="3103" title="Chefornak, Alaska" label="Chefornak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79572" start="3105" end="3116" title="Chuathbaluk, Alaska" label="Chuathbaluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79356" start="3118" end="3121" title="Eek, Alaska" label="Eek"/>
<link wikidata="Q79543" start="3123" end="3135" title="Goodnews Bay, Alaska" label="Goodnews Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80147" start="3137" end="3145" title="Kwethluk, Alaska" label="Kwethluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79269" start="3147" end="3160" title="Lower Kalskag, Alaska" label="Lower Kalskag"/>
<link wikidata="Q80182" start="3162" end="3170" title="Mekoryuk, Alaska" label="Mekoryuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79702" start="3172" end="3180" title="Napakiak, Alaska" label="Napakiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79246" start="3182" end="3191" title="Napaskiak, Alaska" label="Napaskiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79565" start="3193" end="3202" title="Nightmute, Alaska" label="Nightmute"/>
<link wikidata="Q79905" start="3204" end="3215" title="Nunapitchuk, Alaska" label="Nunapitchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80139" start="3217" end="3225" title="Platinum, Alaska" label="Platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79426" start="3227" end="3236" title="Quinhagak, Alaska" label="Quinhagak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79411" start="3238" end="3249" title="Toksook Bay, Alaska" label="Toksook Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79452" start="3251" end="3264" title="Upper Kalskag, Alaska" label="Upper Kalskag"/>
<link wikidata="Q948838" start="3298" end="3306" title="Akiachak, Alaska" label="Akiachak"/>
<link wikidata="Q950654" start="3308" end="3318" title="Atmautluak, Alaska" label="Atmautluak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025467" start="3320" end="3333" title="Crooked Creek, Alaska" label="Crooked Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569800" start="3335" end="3343" title="Kasigluk, Alaska" label="Kasigluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172124" start="3345" end="3351" title="Kipnuk, Alaska" label="Kipnuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896049" start="3353" end="3363" title="Kongiganak, Alaska" label="Kongiganak"/>
<link wikidata="Q777889" start="3365" end="3377" title="Kwigillingok, Alaska" label="Kwigillingok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433389" start="3379" end="3391" title="Lime Village, Alaska" label="Lime Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q16302471" start="3393" end="3402" title="Mertarvik, Alaska" label="Mertarvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925873" start="3404" end="3410" title="Newtok, Alaska" label="Newtok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314665" start="3412" end="3422" title="Oscarville, Alaska" label="Oscarville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866801" start="3424" end="3433" title="Red Devil, Alaska" label="Red Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744067" start="3435" end="3444" title="Sleetmute, Alaska" label="Sleetmute"/>
<link wikidata="Q932485" start="3446" end="3457" title="Stony River, Alaska" label="Stony River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255196" start="3459" end="3467" title="Tuluksak, Alaska" label="Tuluksak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212608" start="3469" end="3480" title="Tuntutuliak, Alaska" label="Tuntutuliak"/>
<link wikidata="Q550177" start="3482" end="3489" title="Tununak, Alaska" label="Tununak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005455" start="3524" end="3536" title="Crow Village, Alaska" label="Crow Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836641" start="3538" end="3548" title="Georgetown, Alaska" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335871" start="3550" end="3559" title="Napaimute, Alaska" label="Napaimute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548233" start="3561" end="3570" title="Umkumiute, Alaska" label="Umkumiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30680565" start="3614" end="3643" title="Iditarod Area School District" label="Iditarod Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q126489251" start="3646" end="3668" title="Kuspuk School District" label="Kuspuk School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621382" start="3671" end="3702" title="Lower Kuskokwim School District" label="Lower Kuskokwim School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782528" start="3705" end="3732" title="Lower Yukon School District" label="Lower Yukon School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061422" start="3735" end="3757" title="Yupiit School District" label="Yupiit School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3773" end="3815" title="List of Airports in the Bethel Census Area" label="List of Airports in the Bethel Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069740" start="3817" end="3846" title="Nunathloogagamiutbingoi Dunes" label="Nunathloogagamiutbingoi Dunes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87463" wikidata="Q501130" url="?curid=87463" title="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska">
<text>Bristol Bay Borough is a borough of the U.S. state of Alaska on Bristol Bay. As of the 2020 census the borough population was 843, down from 997 in 2010, the second-least populated borough in Alaska. The borough seat is Naknek. There are no incorporated settlements.

Incorporated in 1962, Bristol Bay was the first of Alaska&#x27;s boroughs. It is also among the smallest, consisting of little more than the rectangle of land around Naknek on the coast and King Salmon (which, uniquely, serves as the borough seat for the neighboring Lake and Peninsula Borough) inland.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (43.2%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska (east, north and south)
* Dillingham Census Area, Alaska (west)

===National protected area===
* Katmai National Park and Preserve (part)
** Katmai Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 1,258 people, 490 households, and 300 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 979 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 52.54% White, 0.56% Black or African American, 43.72% Native American, 0.24% Asian, 0.48% Pacific Islander, 0.08% from other races, and 2.38% from two or more races. 0.56%. were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 490 households 38.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.20% were married couples living together, 6.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.60% were non-families. 31.20% of households were one person and 2.90% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.33.

The age distribution was 31.30% under the age of 18, 5.90% from 18 to 24, 34.80% from 25 to 44, 24.20% from 45 to 64, and 3.80% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 119.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 125.60 males.

==Communities==
===Census-designated places===
* King Salmon
* Naknek (Borough seat)
* South Naknek

==Politics==
Bristol Bay Borough only voted for the Democratic candidate twice, in 1960 and 1964, and sided with Republicans ever since.







==See also==

*List of airports in the Bristol Bay Borough
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska
==References==
==External links==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501130" start="0" end="19" title="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska" label="Bristol Bay Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="25" end="32" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="40" end="50" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="54" end="60" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q917872" start="64" end="75" title="Bristol Bay" label="Bristol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="87" end="98" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="158" end="188" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="second-least populated borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="204" end="216" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q751433" start="220" end="226" title="Naknek, Alaska" label="Naknek"/>
<link wikidata="Q532057" start="458" end="469" title="King Salmon, Alaska" label="King Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="535" end="561" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="703" end="737" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q277728" start="764" end="794" title="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska" label="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="835" end="868" title="Katmai National Park and Preserve" label="Katmai National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="879" end="896" title="Katmai Wilderness" label="Katmai Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="929" end="940" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1113" end="1126" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q532057" start="2056" end="2067" title="King Salmon, Alaska" label="King Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q751433" start="2070" end="2076" title="Naknek, Alaska" label="Naknek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287372" start="2094" end="2106" title="South Naknek, Alaska" label="South Naknek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="2267" end="2310" title="List of airports in the Bristol Bay Borough" label="List of airports in the Bristol Bay Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975492" start="2312" end="2388" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87464" wikidata="Q179950" url="?curid=87464" title="Denali Borough, Alaska">
<text>The Denali Borough is a borough located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census the population of the borough was 1,619, down from 1,826 in 2010. The borough seat and most populated community is Healy, and its only incorporated place is Anderson. The borough was incorporated in December 1990.

The area was previously a part of the Unorganized Borough, with the Upper Railbelt School District serving as the region&#x27;s rural education attendance area (which was replaced by a school district under the borough&#x27;s umbrella upon incorporation).

The earliest inhabitants were nomadic native Alaskans. A mining camp was established near Healy prior to 1902, and construction of the Alaska Railroad brought additional settlers to the area in the early 1920s. Clear Space Force Station, the Usibelli Coal Mine and tourism at the Denali National Park and Preserve have brought growth and development.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water.

The borough contains North America&#x27;s highest point: Denali (federally Mount McKinley), from which it derives its name, at .

===National protected area===
* Denali National Park and Preserve (part)
** Denali Wilderness (part)

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area - west/north
* Fairbanks North Star Borough - northeast
* Southeast Fairbanks Census Area - east
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough - south

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 1,893 people, 785 households, and 452 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,351 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 85.74% White, 1.43% Black or African American, 4.75% Native American, 1.53% Asian, 0.37% Pacific Islander, 0.95% from other races, and 5.23% from two or more races. 2.48%. were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 785 households 31.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.40% were married couples living together, 4.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.30% were non-families. 35.00% of households were one person and 1.40% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 3.03.

The age distribution was 23.80% under the age of 18, 6.70% from 18 to 24, 36.80% from 25 to 44, 29.70% from 45 to 64, and 3.10% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 139.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 147.10 males.

Denali Borough is the 63rd highest-income county in the United States, and highest-income county in Alaska, by personal per capita income .

===2020 Census===
==Politics==
Apart from the two Democratic victories in 1960 and 1964, Denali Borough was carried by Republicans in presidential elections except in 1992, when it was carried by independent candidate Ross Perot.







==Communities==
===City===
* Anderson

===Census-designated places===
* Cantwell
* Denali Park
* Ferry
* Healy (Borough seat)

===Unincorporated communities===
* Clear
* Kantishna
* Usibelli

===Historical locations===
* Diamond
* Suntrana

==Popular culture==
In the &quot;Twilight&quot; Saga by Stephenie Meyer, the Denali vampire coven (consisting of Tanya, Kate, Irina, Eleazar and Carmen and later Garrett) lives in Denali because of the lack of sunlight.

The film &quot;Into the Wild&quot;, based on a book of the same name, featured a bus where Christopher McCandless died became a destination for film fans. The 1940s bus was taken to a remote trail about 60 years ago (from 2020) by a road crew, according to Denali Borough Mayor, Clay Walker. Visitors to the site had to cross the Teklanika River. In 2019 a newlywed Belarusian woman drowned trying to cross the swollen river on her way to the site. Another drowning took place in 2010. A stranded Brazilian had to be rescued in April 2020 and five Italians were rescued in February 2020, with one suffering from severe frostbite. In total 15 bus-related search and rescue operations for visitors to the bus were carried out between 2009 and 2017. In June 2020 the bus was removed because of public safety concerns. It was air-lifted by a US army Chinook helicopter. Alaskan authorities are quoted as saying the bus would be kept in a &quot;secure location&quot; until a decision is made about its future. Clay Walker said, &quot;It (the bus) is part of our history and it does feel a little bittersweet to see a piece of our history go down the road.&quot;

==See also==

* List of airports in the Denali Borough
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Denali Borough, Alaska

==References==
==External links==

* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179950" start="4" end="18" title="Denali Borough, Alaska" label="Denali Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="24" end="31" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="47" end="57" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="61" end="67" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="79" end="90" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="161" end="173" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592383" start="206" end="211" title="Healy, Alaska" label="Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80136" start="248" end="256" title="Anderson, Alaska" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="344" end="363" title="Unorganized Borough" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235460" start="698" end="713" title="Alaska Railroad" label="Alaska Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130643" start="774" end="799" title="Clear Space Force Station" label="Clear Space Force Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901978" start="805" end="813" title="Usibelli, Alaska" label="Usibelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="843" end="876" title="Denali National Park and Preserve" label="Denali National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1023" end="1036" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q681050" start="1044" end="1057" title="Extremes on Earth" label="highest point"/>
<link wikidata="Q130018" start="1059" end="1065" title="Denali" label="Denali"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="1164" end="1197" title="Denali National Park and Preserve" label="Denali National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="1208" end="1225" title="Denali Wilderness" label="Denali Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="1277" end="1302" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q512901" start="1318" end="1346" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough" label="Fairbanks North Star Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="1361" end="1392" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="1402" end="1427" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1461" end="1472" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1647" end="1660" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1687" end="1692" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1700" end="1705" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1709" end="1725" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1733" end="1748" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1756" end="1761" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1769" end="1785" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1857" end="1865" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1869" end="1875" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="2899" end="2909" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q80136" start="2947" end="2955" title="Anderson, Alaska" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033949" start="2990" end="2998" title="Cantwell, Alaska" label="Cantwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657726" start="3001" end="3012" title="Denali Park (CDP), Alaska" label="Denali Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408108" start="3015" end="3020" title="Ferry, Alaska" label="Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592383" start="3023" end="3028" title="Healy, Alaska" label="Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978752" start="3080" end="3085" title="Clear, Alaska" label="Clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724005" start="3088" end="3097" title="Kantishna, Alaska" label="Kantishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901978" start="3100" end="3108" title="Usibelli, Alaska" label="Usibelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800709" start="3139" end="3146" title="Diamond, Alaska" label="Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641704" start="3149" end="3157" title="Suntrana, Alaska" label="Suntrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q44523" start="3192" end="3200" title="Twilight (novel series)" label="Twilight"/>
<link wikidata="Q160219" start="3215" end="3230" title="Stephenie Meyer" label="Stephenie Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q269912" start="3395" end="3408" title="Into the Wild (film)" label="Into the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235125" start="3427" end="3431" title="Into the Wild (book)" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q312005" start="3471" end="3493" title="Christopher McCandless" label="Christopher McCandless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670844" start="3710" end="3725" title="Teklanika River" label="Teklanika River"/>
<link wikidata="Q209613" start="4226" end="4244" title="Boeing CH-47 Chinook" label="Chinook helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="4554" end="4592" title="List of airports in the Denali Borough" label="List of airports in the Denali Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975910" start="4595" end="4666" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Denali Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Denali Borough, Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87465" wikidata="Q277728" url="?curid=87465" title="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Dillingham Census Area is a census area located in the state of Alaska, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 4,857, slightly up from 4,847 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest community by far is the city of Dillingham, on a small arm of Bristol Bay on the Bering Sea.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (11.2%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska - west/north
* Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska - east

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Bering Sea unit)
** Hagemeister Island
* Togiak National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Togiak Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 4,922 people, 1,529 households, and 1,105 families living in the census area. The population density was . There were 2,332 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 21.64% White, 0.37% Black or African American, 70.13% Native American, 0.61% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.55% from other races, and 6.68% from two or more races. 2.26% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 34.6% reported speaking Yupik or Eskimo at home .
Of the 1,529 households 45.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.10% were married couples living together, 15.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.70% were non-families. 23.30% of households were one person and 3.60% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.20 and the average family size was 3.84.

The age distribution was 38.10% under the age of 18, 7.70% from 18 to 24, 28.90% from 25 to 44, 19.50% from 45 to 64, and 5.70% 65 or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.80 males. The per capita income is estimated at 23,500 U.S. dollars per year.

==Politics==






Dillingham Census Area is quite competitive in presidential elections.

==Communities==
===Cities===
*Aleknagik
*Clark&#x27;s Point
*Dillingham
*Ekwok
*Manokotak
*New Stuyahok
*Togiak

===Census-designated places===
*Koliganek
*Portage Creek
*Twin Hills

==See also==

*List of mountain peaks of North America
**List of mountain peaks of the United States
***List of mountain peaks of Alaska
*List of airports in the Dillingham Census Area
==References==
==External links==

* Census Area map: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q277728" start="0" end="22" title="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska" label="Dillingham Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="28" end="39" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="55" end="60" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="64" end="70" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="72" end="85" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="94" end="105" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="183" end="202" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="224" end="236" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79383" start="282" end="292" title="Dillingham, Alaska" label="Dillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q917872" start="312" end="323" title="Bristol Bay" label="Bristol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="331" end="341" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="375" end="393" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="516" end="542" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q501130" start="558" end="585" title="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska" label="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="588" end="622" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="664" end="704" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568350" start="738" end="756" title="Hagemeister Island" label="Hagemeister Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380194" start="759" end="790" title="Togiak National Wildlife Refuge" label="Togiak National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380194" start="801" end="818" title="Togiak Wilderness" label="Togiak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="851" end="862" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1043" end="1056" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="1331" end="1336" title="Yupik language" label="Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q25946" start="1340" end="1346" title="Eskimo language" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="2054" end="2065" title="U.S. dollar" label="U.S. dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79930" start="2199" end="2208" title="Aleknagik, Alaska" label="Aleknagik"/>
<link wikidata="Q301903" start="2210" end="2228" title="Clark&amp;#x27;s Point, Alaska" label="Clark&amp;#x27;s Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q79383" start="2230" end="2240" title="Dillingham, Alaska" label="Dillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79404" start="2242" end="2247" title="Ekwok, Alaska" label="Ekwok"/>
<link wikidata="Q79959" start="2249" end="2258" title="Manokotak, Alaska" label="Manokotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79541" start="2260" end="2272" title="New Stuyahok, Alaska" label="New Stuyahok"/>
<link wikidata="Q79258" start="2274" end="2280" title="Togiak, Alaska" label="Togiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453486" start="2314" end="2323" title="Koliganek, Alaska" label="Koliganek"/>
<link wikidata="Q538089" start="2325" end="2338" title="Portage Creek, Alaska" label="Portage Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q524230" start="2340" end="2350" title="Twin Hills, Alaska" label="Twin Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q459537" start="2367" end="2406" title="List of mountain peaks of North America" label="List of mountain peaks of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834108" start="2409" end="2452" title="List of mountain peaks of the United States" label="List of mountain peaks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863142" start="2456" end="2488" title="List of mountain peaks of Alaska" label="List of mountain peaks of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="2490" end="2536" title="List of airports in the Dillingham Census Area" label="List of airports in the Dillingham Census Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87467" wikidata="Q512901" url="?curid=87467" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska">
<text>The Fairbanks North Star Borough is a borough located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 95,665, down from 97,581 in 2010. The borough seat is Fairbanks. The borough&#x27;s land area is slightly smaller than that of the state of New Jersey.

Fairbanks North Star Borough comprises the Fairbanks, AK, Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is one of only two metropolitan areas in Alaska.

The borough is home to the University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fort Wainwright and Eielson Air Force Base.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (1.4%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska – north
* Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska – southeast
* Denali Borough, Alaska – southwest

==Government and politics==
The assembly is the borough&#x27;s governing body, or legislative branch. The assembly consists of nine members who are elected at-large (borough-wide), serving three-year terms. The borough operates under a &quot;strong mayor&quot; system. The mayor, along with his chief of staff, performs many of the job duties normally associated with a city manager.

;Mayor
* Grier Hopkins (D)

;Assembly members
* Seat A – David Guttenberg
* Seat B – Brett Rotermund
* Seat C – Mindy O&#x27;Neall
* Seat D – Liz Reeves-Ramos
* Seat E – Nick LaJiness
* Seat F – Savannah Fletcher
* Seat G – Kristan Kelly
* Seat H – Scott Crass
* Seat I – Barbara Haney

The borough operates a public library system; the main library is the Noel Wien Public Library.







==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the census of 2020, there were 95,655 people.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 82,840 people, 29,777 households, and 20,516 families were residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 33,291 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 77.79% White, 5.6% Black or African American, 6.90% Native American, 2.08% Asian, 0.30% Pacific Islander, 1.71% from other races, and 5.39% from two or more races. 4.15% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 29,777 households, 41.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.70% were married couples living together, 9.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.10% were non-families. 23.60% of households were one person, and 3.60% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.20.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 30.10% under the age of 18, 12.20% from 18 to 24, 33.30% from 25 to 44, 19.80% from 45 to 64, and 4.60% 65 or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 110.90 males.

==Communities==
===Cities===
*Fairbanks (Borough seat)
*North Pole

===Census-designated places===

*Badger
*Chena Ridge
*College
*Eielson AFB
*Ester
*Farmers Loop
*Fox
*Goldstream
*Harding-Birch Lakes
*Moose Creek
*Pleasant Valley
*Salcha
*South Van Horn
*Steele Creek
*Two Rivers
===Unincorporated communities===
*Chatanika
*Chena Hot Springs

==Education==
The entire borough is zoned to Fairbanks North Star Borough School District.

==Sister cities==
* Pune, India
* Yakutsk, Russia

==See also==

*List of airports in Fairbanks North Star Borough
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska

==References==
==External links==
* Fairbanks North Star Borough official website
* Borough map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512901" start="4" end="32" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska" label="Fairbanks North Star Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="38" end="45" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="61" end="71" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="75" end="81" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="93" end="104" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="163" end="175" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="179" end="188" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="265" end="275" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="336" end="365" title="Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="450" end="480" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748479" start="482" end="497" title="Fort Wainwright" label="Fort Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722822" start="502" end="524" title="Eielson Air Force Base" label="Eielson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="657" end="690" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="701" end="740" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q179950" start="755" end="777" title="Denali Borough, Alaska" label="Denali Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="873" end="891" title="legislative branch" label="legislative branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q58755877" start="1185" end="1198" title="Grier Hopkins" label="Grier Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1200" end="1201" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047259" start="1533" end="1557" title="Noel Wien Public Library" label="Noel Wien Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1611" end="1617" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1682" end="1688" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="2856" end="2865" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q79494" start="2882" end="2892" title="North Pole, Alaska" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8239616" start="2927" end="2933" title="Badger, Alaska" label="Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8345212" start="2935" end="2946" title="Chena Ridge, Alaska" label="Chena Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q996048" start="2948" end="2955" title="College, Alaska" label="College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2957" end="2968" title="Eielson AFB, Alaska#Demographics" label="Eielson AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q389443" start="2970" end="2975" title="Ester, Alaska" label="Ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5856095" start="2977" end="2989" title="Farmers Loop, Alaska" label="Farmers Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q257169" start="2991" end="2994" title="Fox, Alaska" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882374" start="2996" end="3006" title="Goldstream, Alaska" label="Goldstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740291" start="3008" end="3027" title="Harding-Birch Lakes, Alaska" label="Harding-Birch Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845942" start="3029" end="3040" title="Moose Creek, Alaska" label="Moose Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945197" start="3042" end="3057" title="Pleasant Valley, Alaska" label="Pleasant Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936564" start="3059" end="3065" title="Salcha, Alaska" label="Salcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132819" start="3067" end="3081" title="South Van Horn, Alaska" label="South Van Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838661" start="3083" end="3095" title="Steele Creek, Alaska" label="Steele Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691400" start="3097" end="3107" title="Two Rivers, Alaska" label="Two Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087501" start="3142" end="3151" title="Chatanika, Alaska" label="Chatanika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4516024" start="3153" end="3170" title="Chena Hot Springs, Alaska" label="Chena Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430022" start="3217" end="3261" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough School District" label="Fairbanks North Star Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538" start="3284" end="3288" title="Pune" label="Pune"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3290" end="3295" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610" start="3298" end="3305" title="Yakutsk" label="Yakutsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3307" end="3313" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3330" end="3378" title="List of airports in Fairbanks North Star Borough" label="List of airports in Fairbanks North Star Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976023" start="3380" end="3465" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87468" wikidata="Q512981" url="?curid=87468" title="Haines Borough, Alaska">
<text>Haines Borough is a home-rule borough located in the state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 2,056, down from 2,508 in 2010.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (14.9%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Municipality of Skagway Borough, Alaska – northeast
* Juneau City and Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska – south, west
* Stikine Region, British Columbia – northwest, east

===National protected area===
* Tongass National Forest (part)
** Endicott River Wilderness

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 2,392 people, 991 households, and 654 families living in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,419 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 82.53% White, 0.13% Black or African American, 11.50% Native American, 0.71% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 0.42% from other races, and 4.64% from two or more races. 1.38% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 991 households 31.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.00% were married couples living together, 7.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.00% were non-families. 27.10% of households were one person and 7.20% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.94.

The age distribution was 25.60% under the age of 18, 5.30% from 18 to 24, 28.20% from 25 to 44, 30.40% from 45 to 64, and 10.50% 65 or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.10 males.

==Transportation==
Haines is one of the northern stops on the Alaska Marine Highway. Many people who travel in winter travel to Haines by ferry to avoid travelling the &quot;Alcan&quot;, or Alaska Highway. Haines is also accessible by air service from neighboring Juneau, Alaska.

==Items of interest==
Around November of each year, thousands of eagles descend en masse to feast on one of the salmon runs. Many photographers come to attain easily accessible photos of eagles.

==Communities==
===Census-designated places===
* Covenant Life
* Excursion Inlet
* Haines (Borough seat)
* Lutak
* Mosquito Lake
* Mud Bay

==Politics==
In five presidential elections since 1960 has the Democratic candidate carried Haines Borough: 1964, 1992, 2016, 2020, and 2024. Joe Biden in 2020 carried the borough by the largest margin since 1964. 







==See also==

* List of airports in the Haines Borough
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Haines Borough, Alaska
* &quot;Gold Rush: White Water&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*Haines Convention and Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512981" start="0" end="14" title="Haines Borough, Alaska" label="Haines Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="20" end="29" title="home rule" label="home-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="30" end="37" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="53" end="58" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="62" end="68" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="80" end="91" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="276" end="315" title="Municipality of Skagway Borough, Alaska" label="Municipality of Skagway Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="330" end="361" title="Juneau City and Borough, Alaska" label="Juneau City and Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="376" end="409" title="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430348" start="426" end="458" title="Stikine Region, British Columbia" label="Stikine Region, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="510" end="533" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376134" start="544" end="569" title="Endicott River Wilderness" label="Endicott River Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="595" end="606" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="779" end="792" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="1752" end="1773" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q628076" start="1880" end="1894" title="Alaska Highway" label="Alaska Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615508" start="2216" end="2229" title="Covenant Life, Alaska" label="Covenant Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837535" start="2232" end="2247" title="Excursion Inlet, Alaska" label="Excursion Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79546" start="2250" end="2256" title="Haines, Alaska" label="Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q730225" start="2274" end="2279" title="Lutak, Alaska" label="Lutak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602030" start="2282" end="2295" title="Mosquito Lake, Alaska" label="Mosquito Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183361" start="2298" end="2305" title="Mud Bay, Alaska" label="Mud Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="2449" end="2458" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="2545" end="2583" title="List of airports in the Haines Borough" label="List of airports in the Haines Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976227" start="2586" end="2657" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Haines Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Haines Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2666" end="2688" title="Gold Rush: White Water" label="Gold Rush: White Water"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87469" wikidata="Q29445" url="?curid=87469" title="Juneau, Alaska">
<text>Juneau ( ; ), officially the City and Borough of Juneau, is the capital of the U.S. state of Alaska, located along the Gastineau Channel and the Alaskan panhandle. Juneau was named the capital of Alaska in 1906, when the government of what was then the District of Alaska was moved from Sitka as dictated by the U.S. Congress in 1900. On July 1, 1970, the City of Juneau merged with the City of Douglas and the surrounding Greater Juneau Borough to form the current consolidated city-borough, which ranks as the second-largest municipality in the United States by area and is larger than either Rhode Island or Delaware.

Downtown Juneau is nestled at the base of Mount Juneau and it is across the channel from Douglas Island. As of the 2020 census, the City and Borough had a population of 32,255, making it the third-most populous city in Alaska after Anchorage and Fairbanks, but the sixth-least populous U.S. state capital. Juneau experiences a daily influx of 21,000 people or more from visiting cruise ships between the months of May and September.

The city is named after a gold prospector from Quebec, Joe Juneau, although it was once called &quot;Rockwell&quot; and then &quot;Harrisburg&quot; (after Juneau&#x27;s co-prospector, Richard Harris). The Tlingit name of the town is , and Auke Bay just north of Juneau proper is called in Tlingit. The Taku River, just south of Juneau, was named after the cold wind, which occasionally blows down from the mountains.

Juneau is unique among U.S. state capitals in that there are no roads connecting the city to the rest of the state or to the contiguous United States. Honolulu, Hawaii, is the only other state capital which is not connected by road to the contiguous United States. The absence of a road network is due to the extremely rugged terrain surrounding the city. In turn Juneau is a &quot;de facto&quot; island city in terms of transportation; all goods coming in and out must be transported by plane or boat, in spite of the city&#x27;s location on the Alaskan mainland.

Downtown Juneau sits at sea level with tides averaging , below steep mountains about high. Atop the mountains is the Juneau Icefield, a large ice mass from which about 30 glaciers flow; two of them, the Mendenhall Glacier and the Lemon Creek Glacier, are visible from the local road system. The Mendenhall Glacier has been gradually retreating; its front face is declining in width and height.

The Alaska State Capitol in downtown Juneau was built as the Federal and Territorial Building in 1931. Prior to statehood, it housed federal government offices, the federal courthouse, and a post office. It also housed the territorial legislature and other territorial offices, including that of the governor. Today, Juneau is the home of the state legislature and the offices of the governor and lieutenant governor. Some executive branch offices have moved certain functions to Anchorage and elsewhere in the state.

==History==

The Gastineau Channel was a fishing place for the Auke (&quot;A&#x27;akw Kwáan&quot;) and Taku tribes, who had inhabited the surrounding area for thousands of years. The &quot;A&#x27;akw Kwáan&quot; had a village and burying ground here. In the 21st century it is known as Indian Point. They annually harvested herring during the spawning season.

Since the late 20th century, the A&#x27;akw Kwáan, together with the Sealaska Heritage Institute, have resisted European-American development of Indian Point, including proposals by the National Park Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). They consider it to be sacred territory, both because of the burying ground and the importance of the point in their traditions of gathering sustenance from the sea. They continue to gather clams, gumboot chitons, grass, and sea urchins, as well as tree bark for medicinal uses.

The city and state supported the Sealaska Heritage Institute in documenting the site, and in August 2016, it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places. &quot;It is the first traditional cultural property in Southeast Alaska to be placed on the register.&quot;

Descendants of the indigenous cultures include the Tlingit people. Native cultures have rich artistic traditions expressed in carving, weaving, singing, dancing, and in oral lore. Juneau is a social center for the Tlingit, Haida, and Tsimshian of Southeast Alaska.

===European encounters===

Although the Russians had a colony in the Alaska territory from 1784 to 1867, they did not settle in Juneau. They conducted extensive fur trading with Alaskan Natives of the Aleutian Islands and Kodiak.

The first European to see the Juneau area was Joseph Whidbey, master of the &quot;Discovery&quot; during George Vancouver&#x27;s 1791–95 expedition. He and his party explored the region in July–August 1794. Early in August he viewed the length of Gastineau Channel from the south, noting a small island in mid-channel. He later recorded seeing the channel again, this time from the west. He said it was unnavigable, being filled with ice.

===Mining era and naming===
After the California gold rush, miners migrated up the Pacific Coast and explored the West, seeking other gold deposits. In 1880, Sitka mining engineer George Pilz offered a reward to any local native in Alaska who could lead him to gold-bearing ore. A local native arrived with some ore, and several prospectors were sent to investigate. On their first trip to Gold Creek, they found deposits of little interest. However, Pilz sent Joe Juneau (the cousin of Milwaukee co-founder Solomon Juneau) and Richard Harris back to the Gastineau Channel, directing them to Snow Slide Gulch (the head of Gold Creek). According to the Rev. Samuel Young, in his book &quot;Alaska Days with John Muir&quot;, Juneau and Harris decided to explore their party&#x27;s campsite at the creek head in the summer of 1879. They found nuggets &quot;as large as peas and beans&quot; there, in Harris&#x27; words.

On October 18, 1880, the two men marked a town site and soon a mining camp sprang up. Many miners arrived within a year and the camp became a village, albeit made up mostly of tents and shacks rather than buildings. It was the first European American settlement founded in the territory after the United States purchased Alaska. By the autumn of 1881, the village had a population of over 100 and was known as Rockwell, after Lt. Com. Charles Rockwell; later it was known as Harrisburg after prospector Richard Harris. On December 14, 1881, it was decided at a miners&#x27; meeting of 72 persons to name the settlement Juneau, after prospector Joe Juneau.

===Establishment of Russian Orthodox Church===

Likely due to the pressure of European encroachment, some Tlingit appealed to the Russian Orthodox Church. It held services in northern Tlingit settlements in local languages as early as 1800 and 1824. One of its priests translated scripture and liturgy into the Tlingit language during the 1830s and 1840s. The Tlingit arranged for an Orthodox priest to come to their Juneau settlement. In 1890, about 700 people converted, following chief Yees Gaanaalx and his wife of Auke Bay. The Orthodox Church Missionary Society supported the Tlingit in furnishing and constructing a church for the large congregation.

The St. Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church was completed in 1894 and has maintained an important presence among the Tlingit, Serbians, and other Europeans who follow Orthodox traditions. The iconostasis has six large panels which were sent from Russia.

===Development of mining===
Prospector and placer miner John Lemon operated at the time in what is today the Lemon Creek area. The neighborhood which developed there was given his name by early settlers, several other landmarks in Juneau have also been named for him. Major mining operations in the Juneau mining district prior to World War II included the Treadwell Mine, the Alaska-Juneau Mine, and the Alaska-Gastineau Mine.

By 1906, after the decline of whaling and the fur trade, Sitka which was the original capital of Alaska, had become less important and the territorial legislature moved the seat of government to Juneau in accordance with a 1900 federal law. Juneau was the largest city in Alaska during the inter-war years, passing Fairbanks in population by the 1920 census. Anchorage became the largest city in terms of population in 1950.

===Selection as capital===
In 1911, the United States Congress authorized funds for construction of a capitol building for the Alaska Territory. World War I delayed construction and there were difficulties purchasing the necessary land. Citizens of Juneau donated some of the required funds, and construction began on September 8, 1929. Construction of the capitol took less than two years, and the building was dedicated as the Federal and Territorial Building on February 14, 1931. It was designed by Treasury Department architects in the Art Deco architectural style. The building was originally used by the federal government to house the federal courthouse and the post office for the territory. Alaska gained statehood in 1959 and under the Alaska Statehood Act, the Federal and Territorial Building was transferred to the new state and became its capitol.

The Alaska Governor&#x27;s Mansion was commissioned under the Public Building Act in 1910. The mansion was designed by James Knox Taylor in the Federal style. Construction was completed in 1912. The territorial governor at the time was the first governor to live in the mansion, and he held the first open house for citizens on January 1, 1913.

The area of the mansion is . It has ten bathrooms, six bedrooms, and eight fireplaces. It is the governor&#x27;s residence when in Juneau on official business. In June 1923, President Warren G. Harding became the first president to visit Alaska. Harding visited the Governor&#x27;s Mansion while Territorial Governor Scott Bone, who was appointed by Harding, was in office. Harding spoke from the porch of the mansion explaining his policies and met with attendees.

During World War II, more than 50 Japanese citizens and Japanese Americans residing in Juneau were sent to the internment camps inland as a result of Executive Order 9066, which authorized the forced removal of all ethnic Japanese away from their homes and businesses on the West Coast of the United States. The removal of Juneau&#x27;s Japanese community during the war is memorialized by the &quot;Empty Chair Memorial&quot;, which was dedicated in July 2014 in the city&#x27;s Capital School Park neighborhood.

Robert Atwood, who was then the publisher of the &quot;Anchorage Times&quot; and an Anchorage &quot;booster&quot;, was an early leader in efforts to move the capital to Fairbanks, which many in both cities resisted. Some supporters of a move wanted a new capital to be at least from Anchorage and Fairbanks, to prevent either city from having undue influence. Juneau has continued as the capital. In the 1970s, voters passed a plan to move the capital to Willow, a town north of Anchorage. But pro-Juneau people there and in Fairbanks persuaded voters also to approve a measure (the FRANK Initiative) requiring voter approval of all bondable construction costs before building could begin. Alaskans later voted against spending the estimated $900 million. A 1984 &quot;ultimate&quot; capital-move vote also failed, as did a 1996 vote.

After Alaska was given statehood in 1959, Juneau&#x27;s population increased as well as the growth of state government. After construction of the Alaska Pipeline in 1977, the state budget was flush with oil revenues, and it expanded programs for the people. The growth slowed considerably in the 1980s.

===21st century===

In 2005, the state demographer projected slow growth in the borough for the next twenty years. Cruise ship tourism has expanded rapidly, from approximately 230,000 passengers in 1990 to nearly 1,000,000 in 2006, as cruise lines have built more and larger ships. They sail to Juneau seven days a week over a longer season than before, but the cruising tourism is still primarily a summer industry. It provides few year-round jobs but stimulates summer employment in the city.

In 2010, the city was recognized as part of the &quot;Playful City USA&quot; initiative by KaBOOM!, created to honor cities that ensure their children have great places to play.

Juneau is larger in area than the state of Delaware and was for several decades, the country&#x27;s largest city by area. (Sitka surpassed it in 2000 when it incorporated.) Juneau is the only U.S. state capital on an international border: it is bordered on the east by Canada. It is the U.S. state capital whose namesake was most recently alive: Joe Juneau died in 1899.

The city was temporarily renamed UNO, after the card game, on April 1, 2016 (April Fool&#x27;s Day). It was a promotion with Mattel to draw &quot;attention to new wild cards in [the] game&quot;. For Juneau&#x27;s cooperation, Mattel donated $15,000 &quot;to the Juneau Community Foundation in honor of the late Mayor Greg Fisk.&quot;

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has an area of . In land area, Juneau (proper) is the largest state capital and the second-largest city overall in the United States, with being made up of land and consisting of water (16.54%).

The central (downtown) area of Juneau is at . The City and Borough of Juneau includes Douglas Island, which is a tidal island to the west of mainland Juneau. Douglas can be reached via the Juneau-Douglas Bridge. An unpopulated section of the city is located on Admiralty Island near its northern end.

As in the rest of Southeast Alaska, the Juneau area is susceptible to damage caused by natural disasters. The 2014 Palma Bay earthquake caused widespread outages to telecommunications in the area due to damage to a fiber-optic cable serving the area. In April 2008, a series of massive avalanches outside Juneau heavily damaged the electrical lines providing Juneau with power, knocking the hydroelectric system offline and forcing the utility to switch to a much more expensive diesel system.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
*Haines Borough, Alaska – northwest, west
*Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska – south, southwest
*Petersburg Borough, Alaska – quadripoint

===Border area===
Juneau shares its eastern border with the Canadian province of British Columbia. It is the only U.S. state capital which borders another country.
*Stikine Region, British Columbia – northeast, east

===National protected areas===
*Tongass National Forest (part)
**Admiralty Island National Monument (part)
***Kootznoowoo Wilderness (part)
**Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness (part)

===State Parks===
Alaska State Parks maintains the Juneau Trail System, a series of wilderness trails which are easy to extremely difficult to hike.

===Climate===

The Juneau area is in a transition zone between a humid continental climate (Köppen &quot;Dfb&quot;), a subarctic climate (Köppen &quot;Dfc&quot;), and an oceanic climate (Köppen &quot;Cfb/Cfc&quot;), depending on the isotherm used. The city&#x27;s climate is heavily influenced by the proximity of the Pacific Ocean, specifically the warm Alaska Current, and the Coast Mountains that form a natural orographic barrier for incoming air. As a result, the weather is mild and moist, which, as in other parts of the Alaska Panhandle, allows the growth of temperate rainforests. Like other cities in southeast Alaska, Juneau does not have permafrost.

As of 2023, Juneau falls within USDA Hardiness Zones 6B and 7A.

There are two prevalent types of wind in Juneau. Particularly in winter, the Aleutian Low draws warm and moist air from the south, bringing ample snow- or rainfall, and even in summer, winds will tend to blow onshore. The strength and frequency of the rainfall depends on several factors, including the presence of El Niño (more mild and rainy weather) or La Niña (colder and drier periods due to the presence of an anticyclone in the Gulf of Alaska). Conversely, offshore winds from the interior are normally dry but may have extreme variations in temperature.

Temperatures vary relatively little over the year. Winters are mild by Alaskan standards, with the average temperature of January slightly below freezing and highs often above ; summers are rather cool but occasionally may get warm. Temperatures above or below are not unheard of but are rare. Precipitation falls on an average 230 days per year, averaging at the airport (1981–2010 normals), but ranging from , depending on location. Most of it will occur in fall and winter, some falling as snow from November to March.

Records have been officially kept at downtown Juneau from January 1890 to June 1943, and at Juneau International Airport since July 1943. The coldest temperature ever officially recorded in Juneau was on February 2, 1968, and January 12, 1972, while the hottest was on July 7, 1975. The normals and record temperatures for both downtown and the airport are given below.



==Demographics==
Juneau first appeared on the 1890 U.S. Census. It was formally incorporated in 1900, and on July 1, 1970, the city of Juneau merged with the city of Douglas and the surrounding Greater Juneau Borough to form the current municipality, which accounts for the population jump between the 1970 and 1980 censuses.

===2020 census===
As of the census of 2020, there were 31,275 people, 12,922 households. The population density was , making it the least densely populated state capital. There were 12,922 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city/borough was 64.7% White (62.5% Non-Hispanic White), 1.0% African American, 10.1% Native American or Alaska Native, 6.7% Asian, 1.3% Pacific Islander, and 14.3% from two or more races. 7.0% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 2.6% reported speaking Tagalog at home, and 2.4% reported speaking Spanish.

The median income for a household in the city/borough was $90,126. The per capita income for the city/borough was $45,607. 7.2% of the population was below the poverty line.

==Economy==

The primary employer in Juneau is government including the state government, federal government (which has regional offices here, especially for resource agencies), municipal government (which includes the local airport, hospital, harbors, and school district), and the University of Alaska Southeast. State government offices and their indirect economic impact comprise approximately one-quarter of Juneau&#x27;s economy.

A large contributor to the local economy is the tourism industry, which generates most income in the summer months. In 2005, nearly an estimated one million cruise ship passengers visited Juneau between May and September. That figure is now 1.65 million per year for the season ending in October 2023.
On the other hand, former politician Bill Ray, who previously lived in Juneau and represented Juneau in the Alaska Legislature, said: &quot;Juneau doesn&#x27;t go forward. They&#x27;ve prostituted themselves to tourism. It looks like a poor man&#x27;s Lahaina&quot;.

The fishing industry is a major part of the Juneau economy, while not as strong as when a halibut schooner fleet generated considerable profits. The city was recently the 49th most lucrative U.S. fisheries port by volume and 45th by value. In 2004 it took in 15 million pounds of fish and shellfish, valued at 21.5 million dollars, according to the National Marine Fisheries Service. While the port of Juneau has comparatively little seafood processing compared to other towns of this size in Alaska, hundreds of commercial fishing boats sell their fish to plants in nearby Sitka, Hoonah, Petersburg and Ketchikan. The largest fleets operating from Juneau are the gillnet and troll salmon fleets.

Juneau has many of the commercial fishing associations in Alaska. The associations include the Alaska Trollers Association, United Fishermen of Alaska, United Southeast Alaska Gillnetters Association, and the Southeast Alaska Seiners Association.

Real estate agencies, federally funded highway construction, and mining are still viable non-government local industries. Alaska Seaplanes, an airline, has its headquarters in Juneau.
As of the 2010 census, there were 1,107 businesses with operations in Juneau borough; with a population of 31,275 there is a per capita of about 28 people per business.

Juneau&#x27;s only power utility is Alaska Electric Light &amp; Power (AEL&amp;P). Most of the electricity in the borough is generated at the Snettisham Hydroelectric facility in the southern end of the borough, accessible only by boat or plane. In April 2008, an avalanche destroyed three transmission towers, forcing AEL&amp;P to supply almost all of the borough&#x27;s electricity from diesel-powered generators for one month.

Also headquartered in Juneau is the Marine Exchange of Alaska, a nonprofit organization which operates an extensive vessel tracking network and ensures safe maritime operations for the entire state.

==Culture==
Juneau hosts the annual Alaska Folk Festival, Juneau Jazz &amp; Classics music festival, and Celebration, a biennial Alaska Native cultural festival. A city-owned ski resort, Eaglecrest is on Douglas Island.

The city-owned Treadwell ice-skating rink is located on the south end of Douglas Island. It is named after the Treadwell Gold Mine, which is located next to the rink. The rink has figure skating, hockey, and free open skates. From April to September when there is no ice, it is used for rollerblading, roller hockey, tennis, basketball, and concerts.

The city has a vibrant performing arts scene; it is home to Perseverance Theatre, Alaska&#x27;s largest professional theater, the non-profit Theatre in the Rough, Theater Alaska, Theater at Latitude 58, and Juneau Ghost Light Theatre (formerly the Juneau Douglas Little Theatre). The Juneau Symphony regularly performs. The two local opera companies are the Juneau Lyric Opera and Opera to Go. Twice a year the JUMP Society hosts screenings of locally made short films. Gold Town Nickelodeon is a local art house cinema which plays independent films, foreign films, classics, and has operated a drive-in.

Downtown Juneau has art galleries which participate in the monthly First Friday Art Walk and annual Gallery Walk held in the first week of December. The Juneau Arts &amp; Humanities Council coordinates certain events and operates the Juneau Arts &amp; Culture Center featuring a community center, gallery and lobby shop. The University of Alaska Southeast Campus offers lectures, concerts, and theater performances. Sealaska Heritage, the nonprofit affiliate of the Sealaska Corporation, operates the Walter Soboleff Building which is decorated by carvings and hosts cultural exhibits.

==Efforts to move state capital==
There have been efforts and discussions about moving Alaska&#x27;s capital away from Juneau. A primary motivating factor has been concerns about Juneau&#x27;s remote location. In 1960, 56% of voters voted against a measure to move the capital to a location in the &quot;Cook Inlet-Railbelt Area&quot; (the specific location would subsequently be selected by a committee appointed by the governor). In 1962, 55% of voters voted against a measure to move the capital to &quot;Western Alaska... within 30 miles of Anchorage&quot;. &quot;Senior&quot; state senators would have been chosen to select three potential sites to be put to a vote by later vote by the state&#x27;s electorate.

In 1974, at a time when Alaska was expected to be flushed with new funds from the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, 56% Alaskan voters approved an initiative to move the capital. The initiative specified that the new location must be within 300 miles of both Anchorage and Fairbanks and have at least 100 square miles of donated public land. The initiative would have the final location selected by a committee appointed by the governor. The committee proposed Larson Lake, Mount Yenlo, and Willow as sites and Willow received 53% of votes in a 1976 statewide vote. However, in 1978, voters rejected a measure to fund a move to Willow, with 55% of voters voting against spending $996 million to move the capital there. In 1978, voters also approved the Fiscally Responsible Alaskans Needing Knowledge (FRANK) Initiative, which required that all costs of moving the capital be disclosed and approved by Alaskans before the move commenced. In 1982, 53% of voters voted against spending roughly $2.9 billion to move the capital to Willow. This vote also had the effect of repealing the previous approval of moving the capital.

In 1994, a statewide initiative to move Alaska&#x27;s capital to Wasilla was defeated by a vote of 116,277 (54.7%) to 96,398 (45.3%). At the same time, 77% of voters approved a renewed FRANK Initiative. In 2002, Alaskan voters again voted against moving the state&#x27;s capital. Advocacy for a capital move has continued.

==Notable people==
*Carlos Boozer (born 1981), professional basketball player
*Gab Cody, playwright, filmmaker
*Dale DeArmond (1914–2006), printmaker
*Mike Dunleavy (born 1961), current governor of Alaska
*Neva Egan (1914–2011), Educator and First Lady of Alaska
*Janet Gardner (born 1962), singer of the hard rock band Vixen
*Al Gross (born 1962), surgeon, fisherman, and politician
*Mary McGee (born 1936), motorcycle racer
*Charles Melton (born 1991), actor
*Joshua Morrow (born 1974), actor known for starring in daytime drama &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;
*Rie Muñoz (1921–2015), artist and Bureau of Indian Affairs educator
*Elizabeth Peratrovich (1911–1958), civil rights activist, Grand President of the Alaska Native Sisterhood, member of the Tlingit nation.
*Macy Rodman (born 1989), musician and podcaster
*Linda Rosenthal, violinist
*Paul Rosenthal (born 1942), violinist
*Lynn Schooler, photographer, writer who authored &quot;The Blue Bear&quot;
*James Schoppert (1947–1992), carver, painter
*Molly Smith, theatre director

==Government and politics==
The City and Borough of Juneau operates under a council–manager form of government. The mayor is the titular head of the city, the presiding officer (or chair) of the Juneau Assembly (council), and is one of three members of the body which is elected at-large, or areawide. The other six members are elected by single-member districts: as of the last redistricting by the Assembly in 2003 there are two districts:
 A city manager handles daily affairs and a city attorney is responsible for working with legal matters.

The districts are nearly aligned with the boundaries of the 31st and 32nd election districts which were established by the state. Mainly the difference is that the 32nd District includes communities outside the CBJ: Gustavus, Kupreanof, Petersburg, Skagway and Tenakee Springs. The Juneau Airport precinct is in the 31st district, which is otherwise identical to the 2nd Assembly District.

Juneau was split into two state house districts by the state during redistricting in the early 1990. The districts comprising downtown Juneau, Douglas Island and surrounding areas have exclusively elected Democrats to the Alaska House of Representatives and the districts comprising Mendenhall Valley and surrounding areas have mostly elected Republicans. The 31st District is represented in the House by Andi Story, a Democrat who has been in office since 2018. The 32nd District is represented by Democrat Sara Hannan. The two election districts form Alaska Senate District Q and the seat is held by Democrat Jesse Kiehl. The last Republican to represent Juneau in the state Senate was Elton Engstrom Jr., the father of Cathy Muñoz. He left office at the end of his term in early 1971, after failing to be re-elected in 1970.







Juneau is one of the most Democratic boroughs in Alaska. The borough has voted Democratic in the U.S. presidential election in every election (except for one) since 1988.

While more state jobs are based in Anchorage than in Juneau, the state government still maintains a substantial presence in Juneau. A number of executive branch departments, as well as the legislature, are based in Juneau. In response to repeated pressure from Southcentral Alaska to move either the capital or the legislature, the legislature acquired and renovated several buildings in the vicinity of the Alaska State Capitol, which hold committee meeting rooms and administrative offices for the Legislative Affairs Agency. The buildings were named for former legislators Terry Miller and Thomas B. Stewart. Stewart, a Juneau native and son of early Juneau mayor Benjamin D. Stewart, represented Juneau in the Senate during the 1st Alaska State Legislature. He later served in Juneau&#x27;s Alaska Superior Court judgeship and was noted as an authority on the territory and early statehood eras of Alaska&#x27;s history.

A nine-story federal government building in Juneau near the mouth of Gold Creek and a short distance east of the Juneau-Douglas Bridge, houses many federal agencies, the United States District Court for the District of Alaska, and Juneau&#x27;s main post office. It is in the area known as &quot;The Flats&quot;. The building was designed by Linn A. Forrest and built in 1966.

==Education==
===Primary and secondary schools===
Juneau is served by the Juneau School District, and includes the following schools:
The following private schools serve Juneau:
* (Glacier) Valley Baptist Academy
* Faith Community School
* Thunder Mountain Learning Center (formerly Thunder Mountain Academy)
* Juneau Seventh-day Adventist Christian School
* Juneau Montessori School

===Colleges and universities===
The University of Alaska Southeast is within the Auke Bay community along the shore of Auke Lake. Juneau-Douglas Community College, founded in 1956, and Southeastern Senior College which was established in 1972, were merged in 1980 forming the University of Alaska Juneau. The university was restructured as the University of Alaska Southeast to include Ketchikan and Sitka campuses. The university offers undergraduate and graduate studies. The University of Alaska Fairbanks has a satellite campus in Juneau for mainly graduate level students in marine studies.

==Transportation==
Juneau is not directly accessible by road, although there are road connections within the borough to rural areas. The Glacier Highway section of Alaska Route 7 is within Juneau. Primary access to the city is by air and sea. Cars and trucks are transported to and from Juneau by barge or the Alaska Marine Highway ferry system.

===Sea===
The state-owned ferry system is the Alaska Marine Highway. The ferries connect Juneau with 13 other cities in Southeast Alaska and other destinations north via Whittier, as well as with the continental road system in Bellingham, Washington and Prince Rupert, British Columbia. On the northern route the ferries dock in Haines and Skagway connecting to the Alaska Highway via Whitehorse, Yukon. In addition to the traditional Alaska Marine Highway ferries, high-speed catamarans known as &quot;fast cats&quot; connect Juneau with Haines and Skagway () in two hours, about half the time of the traditional ferries travel time.

===Air===
Juneau International Airport serves the city and borough of Juneau. Alaska Airlines services the airport year round, operating over 11 daily departures. Alaska Airlines serves Juneau and other Southeast Alaska villages via &quot;Milk Run&quot; flights which make multiple stops to and from Seattle or Anchorage. It also connects Juneau to other cities in the country through connections in Seattle or Anchorage.

In the summer, Delta Air Lines serves Juneau from its major West Coast hub in Seattle, providing global service to and from Southeast Alaska without having to switch air carriers.

MarkAir and Western Airlines serviced Juneau in the past. Alaska Seaplanes and Ward Air offer charter seaplane service from the seaplane floatpond &quot;runway&quot; that runs parallel to the traditional tarmac. They offer service to the smaller villages in the surrounding area as well as flightseeing.

Alaska Seaplanes, Harris Air, and Island Air Express provide FAA Part 135 scheduled commuter service to communities throughout Southeast Alaska. These trips are the only connections to the outside world for many of these villages. Alaska Seaplanes has restored scheduled international service to Juneau with 3 weekly trips to Whitehorse, Canada, while Ward Air provides unscheduled charter flights to Canada.

===Roads===
Avalanche hazards, steep slopes, cold weather and environmental protection concerns are factors that make road construction and maintenance both difficult and costly.

The Juneau-Douglas Bridge connects the Juneau mainland with Douglas Island.

No roads connect Juneau to the rest of North America; ferries allow access to the road network. There is a lack of places to build a road. A route to the east would fail due to an icefield the size of Rhode Island separating Juneau from Atlin, British Columbia. Similarly, the route up the Taku River is blocked by ever-shifting glaciers. Juneau is one of only four state capitals not served by an Interstate highway (the others being Dover, Delaware; Jefferson City, Missouri; and Pierre, South Dakota).

====Juneau Access Project====

Juneau&#x27;s roads remain separate from other roads in Alaska and in the Lower 48. In the past there have been plans to connect Juneau to Haines and Skagway by road since before 1972, with funding for the first feasibility study acquired in 1987. The State of Alaska Department of Transportation and Public Facilities announced in 2005 that the connection was to be provided partly by road, and partly by fast ferry. A road would be built on the east side of Lynn Canal to a new ferry terminal at the Katzehin River estuary. A ferry would be able to transport cars from the terminal to Haines and Skagway and the North American road system. In 2006, the project was estimated to cost $258 million, and in 2007, the estimate was increased to $350 million. Annual costs have been estimated from $2.1 million to $12 million, depending on the length of the road. The Western Federal Lands Center estimated the project would cost $491 million.

Local opinions on constructing a road link to the outside world were mixed. Some residents saw such a road as a much-needed link between Juneau and the rest of the world which will also provide great economic benefits to the city, while many other residents were concerned about the project&#x27;s financial costs along with environmental and social impacts it could have on Lynn Canal.

Citing the state&#x27;s multibillion-dollar financial crisis, Governor Bill Walker announced on December 15, 2016, that the state is no longer backing construction of the Juneau Access Improvements Project. Eventually the project lost its steam and was ended in July 2018 with the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) releasing their Record of Decision, selecting the no-build alternative for the Juneau Access Project, halting construction on the road.

===Public transportation===
Local government operates a bus service under the name Capital Transit.

===Walking, hiking, and biking===
Residents walk, hike, or ride bicycles for recreational purposes and for transportation. The downtown area of Juneau has sidewalks, outdoors flights of stairs, and the neighborhoods on the hill above downtown are accessible by foot. Some roads in the city also have bike lanes, and there is a bike path parallel to the main highway.

==Infrastructure==
===Healthcare===
The city and borough is primarily served by Bartlett Regional Hospital in Juneau&#x27;s Twin Lakes area. The hospital also serves the nearby remote communities of Hoonah, Haines, and Skagway. Individuals from those communities are airlifted in emergencies to the hospital via helicopter or air ambulance (a 20-minute to a 45-minute flight).

==Utilities==
Juneau is served by the following utilities:
*Electric: Alaska Electric Light and Power Company
*Water and Sewer: City and Borough of Juneau

==Media==
===Print===
Juneau&#x27;s daily newspaper, the &quot;Juneau Empire&quot;, is published Wednesdays and Saturdays. The &quot;Capital City Weekly&quot; was published weekly and the Empire runs a few stories in a CCW section. The University of Alaska Southeast has &quot;The Whalesong&quot;, a college newspaper.

===Radio===
*AM: KJNO 630, KINY 800, KXXJ 1330
*FM: KTKU 105.1, KSUP 106.3, and LPFM station KBJZ-LP 94.1.
*Public Radio: KTOO 104.3, KXLL &quot;Excellent Radio&quot; 100.7 and KRNN &quot;Rain Country Radio&quot; 102.7 (all 3 operated by KTOO).

The studios of CoastAlaska (a regional public radio station consortium), are in Juneau. AP (the Associated Press), Anchorage news outlets, and other Alaska media entities, send reporters to Juneau during the annual Legislative session.

===Television===
Juneau&#x27;s major television affiliates are: KTOO (PBS), 360 North &quot;Alaska&#x27;s public affairs channel&quot; (Operated by KTOO), KATH-LD (NBC), KYEX-LD (CBS/MyNetworkTV on DT2), and KJUD (ABC)/The CW on DT2/Fox on DT3).

The Juneau-Douglas High School video program produces television programming including a weekly 10-minute TV newscast, &quot;JDTV News&quot;, which is on air during the spring semester.

==Sister cities==
Juneau has three active sister city relationships. 
* Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada
* Vladivostok, Primorsky Krai, Russia
* Kalibo, Aklan, Philippines 
It also has two relationships which are in emeritus status, meaning they are not currently active. 
* Mishan City, China
* Chiayi City, Taiwan
==See also==

*Juneau gold belt
*Adair-Kennedy Memorial Park
*Capital City Fire/Rescue
*Evergreen Cemetery
*Hurff Ackerman Saunders Federal Building and Robert Boochever U.S. Courthouse
*Juneau Mountain Rescue
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Juneau, Alaska
*Alaska Route 7
*Out the road, a region of Juneau
*USS &quot;Juneau&quot;, 3 ships

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==

*Juneau Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="0" end="6" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="29" end="55" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="City and Borough of Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="64" end="71" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="79" end="89" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="93" end="99" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495538" start="119" end="136" title="Gastineau Channel" label="Gastineau Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="145" end="162" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Alaskan panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163801" start="253" end="271" title="District of Alaska" label="District of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="287" end="292" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="312" end="325" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301142" start="395" end="402" title="Douglas, Alaska" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="438" end="445" title="Borough (United States)" label="Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="466" end="491" title="consolidated city-county" label="consolidated city-borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="519" end="568" title="List of United States cities by area" label="largest municipality in the United States by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="595" end="607" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="611" end="619" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q130544" start="664" end="676" title="Mount Juneau" label="Mount Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593064" start="711" end="725" title="Douglas Island" label="Douglas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="737" end="748" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869" start="813" end="847" title="List of cities in Alaska" label="third-most populous city in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="854" end="863" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="868" end="877" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1103" end="1109" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741961" start="1111" end="1121" title="Joe Juneau (prospector)" label="Joe Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326287" start="1240" end="1254" title="Richard Harris (prospector)" label="Richard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821641" start="1295" end="1303" title="Auke Bay" label="Auke Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389724" start="1358" end="1368" title="Taku River" label="Taku River"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="1625" end="1633" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="1635" end="1641" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518380" start="2157" end="2172" title="Juneau Icefield" label="Juneau Icefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920336" start="2243" end="2261" title="Mendenhall Glacier" label="Mendenhall Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095370" start="2439" end="2459" title="Alaska State Capitol" label="Alaska State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q719894" start="2778" end="2795" title="Alaska Legislature" label="state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q575942" start="2819" end="2827" title="List of Governors of Alaska" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60095901" start="2832" end="2851" title="List of Lieutenant Governors of Alaska" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495538" start="2971" end="2988" title="Gastineau Channel" label="Gastineau Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563601" start="3017" end="3021" title="Auke Indians" label="Auke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389700" start="3057" end="3061" title="Taku Indians" label="Taku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666068" start="3384" end="3411" title="Sealaska Heritage Institute" label="Sealaska Heritage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="3501" end="3522" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="3531" end="3578" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="3777" end="3781" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861188" start="3784" end="3798" title="gumboot chiton" label="gumboot chiton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="3812" end="3822" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666068" start="3900" end="3927" title="Sealaska Corporation" label="Sealaska Heritage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3994" end="4030" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="4087" end="4103" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="4192" end="4206" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit people"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="4364" end="4369" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q56490" start="4375" end="4384" title="Tsimshian" label="Tsimshian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4447" end="4455" title="Russian Empire" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="4460" end="4492" title="Russian colonization of North America" label="a colony in the Alaska territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="4608" end="4624" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="4629" end="4635" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287896" start="4684" end="4698" title="Joseph Whidbey" label="Joseph Whidbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564601" start="4720" end="4729" title="HMS Discovery (1789)" label="Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="4743" end="4759" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044451" start="4767" end="4785" title="Vancouver Expedition" label="1791–95 expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="5161" end="5174" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="5236" end="5241" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741961" start="5539" end="5549" title="Joe Juneau (prospector)" label="Joe Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="5565" end="5574" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174359" start="5586" end="5600" title="Solomon Juneau" label="Solomon Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326287" start="5606" end="5620" title="Richard Harris (prospector)" label="Richard Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="6229" end="6246" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="6307" end="6323" title="Alaska Purchase" label="purchased Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="6629" end="6639" title="prospecting" label="prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="6783" end="6806" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q982977" start="6903" end="6921" title="Innocent of Alaska" label="One of its priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="6964" end="6980" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821641" start="7172" end="7180" title="Auke Bay, Juneau" label="Auke Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q421512" start="7316" end="7352" title="St. Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church (Juneau, Alaska)" label="St. Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="7555" end="7561" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="7607" end="7618" title="placer mine" label="placer mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197845" start="7620" end="7630" title="John Lemon (prospector)" label="John Lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521299" start="7673" end="7684" title="Lemon Creek, Alaska" label="Lemon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312496" start="7863" end="7885" title="Juneau mining district" label="Juneau mining district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836584" start="7921" end="7935" title="Treadwell gold mine" label="Treadwell Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708478" start="7941" end="7959" title="Alaska-Juneau Gold Mining Company" label="Alaska-Juneau Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708476" start="7969" end="7990" title="Alaska-Gastineau Mine" label="Alaska-Gastineau Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="8050" end="8055" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="8308" end="8317" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042056" start="8339" end="8350" title="1920 United States census" label="1920 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="8352" end="8361" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q585978" start="8412" end="8416" title="1950 United States census" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811372" start="8546" end="8562" title="Alaska Territory" label="Alaska Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8564" end="8575" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="8960" end="8988" title="Art Deco architecture" label="Art Deco architectural style"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="9166" end="9186" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095370" start="9273" end="9280" title="Alaska State Capitol" label="capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137444" start="9402" end="9419" title="James Knox Taylor" label="James Knox Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400086" start="9427" end="9440" title="Federal architecture" label="Federal style"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="9813" end="9830" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q885878" start="9946" end="9956" title="Scott Bone" label="Scott Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10103" end="10115" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="10195" end="10230" title="internment of Japanese Americans" label="sent to the internment camps inland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159918" start="10246" end="10266" title="Executive Order 9066" label="Executive Order 9066"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="10371" end="10402" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759223" start="10496" end="10516" title="Empty Chair Memorial" label="Empty Chair Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341646" start="10611" end="10624" title="Robert Atwood" label="Robert Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752737" start="10666" end="10681" title="Anchorage Times" label="Anchorage Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q923710" start="11066" end="11072" title="Willow, Alaska" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="11470" end="11479" title="U.S. state" label="statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="11593" end="11608" title="Alaska Pipeline" label="Alaska Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998060" start="12338" end="12345" title="KaBOOM! (non-profit organization)" label="KaBOOM!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="12469" end="12477" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741961" start="12772" end="12782" title="Joe Juneau (prospector)" label="Joe Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q17267" start="12842" end="12855" title="Uno (card game)" label="the card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="12923" end="12929" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21104184" start="13115" end="13124" title="Greg Fisk" label="Greg Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="13164" end="13191" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13267" end="13280" title="List of capitals in the United States#State capitals" label="state capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593064" start="13487" end="13501" title="Douglas Island" label="Douglas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q555937" start="13514" end="13526" title="tidal island" label="tidal island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582287" start="13590" end="13611" title="Juneau-Douglas Bridge" label="Juneau-Douglas Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q359266" start="13662" end="13678" title="Admiralty Island" label="Admiralty Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="13790" end="13806" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507707" start="13813" end="13838" title="2014 Palma Bay earthquake" label="2014 Palma Bay earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="13918" end="13935" title="fiber-optic cable" label="fiber-optic cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q963375" start="14182" end="14188" title="Diesel generator" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q512981" start="14240" end="14262" title="Haines Borough, Alaska" label="Haines Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="14282" end="14315" title="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q25408755" start="14336" end="14362" title="Petersburg Borough, Alaska" label="Petersburg Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="14438" end="14455" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="Canadian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="14459" end="14475" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430348" start="14543" end="14575" title="Stikine Region, British Columbia" label="Stikine Region, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="14627" end="14650" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q359266" start="14660" end="14694" title="Admiralty Island National Monument" label="Admiralty Island National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430877" start="14705" end="14727" title="Kootznoowoo Wilderness" label="Kootznoowoo Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447654" start="14737" end="14770" title="Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness" label="Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520278" start="14797" end="14815" title="Alaska State Parks" label="Alaska State Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="14994" end="15019" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15021" end="15027" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="15048" end="15065" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15067" end="15073" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="15099" end="15114" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="15247" end="15260" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902975" start="15284" end="15298" title="Alaska Current" label="Alaska Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q920070" start="15308" end="15323" title="Coast Mountains" label="Coast Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506685" start="15344" end="15362" title="Orographic lift" label="orographic barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="15457" end="15473" title="Alaska Panhandle" label="Alaska Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q845725" start="15496" end="15516" title="temperate rainforest" label="temperate rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="15579" end="15589" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="15624" end="15628" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="USDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="15629" end="15644" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness Zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q542694" start="15734" end="15746" title="Aleutian Low" label="Aleutian Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="15972" end="15979" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="16013" end="16020" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709543" start="16073" end="16084" title="anticyclone" label="anticyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="16092" end="16106" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505424" start="16835" end="16863" title="Juneau International Airport" label="Juneau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="17471" end="17477" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="17721" end="17726" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="17734" end="17752" title="Non-Hispanic whites" label="Non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="17760" end="17776" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="17784" end="17799" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="17803" end="17816" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="17823" end="17828" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="17835" end="17851" title="Pacific Islands Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="17915" end="17933" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="17970" end="17977" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="18095" end="18112" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="18482" end="18512" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="18793" end="18804" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993429" start="18975" end="18983" title="Bill Ray (politician)" label="Bill Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q719894" start="19046" end="19064" title="Alaska Legislature" label="Alaska Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012971" start="19190" end="19197" title="Lahaina" label="Lahaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="19555" end="19588" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="19787" end="19793" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="19810" end="19819" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708541" start="20542" end="20575" title="Alaska Electric Light &amp;amp; Power" label="Alaska Electric Light &amp;amp; Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547680" start="20648" end="20681" title="Snettisham Hydroelectric Project" label="Snettisham Hydroelectric facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981715" start="20973" end="20998" title="Marine Exchange of Alaska" label="Marine Exchange of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="21002" end="21024" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708547" start="21173" end="21193" title="Alaska Folk Festival" label="Alaska Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19787082" start="21195" end="21221" title="Juneau Jazz &amp;amp; Classics" label="Juneau Jazz &amp;amp; Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057614" start="21242" end="21253" title="Celebration (Alaska festival)" label="Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="21266" end="21279" title="Alaska Native" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325323" start="21324" end="21334" title="Eaglecrest Ski Area" label="Eaglecrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="21383" end="21399" title="Ice rink" label="ice-skating rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836584" start="21469" end="21488" title="Treadwell gold mine" label="Treadwell Gold Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170152" start="21770" end="21790" title="Perseverance Theatre" label="Perseverance Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="22641" end="22671" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666068" start="22782" end="22802" title="Sealaska Corporation" label="Sealaska Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23152" end="23159" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1960" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="23207" end="23217" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23374" end="23381" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1962" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="23448" end="23457" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q937088" start="23703" end="23724" title="Trans-Alaska Pipeline" label="Trans-Alaska Pipeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23757" end="23767" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1974" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="23883" end="23892" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q923710" start="24101" end="24107" title="Willow, Alaska" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24170" end="24174" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1976" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24212" end="24219" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1978" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24571" end="24576" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1982" label="voted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24756" end="24766" title="List of Alaska ballot measures#1994" label="initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q79957" start="24800" end="24807" title="Wasilla, Alaska" label="Wasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q310411" start="25079" end="25092" title="Carlos Boozer" label="Carlos Boozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665995" start="25138" end="25146" title="Gab Cody" label="Gab Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210401" start="25171" end="25184" title="Dale DeArmond" label="Dale DeArmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="25198" end="25208" title="Printmaking" label="printmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209663" start="25210" end="25223" title="Mike Dunleavy (politician)" label="Mike Dunleavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019044" start="25265" end="25274" title="Neva Egan" label="Neva Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834507" start="25301" end="25321" title="First Ladies and Gentlemen of Alaska" label="First Lady of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053120" start="25323" end="25336" title="Janet Gardner" label="Janet Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865430" start="25379" end="25384" title="Vixen (band)" label="Vixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q99826870" start="25386" end="25394" title="Al Gross (politician)" label="Al Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q27677142" start="25444" end="25454" title="Mary McGee" label="Mary McGee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41796239" start="25486" end="25500" title="Charles Melton" label="Charles Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q59522" start="25521" end="25534" title="Joshua Morrow" label="Joshua Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q849627" start="25596" end="25622" title="The Young and the Restless" label="The Young and the Restless"/>
<link wikidata="Q18753800" start="25630" end="25639" title="Rie Muñoz" label="Rie Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="25664" end="25688" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363339" start="25699" end="25720" title="Elizabeth Peratrovich" label="Elizabeth Peratrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q108301323" start="25837" end="25848" title="Macy Rodman" label="Macy Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058521" start="25886" end="25901" title="Linda Rosenthal (violinist)" label="Linda Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153331" start="25914" end="25928" title="Paul Rosenthal (violinist)" label="Paul Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736570" start="25953" end="25966" title="Lynn Schooler" label="Lynn Schooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142839" start="26029" end="26044" title="James Schoppert" label="James Schoppert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896679" start="26075" end="26086" title="Molly Smith" label="Molly Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="26182" end="26197" title="Council–manager government" label="council–manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808718" start="26301" end="26316" title="Assembly of the City and Borough of Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="26385" end="26393" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="26445" end="26467" title="single-member district" label="single-member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="26870" end="26878" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80084" start="26880" end="26889" title="Kupreanof, Alaska" label="Kupreanof"/>
<link wikidata="Q80027" start="26891" end="26901" title="Petersburg, Alaska" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="26903" end="26910" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79409" start="26915" end="26930" title="Tenakee Springs, Alaska" label="Tenakee Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305983" start="27113" end="27126" title="redistricting" label="redistricting"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="27250" end="27259" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q720324" start="27267" end="27298" title="Alaska House of Representatives" label="Alaska House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="27388" end="27399" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q58756000" start="27450" end="27460" title="Andi Story" label="Andi Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q58755971" start="27553" end="27564" title="Sara Hannan" label="Sara Hannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q144574" start="27598" end="27611" title="Alaska Senate" label="Alaska Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58756799" start="27656" end="27667" title="Jesse Kiehl" label="Jesse Kiehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q572018" start="28313" end="28332" title="Southcentral Alaska" label="Southcentral Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095370" start="28460" end="28480" title="Alaska State Capitol" label="Alaska State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708558" start="28552" end="28578" title="Alaska Legislative Council" label="Legislative Affairs Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405701" start="28628" end="28640" title="Terry Miller (politician)" label="Terry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596107" start="28784" end="28812" title="1st Alaska State Legislature" label="1st Alaska State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303079" start="28847" end="28868" title="Alaska Superior Court" label="Alaska Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q575962" start="28954" end="28975" title="History of Alaska" label="Alaska&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578689" start="29047" end="29057" title="Gold Creek (Juneau, Alaska)" label="Gold Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582287" start="29091" end="29112" title="Juneau-Douglas Bridge" label="Juneau-Douglas Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889765" start="29148" end="29203" title="United States District Court for the District of Alaska" label="United States District Court for the District of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="29228" end="29239" title="United States Postal Service" label="post office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554499" start="29320" end="29335" title="Linn A. Forrest" label="Linn A. Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312488" start="29430" end="29452" title="Juneau School District" label="Juneau School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="29777" end="29807" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821641" start="29822" end="29830" title="Auke Bay" label="Auke Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821644" start="29860" end="29869" title="Auke Lake" label="Auke Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285262" start="30219" end="30249" title="University of Alaska Fairbanks" label="University of Alaska Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q801928" start="30502" end="30516" title="Alaska Route 7" label="Alaska Route 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="30648" end="30682" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway ferry system"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="30731" end="30752" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79716" start="30855" end="30863" title="Whittier, Alaska" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q430267" start="30912" end="30934" title="Bellingham, Washington" label="Bellingham, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015639" start="30939" end="30970" title="Prince Rupert, British Columbia" label="Prince Rupert, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q628076" start="31051" end="31065" title="Alaska Highway" label="Alaska Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="31070" end="31087" title="Whitehorse, Yukon" label="Whitehorse, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="31120" end="31141" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505424" start="31331" end="31359" title="Juneau International Airport" label="Juneau International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q822614" start="31399" end="31414" title="Alaska Airlines" label="Alaska Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="31621" end="31628" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="31632" end="31641" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188920" start="31759" end="31774" title="Delta Air Lines" label="Delta Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766382" start="31925" end="31932" title="MarkAir" label="MarkAir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583020" start="31937" end="31953" title="Western Airlines" label="Western Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935" start="32652" end="32661" title="Avalanche" label="Avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582287" start="32824" end="32845" title="Juneau-Douglas Bridge" label="Juneau-Douglas Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593064" start="32880" end="32894" title="Douglas Island" label="Douglas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="33098" end="33110" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623078" start="33134" end="33157" title="Atlin, British Columbia" label="Atlin, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389724" start="33187" end="33197" title="Taku River" label="Taku River"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="33295" end="33313" title="Interstate highway" label="Interstate highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33518" start="33332" end="33347" title="Dover, Delaware" label="Dover, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180" start="33349" end="33373" title="Jefferson City, Missouri" label="Jefferson City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="33379" end="33399" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="33508" end="33516" title="Lower 48" label="Lower 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q79546" start="33573" end="33579" title="Haines, Alaska" label="Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="33584" end="33591" title="Skagway" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q422243" start="33894" end="33904" title="Lynn Canal" label="Lynn Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159074" start="34834" end="34845" title="Bill Walker (American politician)" label="Bill Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035680" start="35302" end="35317" title="Capital Transit System" label="Capital Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20712149" start="35768" end="35794" title="Bartlett Regional Hospital" label="Bartlett Regional Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="35887" end="35893" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79546" start="35895" end="35901" title="Haines, Alaska" label="Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="35907" end="35914" title="Skagway, Alaska" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828988" start="36136" end="36175" title="Alaska Electric Light and Power Company" label="Alaska Electric Light and Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312479" start="36285" end="36298" title="Juneau Empire" label="Juneau Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035526" start="36355" end="36374" title="Capital City Weekly" label="Capital City Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="36458" end="36488" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331542" start="36559" end="36563" title="KJNO" label="KJNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330965" start="36569" end="36573" title="KINY" label="KINY"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341660" start="36579" end="36583" title="KXXJ" label="KXXJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231732" start="36594" end="36598" title="KTKU" label="KTKU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338301" start="36606" end="36610" title="KSUP" label="KSUP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325925" start="36635" end="36642" title="KBJZ-LP" label="KBJZ-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15231739" start="36664" end="36668" title="KTOO (FM)" label="KTOO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680072" start="36676" end="36680" title="KXLL" label="KXLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336918" start="36719" end="36723" title="KRNN" label="KRNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138071" start="36803" end="36814" title="CoastAlaska" label="CoastAlaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325019" start="37089" end="37093" title="KTOO-TV" label="KTOO"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="37095" end="37098" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325385" start="37180" end="37187" title="KATH-LD" label="KATH-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="37189" end="37192" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341814" start="37195" end="37202" title="KAUU" label="KYEX-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="37204" end="37207" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="37208" end="37219" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331651" start="37233" end="37237" title="KJUD" label="KJUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="37239" end="37242" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="37244" end="37250" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338529" start="37258" end="37261" title="KTBY" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312473" start="37276" end="37302" title="Juneau-Douglas High School" label="Juneau-Douglas High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="37501" end="37512" title="town twinning" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055" start="37531" end="37548" title="Whitehorse, Yukon" label="Whitehorse, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="37559" end="37570" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341" start="37572" end="37586" title="Primorsky Krai" label="Primorsky Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q626721" start="37597" end="37603" title="Kalibo" label="Kalibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13723" start="37605" end="37610" title="Aklan" label="Aklan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203738" start="37727" end="37738" title="Mishan" label="Mishan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="37740" end="37745" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q249995" start="37748" end="37759" title="Chiayi City" label="Chiayi City"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="37761" end="37767" title="Taiwan Province" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312492" start="37783" end="37799" title="Juneau gold belt" label="Juneau gold belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678454" start="37801" end="37828" title="Adair-Kennedy Memorial Park" label="Adair-Kennedy Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866058" start="37830" end="37854" title="Capital City Fire/Rescue" label="Capital City Fire/Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417183" start="37856" end="37874" title="Evergreen Cemetery (Juneau, Alaska)" label="Evergreen Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016745" start="37876" end="37953" title="Hurff Ackerman Saunders Federal Building and Robert Boochever U.S. Courthouse" label="Hurff Ackerman Saunders Federal Building and Robert Boochever U.S. Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879391" start="37955" end="37977" title="Juneau Mountain Rescue" label="Juneau Mountain Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976470" start="37979" end="38042" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Juneau, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Juneau, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q801928" start="38044" end="38058" title="Alaska Route 7" label="Alaska Route 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5860541" start="38060" end="38072" title="Out the road" label="Out the road"/>
<link wikidata="Q576609" start="38094" end="38116" title="USS Juneau" label="USS &amp;quot;Juneau&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87471" wikidata="Q512713" url="?curid=87471" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska">
<text>Kenai Peninsula Borough is a borough of the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 58,799, up from 55,400 in 2010. The borough seat is Soldotna, the largest city is Kenai, and the most populated community is the census-designated place of Kalifornsky.

The borough includes most of the Kenai Peninsula and a large area of the mainland of Alaska on the opposite side of Cook Inlet.

==Geography==

The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (3.4%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska - northwest
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska - north
* Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska - north
* Chugach Census Area, Alaska - east
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska - west
* Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska - south

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of Gulf of Alaska unit)
** Chiswell Islands
** Tuxedni Wilderness
* Chugach National Forest (part)
* Katmai National Park and Preserve (part)
** Katmai Wilderness (part)
* Kenai Fjords National Park
* Kenai National Wildlife Refuge
** Kenai Wilderness
* Lake Clark National Park and Preserve (part)
** Lake Clark Wilderness (part)

==Ecology==
Bear Lake, Tutka Bay, and the Trail Lakes, have been the site of salmon enhancement activities. All three sites are managed by the Cook Inlet Aquaculture Association Some of the fish hatched at these facilities are released into the famous Homer fishing hole. Cook Inlet Keeper and the Cook Inlet Regional Citizen&#x27;s Advisory Council are groups that attempt to influence public policy on the use of the area&#x27;s resources.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the census of 2020, there were 58,799 people.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 49,700 people, 18,400 households, and 12,700 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 24,900 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 86% white, 7% Native American, 2% Hispanic or Latino (any race), and 4% from two or more races. Black or African Americans, Asians, and Pacific Islanders each were less than 1%. Just under 1% were from other races combined. 1.92% reported speaking Russian at home, while 1.74% spoke Spanish.

Of the 18,400 households, 38% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55% were married couples living together, 9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31% were non-families. 25% of households were one person, and 5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.6 and the average family size was 3.2.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 30% under the age of 18, 7% from 18 to 24, 30% from 25 to 44, 26% from 45 to 64, and 7% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 109 males; for every 100 females age 18 and over there were 110 males.

==Government and infrastructure==
There is a borough-wide government based in Soldotna, consisting of a strong mayor and an assembly of representatives from all areas of the borough. They collect sales and property taxes and provide services such as road maintenance, waste collection facilities, emergency services and major funding for public schools, along with mitigation of damage from spruce bark beetles that infested the borough in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Incorporated towns also have their own local governments and city councils.
The Alaska Department of Corrections operates the Spring Creek Correctional Center near Seward and the Wildwood Correctional Complex near Kenai.

Kenai Peninsula is one of the most Republican boroughs in the state, having last backed a Democrat for president in 1968.







==Communities==
===Cities===
* Homer
* Kachemak
* Kenai
* Seldovia
* Seward
* Soldotna (Borough seat)

===Census-designated places===

* Anchor Point
* Bear Creek
* Beluga
* Clam Gulch
* Cohoe
* Cooper Landing
* Crown Point
* Diamond Ridge
* Fox River
* Fritz Creek
* Funny River
* Halibut Cove
* Happy Valley
* Hope
* Kalifornsky
* Kasilof
* Lowell Point
* Moose Pass
* Nanwalek
* Nikiski
* Nikolaevsk
* Ninilchik
* Point Possession
* Port Graham
* Primrose
* Ridgeway
* Salamatof
* Seldovia Village
* Sterling
* Sunrise
* Tyonek
===Unincorporated communities===
* Jakolof Bay
* Kachemak Selo
* Razdolna
* Voznesenka

===Ghost town===
* Portlock

==Education==
The school district for the whole borough is Kenai Peninsula Borough School District.

==See also==

* 2006 Arctic Winter Games
* Kalgin Island
* List of airports in the Kenai Peninsula Borough
* State parks on the Kenai Peninsula

==References==

==External links==

* Borough map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Borough map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="0" end="23" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="29" end="36" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="44" end="54" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="58" end="64" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="76" end="87" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="144" end="156" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79393" start="160" end="168" title="Soldotna, Alaska" label="Soldotna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79422" start="190" end="195" title="Kenai, Alaska" label="Kenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="237" end="260" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q921285" start="264" end="275" title="Kalifornsky, Alaska" label="Kalifornsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="311" end="326" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129590" start="394" end="404" title="Cook Inlet" label="Cook Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="538" end="564" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="579" end="612" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="623" end="656" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481098" start="667" end="694" title="Chugach Census Area, Alaska" label="Chugach Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="704" end="738" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q514093" start="748" end="777" title="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska" label="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="820" end="860" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102162" start="894" end="910" title="Chiswell Islands" label="Chiswell Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="914" end="932" title="Tuxedni Wilderness" label="Tuxedni Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="935" end="958" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="968" end="1001" title="Katmai National Park and Preserve" label="Katmai National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1012" end="1029" title="Katmai Wilderness" label="Katmai Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q841503" start="1039" end="1065" title="Kenai Fjords National Park" label="Kenai Fjords National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q829102" start="1068" end="1098" title="Kenai National Wildlife Refuge" label="Kenai National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q829102" start="1102" end="1118" title="Kenai Wilderness" label="Kenai Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1121" end="1158" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1169" end="1190" title="Lake Clark Wilderness" label="Lake Clark Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251930" start="1211" end="1220" title="Bear Lake (Alaska)" label="Bear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536521" start="1241" end="1252" title="Trail Lakes" label="Trail Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="1276" end="1282" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166926" start="1342" end="1376" title="Cook Inlet Aquaculture Association" label="Cook Inlet Aquaculture Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626036" start="1451" end="1469" title="Nick Dudiak Fishing Lagoon" label="Homer fishing hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166927" start="1471" end="1488" title="Cook Inlet Keeper" label="Cook Inlet Keeper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1497" end="1548" title="Cook Inlet Regional Citizen&amp;#x27;s Advisory Council" label="Cook Inlet Regional Citizen&amp;#x27;s Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1687" end="1693" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1758" end="1764" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1956" end="1969" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2094" end="2111" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="2113" end="2119" title="Asians" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2125" end="2132" title="Pacific" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2237" end="2244" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2272" end="2279" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q109699187" start="3312" end="3330" title="spruce bark beetle" label="spruce bark beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708525" start="3473" end="3505" title="Alaska Department of Corrections" label="Alaska Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313790" start="3519" end="3551" title="Spring Creek Correctional Center" label="Spring Creek Correctional Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001565" start="3572" end="3601" title="Wildwood Correctional Complex" label="Wildwood Correctional Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q79441" start="3775" end="3780" title="Homer, Alaska" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79538" start="3783" end="3791" title="Kachemak, Alaska" label="Kachemak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79422" start="3794" end="3799" title="Kenai, Alaska" label="Kenai"/>
<link wikidata="Q79430" start="3802" end="3810" title="Seldovia, Alaska" label="Seldovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79919" start="3813" end="3819" title="Seward, Alaska" label="Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q79393" start="3822" end="3830" title="Soldotna, Alaska" label="Soldotna"/>
<link wikidata="Q489206" start="3881" end="3893" title="Anchor Point, Alaska" label="Anchor Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117474" start="3896" end="3906" title="Bear Creek, Alaska" label="Bear Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811196" start="3909" end="3915" title="Beluga, Alaska" label="Beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641765" start="3918" end="3928" title="Clam Gulch, Alaska" label="Clam Gulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642177" start="3931" end="3936" title="Cohoe, Alaska" label="Cohoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79649" start="3939" end="3953" title="Cooper Landing, Alaska" label="Cooper Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990451" start="3956" end="3967" title="Crown Point, Alaska" label="Crown Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740303" start="3970" end="3983" title="Diamond Ridge, Alaska" label="Diamond Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740276" start="3986" end="3995" title="Fox River, Alaska" label="Fox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740315" start="3998" end="4009" title="Fritz Creek, Alaska" label="Fritz Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055647" start="4012" end="4023" title="Funny River, Alaska" label="Funny River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836964" start="4026" end="4038" title="Halibut Cove, Alaska" label="Halibut Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q677131" start="4041" end="4053" title="Happy Valley, Alaska" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627535" start="4056" end="4060" title="Hope, Alaska" label="Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q921285" start="4063" end="4074" title="Kalifornsky, Alaska" label="Kalifornsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734955" start="4077" end="4084" title="Kasilof, Alaska" label="Kasilof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550867" start="4087" end="4099" title="Lowell Point, Alaska" label="Lowell Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q426115" start="4102" end="4112" title="Moose Pass, Alaska" label="Moose Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032910" start="4115" end="4123" title="Nanwalek, Alaska" label="Nanwalek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740269" start="4126" end="4133" title="Nikiski, Alaska" label="Nikiski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849796" start="4136" end="4146" title="Nikolaevsk, Alaska" label="Nikolaevsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493148" start="4149" end="4158" title="Ninilchik, Alaska" label="Ninilchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081500" start="4161" end="4177" title="Point Possession, Alaska" label="Point Possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691640" start="4180" end="4191" title="Port Graham, Alaska" label="Port Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826818" start="4194" end="4202" title="Primrose, Alaska" label="Primrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783316" start="4205" end="4213" title="Ridgeway, Alaska" label="Ridgeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740320" start="4216" end="4225" title="Salamatof, Alaska" label="Salamatof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740309" start="4228" end="4244" title="Seldovia Village, Alaska" label="Seldovia Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928157" start="4247" end="4255" title="Sterling, Alaska" label="Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836972" start="4258" end="4265" title="Sunrise, Alaska" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221295" start="4268" end="4274" title="Tyonek, Alaska" label="Tyonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837727" start="4310" end="4321" title="Jakolof Bay, Alaska" label="Jakolof Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191730" start="4324" end="4337" title="Kachemak Selo, Alaska" label="Kachemak Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421365" start="4340" end="4348" title="Razdolna, Alaska" label="Razdolna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563458" start="4351" end="4361" title="Voznesenka, Alaska" label="Voznesenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799102" start="4382" end="4390" title="Portlock, Alaska" label="Portlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388760" start="4451" end="4490" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough School District" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605762" start="4509" end="4533" title="2006 Arctic Winter Games" label="2006 Arctic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352329" start="4536" end="4549" title="Kalgin Island" label="Kalgin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="4552" end="4599" title="List of airports in the Kenai Peninsula Borough" label="List of airports in the Kenai Peninsula Borough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4602" end="4636" title="List of Alaska state parks#Kenai Peninsula area parks" label="State parks on the Kenai Peninsula"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87472" wikidata="Q506064" url="?curid=87472" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska">
<text>Ketchikan Gateway Borough is a borough located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census its population was 13,948, up from 13,477 in 2010. The borough seat is Ketchikan. The borough is the second most populous borough in Southeast Alaska, the first being Juneau Borough.

Ketchikan Gateway Borough comprises the Ketchikan, AK Micropolitan Statistical Area.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (27.0%) is water. On May 19, 2008, a large part of the former Prince of Wales–Outer Ketchikan Census Area was annexed, including the remainder of Misty Fjords National Monument that was not already in the borough, making the current figures much larger than these. A map of the current area can be seen here:

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, AK – east, west
* City and Borough of Wrangell, AK – north
* Kitimat–Stikine Regional District, BC – east
* Skeena–Queen Charlotte Regional District, BC – south

===National protected areas===
* Tongass National Forest – partly
** Misty Fjords National Monument
*** Misty Fjords National Monument Wilderness

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 13,477 people, 5,305 households, and 3,369 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 6,166 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 68.7% White, 0.7% Black or African American, 14.3% Native American, 7.1% Asian (5.8% Filipino, 0.3% Chinese, 0.2% Japanese), 0.2% Pacific Islander (0.1% Hawaiian), 0.7% from other races, and 8.3% from two or more races. 4.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 3.31% reported speaking Tagalog at home, while 1.65% speak Spanish.

The median income for a household in the city was $61,695, and the median income for a family was $45,417. Males had a median income of $35,139 versus $37,500 for females. The per capita income for the city was $29,520. About 8.3% of the population were below the poverty line.

In 2000, there were 5,399 households, out of which 36.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.50% were married couples living together, 11.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.70% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56, and the average family size was 3.10.

In the borough, the population was spread out, with 28.20% under the age of 18, 7.50% from 18 to 24, 31.40% from 25 to 44, 25.10% from 45 to 64, and 7.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 105.30 males.

==Communities==

===Cities===

* Ketchikan (Borough seat)
* Saxman

===Unincorporated communities===

* Loring
* Ward Cove

==Government and politics==






Ketchikan Gateway Borough is strongly conservative, and has voted Republican all but once since statehood in 1959. Ketchikan Gateway Borough has mirrored Alaska’s choice for the statewide presidential winner in every election since 1960.
==See also==

* Ketchikan Gateway Borough School District
* List of airports in the Ketchikan Gateway Borough
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506064" start="0" end="25" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska" label="Ketchikan Gateway Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="31" end="38" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="54" end="64" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="68" end="74" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="86" end="97" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="153" end="165" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="169" end="178" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="231" end="247" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="265" end="279" title="Juneau Borough" label="Juneau Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="336" end="365" title="Micropolitan Statistical Area" label="Micropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="499" end="542" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales–Outer Ketchikan Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q578439" start="583" end="613" title="Misty Fjords National Monument" label="Misty Fjords National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="790" end="823" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="843" end="871" title="City and Borough of Wrangell, Alaska" label="City and Borough of Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138250" start="886" end="919" title="Regional District of Kitimat–Stikine" label="Kitimat–Stikine Regional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q277291" start="933" end="973" title="Skeena–Queen Charlotte Regional District" label="Skeena–Queen Charlotte Regional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="1020" end="1043" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q578439" start="1056" end="1086" title="Misty Fjords National Monument" label="Misty Fjords National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q578439" start="1091" end="1132" title="Misty Fjords National Monument Wilderness" label="Misty Fjords National Monument Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1179" end="1185" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1287" end="1305" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1413" end="1418" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1425" end="1430" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1434" end="1450" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1458" end="1473" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1480" end="1485" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1537" end="1553" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1581" end="1592" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1655" end="1663" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1667" end="1673" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="1711" end="1718" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1746" end="1753" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="2840" end="2849" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79347" start="2867" end="2873" title="Saxman, Alaska" label="Saxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979198" start="2911" end="2917" title="Loring, Alaska" label="Loring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968995" start="2920" end="2929" title="Ward Cove, Alaska" label="Ward Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395345" start="3219" end="3260" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough School District" label="Ketchikan Gateway Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3263" end="3312" title="List of airports in the Ketchikan Gateway Borough" label="List of airports in the Ketchikan Gateway Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976497" start="3315" end="3397" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87473" wikidata="Q750430" url="?curid=87473" title="Coptic calendar">
<text>The Coptic calendar, also called the Alexandrian calendar, is a liturgical calendar used by the farming populace in Egypt and used by the Coptic Orthodox and Coptic Catholic churches. It was used for fiscal purposes in Egypt until the adoption of the Gregorian calendar on 11 September 1875 (1st Thout 1592 AM). This calendar is based on the ancient Egyptian calendar. To avoid the calendar creep of the latter (which contained only 365 days each year, year after year, so that the seasons shifted about one day every four years), a reform of the ancient Egyptian calendar was introduced at the time of Ptolemy III (Decree of Canopus, in 238 BC) which consisted of adding an extra day every fourth year. However, this reform was opposed by the Egyptian priests, and the reform was not adopted until 25 BC, when the Roman Emperor Augustus imposed the Decree upon Egypt as its official calendar (although initially, namely between 25 BC and AD 5, it was unsynchronised with the original implementation of the Julian calendar which was erroneously intercalating leap days every third year due to a misinterpretation of the leap year rule so as to apply inclusive counting). To distinguish it from the Ancient Egyptian calendar, which remained in use by some astronomers until medieval times, this reformed calendar is known as the Coptic or Alexandrian calendar. Its years and months coincide with those of the Ethiopian calendar but have different numbers and names.

Unlike the Gregorian calendar, the Coptic calendar does not skip leap years three times every 400 years, and therefore it stays synchronised with the Julian calendar over a four-year leap year cycle.
== Coptic year ==

The Coptic year is the extension of the ancient Egyptian civil year, retaining its subdivision into the three seasons, four months each. The three seasons are commemorated by special prayers in the Coptic Liturgy. This calendar is still in use all over Egypt by farmers to keep track of the various agricultural seasons.

The Coptic calendar has 13 months, 12 of 30 days each and one at the end of the year of five days (six days in leap years). The Coptic Leap Year follows the same rules as the Julian Calendar so that the extra month always has six days in the year before a Julian Leap Year.

The year starts on the Feast of Neyrouz, the first day of the month of Thout, the first month of the Egyptian year. For 1900 to 2099 it coincides with the Gregorian Calendar&#x27;s 11 September, or 12 September before a leap year, but for any year, it coincides with the Julian Calendar&#x27;s 29 August, or 30 August before a leap year. Coptic years are counted from 284 AD, the year Diocletian became Roman Emperor, whose reign was marked by tortures and mass executions of Christians, especially in Egypt. Hence, the Coptic year is identified by the abbreviation A.M. (for &quot;Anno Martyrum&quot; or &quot;in the Year of the Martyrs&quot;). The first day of year I of the Coptic era was 29 August 284 in the Julian calendar. Note that the abbreviation A.M. is also used for unrelated calendar eras (such as the Freemasonic and Jewish calendar epochs) which start at the putative creation of the world; it then stands for &quot;Anno Mundi&quot;.

Easter is reckoned by the Julian Calendar in combination with the uncorrected repetition of the 19-year Metonic cycle.

To obtain the Coptic year number, subtract from the Julian year number either 283 (before the Julian new year) or 284 (after it).

== Date of Christmas ==
Coptic Christmas is observed on what the Julian Calendar labels 25 December, a date that currently corresponds with 7 January on the more widely used Gregorian Calendar (which is also when Christmas is observed in many Eastern Orthodox countries such as Russia). The 25 December Nativity of Christ was alleged very early by Hippolytus of Rome (170–236) in his Commentary on Daniel 4:23: &quot;The first coming of our Lord, that in the flesh, in which he was born at Bethlehem, took place eight days before the calends of January, a Wednesday, in the forty-second year of the reign of Augustus, 5500 years from Adam.&quot; &quot;Another early source is Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea (115–181): &quot;We ought to celebrate the birth-day of our Lord on what day soever the 25th of December shall happen.&quot; However, it was not until 367 that 25 December began to be universally accepted. Before that, the Eastern Church had kept 6 January as the Nativity under the name &quot;Epiphany.&quot; John Chrysostom, in a sermon preached in Antioch in 387, relates how the correct date of the Nativity was brought to the East ten years earlier. Dionysius of Alexandria emphatically quoted mystical justifications for this very choice. 25 March was considered to be the anniversary of Creation itself. It was the first day of the year in the medieval Julian, or Old Style, calendar and the nominal vernal equinox (it had been the actual equinox at the time of the Decree of Canopus in terms of the Julian calendar which adopted it without correction when originally designed). Considering that Jesus was thought to have been conceived on New Year&#x27;s Day of the Old Style calendar, 25 March was recognised as the Feast of the Annunciation which had to be followed, nine months later, by the celebration of the birth of Christ, Christmas, on 25 December.

There may have been more practical considerations for choosing 25 December. The choice would help substitute a major Christian holiday for the popular Pagan celebrations surrounding the Winter Solstice (Roman Sol Sticia, the three-day stasis when the sun would rise consecutively in its southernmost point before heading north, 21, 22 and 23 December. In AD 274, Emperor Aurelian had declared a civil holiday on 25 December (the &quot;Festival of the Birth of the Unconquered Sun&quot;) to celebrate the deity Sol Invictus. Finally, joyous festivals are needed at that time of year to fight the natural gloom of the season (in the Northern Hemisphere).

Until the 16th century, 25 December coincided with 29 Koiak of the Coptic calendar. However, upon the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in 1582, 25 December shifted 10 days earlier in comparison with the Julian and Coptic calendars. Furthermore, the Gregorian calendar drops 3 leap days every 400 years to closely approximate the length of a solar year. As a result, the Coptic Christmas advances a day each time the Gregorian calendar drops a leap day (years AD 1700, 1800, and 1900). This is the reason why Old-Calendarists (using the Julian and Coptic calendars) presently celebrate Christmas on 7 January, 13 days after the New-Calendarists (using the Gregorian calendar), who celebrate Christmas on 25 December. From AD 2101, the Coptic Christmas will be on the Gregorian date of 8 January.

== Date of Easter ==

The First Council of Nicaea (325) sent a letter to the Church of Alexandria stating &quot;all our brethren in the East who formerly followed the custom of the Jews are henceforth to celebrate the said most sacred feast of Easter at the same time with the Romans and yourselves and all those who have observed Easter from the beginning.&quot; 

At the Council of Nicaea, it became one of the duties of the patriarch of Alexandria to determine the dates of the Easter and to announce it to the other Christian churches. This duty fell on this officiate because of the erudition at Alexandria he could draw on. The rules to determine this are complex, but Easter is the first Sunday after a full moon occurring after the northern vernal equinox, which falls on or after 21 March in Alexandria. When Julius Caesar reformed the calendar, the northern vernal equinox was nominally on 25 March which was abandoned shortly after Nicaea. The reason for the observed discrepancy was all but ignored (the actual tropical year is not quite equal to the Julian year of 365 days, so the date of the equinox keeps creeping back in the Julian calendar).

Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church, there are different dates for holidays. In recent years there have been multiple attempts to unify these dates. Some people are skeptical about the success of these attempts. Eastern Orthodox use the Julian calendar while Catholics use the Gregorian calendar. Pope Tawadros, the Coptic pope, and Pope Francis, the Catholic pope, agreed to the proposal to celebrate Easter on the same day. Pope Tawadros suggested to celebrate Easter on the second Sunday of April.

== Coptic months ==
The following table refers to dates for Coptic years not containing 29 February. Such years are preceded by a Coptic leap day at the end of the preceding year. This causes dates to move one day later in the Julian and Gregorian Calendars from the Coptic New Year&#x27;s Day until the leap day of the Julian or Gregorian Calendar respectively.

== Literature ==
* Wolfgang Kosack: &quot;Der koptische Heiligenkalender.&quot; The Calendar of the Coptic Holies. Deutsch – Koptisch – Arabisch nach den besten Quellen neu bearbeitet und vollständig herausgegeben mit Index Sanctorum koptischer Heiliger, Index der Namen auf Koptisch, Koptische Patriarchenliste, Geografische Liste. Christoph Brunner, Berlin 2012, .

== See also ==
* Egyptian calendar
* Ethiopian calendar
* Computus
* Era of the Martyrs

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==

* The Coptic Calendar of Martyrs
* &quot;Seasonal Almanac Based on the Coptic Calendar&quot; is an Arabic manuscript from 1678.
* The Coptic Calendar by Bishoy K. R. Dawood (1.29MB pdf file – historical development and technical discussion)
* An introduction to the Coptic calendar (Gregorian equivalents are valid only between 1900 and 2099)
* Ancient Egyptian Calendar and Coptic Calendar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q750430" start="4" end="19" title="Coptic calendar" label="Coptic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q750430" start="37" end="57" title="Coptic calendar" label="Alexandrian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="64" end="83" title="Liturgical year" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q685896" start="96" end="112" title="fellah" label="farming populace"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="138" end="153" title="Coptic Orthodox" label="Coptic Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49378" start="158" end="173" title="Coptic Catholic" label="Coptic Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350297" start="235" end="269" title="adoption of the Gregorian calendar" label="adoption of the Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="350" end="367" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q39602" start="603" end="614" title="Ptolemy III Euergetes" label="Ptolemy III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240912" start="616" end="633" title="Decree of Canopus" label="Decree of Canopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="665" end="684" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="adding an extra day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="815" end="820" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="829" end="837" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="862" end="867" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="1007" end="1022" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215271" start="1408" end="1426" title="Ethiopian calendar" label="Ethiopian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="1477" end="1495" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963868" start="2314" end="2321" title="Neyrouz" label="Neyrouz"/>
<link wikidata="Q577200" start="2353" end="2358" title="Thout" label="Thout"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="2667" end="2677" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256376" start="2864" end="2877" title="Anno Martyrum" label="Anno Martyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="3214" end="3224" title="Anno Mundi" label="Anno Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="3233" end="3239" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="3337" end="3350" title="Metonic cycle" label="Metonic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="3658" end="3676" title="Gregorian Calendar" label="Gregorian Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="3727" end="3743" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3799" end="3805" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="3832" end="3842" title="Hippolytus (writer)" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3846" end="3850" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q328736" start="4645" end="4668" title="Dionysius of Alexandria" label="Dionysius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="5329" end="5338" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="5728" end="5736" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5792" end="5836" title="Sol Invictus#Festival of Dies Natalis Solis Invicti" label="Festival of the Birth of the Unconquered Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="5867" end="5879" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="5988" end="6007" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410257" start="6065" end="6070" title="Koiak" label="Koiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="7240" end="7263" title="patriarch of Alexandria" label="patriarch of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="7562" end="7576" title="March equinox" label="vernal equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="7631" end="7644" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="7836" end="7849" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307437" start="8120" end="8137" title="Reform of the date of Easter" label="unify these dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823" start="8287" end="8300" title="Pope Tawadros II of Alexandria" label="Pope Tawadros"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="8323" end="8335" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364" start="8580" end="8591" title="29 February" label="29 February"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="8629" end="8637" title="leap day" label="leap day"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="9241" end="9258" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215271" start="9261" end="9279" title="Ethiopian calendar" label="Ethiopian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="9282" end="9290" title="Computus" label="Computus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256376" start="9293" end="9311" title="Era of the Martyrs" label="Era of the Martyrs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87474" wikidata="Q295020" url="?curid=87474" title="Tony Hawk">
<text>Anthony Frank Hawk (born May 12, 1968), nicknamed Birdman, is an American professional skateboarder, entrepreneur, and the owner of the skateboard company Birdhouse. A pioneer of modern vertical skateboarding, Hawk completed the first documented &quot;900&quot; skateboarding trick in 1999. He also licensed a skateboarding video game series named after him, published by Activision that same year. Hawk retired from competing professionally in 2003 and is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential skateboarders.

Hawk has been involved in various philanthropic activities throughout his career. He founded the Skatepark Project, which helps to build skateparks in underprivileged areas around the world.

==Early life==
Tony Hawk was born on May 12, 1968, in San Diego, California, to Nancy (1924–2019) and Frank Peter Rupert Hawk (1923–1995), and was raised in San Diego. He has two older sisters, Pat and Lenore, and an older brother, Steve.

As a child, Hawk was described as &quot;hyperactive&quot;. One time, Hawk struck out in baseball and was so distraught that he hid in a ravine and had to be coaxed out by his father. His parents had him psychologically evaluated at school. The results were that Tony was &quot;gifted&quot;, as he was tested with an IQ of 144, so school advisers recommended placing him in advanced classes. Hawk attended Jean Farb Middle School from 1980 to 1981. His parents supported his skateboarding because it served as an outlet for his excess energy. Hawk&#x27;s skills developed, and he made his television debut on &quot;Captain Kangaroo&quot; as &quot;Skateboard Johnny&quot; in 1981. Hawk became a professional skateboarder at age 14. By age 16, he was sponsored by Powell Peralta, Tracker, Sundek, Vans, and SIO. Hawk was the official National Skateboard Association world champion for 12 consecutive years.

Hawk attended three high schools and graduated from Torrey Pines High School in 1986. He listed Steve Caballero and Christian Hosoi as his influences at the time.

==Career==
===Skateboarding===

With the money he made from skateboarding, Hawk bought his first house during his senior year in high school.
On June 27, 1999, Hawk became the first skateboarder to land a &quot;900&quot;, a trick involving the completion of two-and-a-half mid-air revolutions on a skateboard, in which he was successful on his twelfth attempt. After completing the trick, Hawk said, &quot;This is the best day of my life.&quot; He retired from professional competition that year, but Hawk continued to appear at the annual X Games until 2003, when he retired from performing. On June 27, 2016, at age 48, Hawk performed what he claimed would be his final 900. In a video posted on the YouTube RIDE Channel, Hawk said, &quot;Spencer was there on my first one, and now he was there on my last&quot;, after successfully landing a 900.

Hawk was invited to US president Barack Obama&#x27;s June 2009 Father&#x27;s Day celebration and skated in the hallways of the nearby Old Executive Office Building on the White House grounds. This was the first time anyone had skateboarded on the White House grounds with permission from officials. In 2009, Hawk was inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame at its inaugural ceremony.

As of April 2020, Hawk is sponsored by Birdhouse, Vans, Independent, Bones, and Nixon. His current Pro model shoe is the Proto. Hawk was formerly sponsored by Theeve.

In July 2021, Hawk briefly ended his competitive retirement to participate in the Vert Best Trick event at that year&#x27;s X Games, finishing in fourth place out of nine competitors.

====Contest victories====

==== Tricks invented ====
===Video game series===

A video game series based on Hawk&#x27;s skateboarding, titled &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Pro Skater&quot;, debuted in 1999. Since then, the series has spawned 18 titles so far, including ten main-series titles, four spin-offs, and four repackages.

According to former Activision CEO Bobby Kotick, Hawk was offered $300,000 for the use of his name and likeness for the original &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Pro Skater&quot; game, and that Hawk was living in his car due to financial issues.

Hawk&#x27;s role in the series was usurped by customizable player characters in later installments, but he has remained a prominent character. In the fifth game in the series, &quot;Underground&quot;, Hawk is a minor non-player character whom the player meets in Tampa, Florida, and skates against. Impressed with the player&#x27;s skills, Hawk grants them entry into a skate competition. He later appears in Moscow to teach them the &quot;360 Varial Heelflip Lien&quot; move. Hawk and other skaters are briefly playable near the end of the game when they skate in a promotional video for the player&#x27;s skate team, and in all gameplay modes except the story mode. He appeared as a kid in the &quot;Backyard Sports&quot; game, &quot;Backyard Skateboarding&quot;.

===Film and television===
In 1986, Hawk was a featured skateboarder and skater-double for Josh Brolin in the movie &quot;Thrashin&#x27;&quot;. In 1987, Hawk made a brief appearance in the movie &quot;Police Academy 4: Citizens on Patrol&quot; with David Spade. In 1989, Hawk appeared as a skateboarder in &quot;Gleaming the Cube&quot;. In 2002, he appeared in Neal H. Moritz&#x27;s and Christopher Gilcrest&#x27;s film &quot;xXx&quot; playing the role of one of Xander Cage&#x27;s stuntman friends. In 2004, Hawk played himself in the Australian skateboarding movie &quot;Deck Dogz&quot;. In 2006, he made a cameo appearance in the film &quot;Drake &amp; Josh Go Hollywood&quot; as himself. Hawk also had a cameo in the movie &quot;The New Guy&quot;, and appeared in &quot;&quot;, skateboarding in a fat suit with Mat Hoffman and Bam Margera, as well as in &quot;Jackass Number Two&quot; skateboarding through an obstacle course. Hawk also appeared in the opening title sequences in &quot;Jackass 3D&quot; and &quot;Jackass Forever&quot;. He appeared in the film following the 2006 Gumball Rally, &quot;3000 Miles&quot;, again with Bam Margera. Hawk also played the police officer who arrests Ryan Dunn in the movie &quot;&quot;. Hawk made a brief cameo appearance in &quot;Lords of Dogtown&quot; as an astronaut, where he is shown comically falling off the skateboard as he is a &quot;rookie&quot;. Hawk voiced himself in the 2006 animated movie &quot;Tony Hawk in Boom Boom Sabotage&quot;, where he is kidnapped by circus freaks.
Hawk was featured as an extra in the &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic video &quot;Smells Like Nirvana&quot;. He can be seen sitting in the bleachers during the crowd sweep near Dick Van Patten. Hawk also made a cameo appearance in the Simple Plan music video for &quot;I&#x27;m Just a Kid&quot;, he can be seen, in a crowd, at a high school, watching kids skating.

On television, Hawk was a guest on the Nickelodeon kid&#x27;s show &quot;Yo Gabba Gabba!&quot;. In 2000, he played himself in &quot;Max Steel&quot;. Hawk also guest voiced on &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;Barting Over&quot;, where he played himself, along with fellow San Diegans Blink-182. In the episode, Hawk lends Homer a new board from his brand where complete rookies are able to perform at the top levels. Hawk ends up having a comical play off with him after Homer begins to show him up. Tony Hawk appeared as himself in &quot;MXC&quot; in a special &quot;MXC Almost Live&quot; episode in 2004. On the PBS Kids show &quot;Cyberchase&quot;, Hawk guest-starred as Slider&#x27;s long-lost father Coop. In the &quot;&quot; episode &quot;Game Over&quot; he played a game programmer who was murdered. Hawk also played on Fox&#x27;s &quot;Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?&quot;. Hawk hosted Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;Hall of Game&quot; sports award show on February 25, 2011. Hawk was on &quot;Take Two With Phineas and Ferb&quot;. Hawk appeared on the internet cooking show &quot;Epic Meal Time&quot; on October 28, 2011, to celebrate the show&#x27;s one-year anniversary, where he can be seen in the final scene eating a deep-fried pizza cake. Hawk reappeared on another Epic Meal Time video on July 20, 2013, as a guest on the educational cooking show &quot;Handle It&quot;. Hawk assisted Harley Morenstein (Sauce Boss) in cooking egg rolls. The video features promotion for Hawk&#x27;s own YouTube channel, RIDE Channel. He also guest-starred on the ABC comedy &quot;Last Man Standing&quot;. He played himself in an episode of &quot;Rocket Power&quot;.

Hawk appeared in the TV series &quot;Breaking In&quot;, &quot;The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange&quot;, &quot;The Cleveland Show&quot;, &quot;Sesame Street&quot;, and &quot;So Random!&quot;. Hawk appeared in the movie &quot;Parental Guidance&quot; as himself. In 2013, he and Eric Koston appeared as reporters in an episode of &quot;The Aquabats! Super Show!&quot;, another series by &quot;Yo Gabba Gabba!&quot; creator and longtime friend of Hawk&#x27;s, Christian Jacobs. He also appeared in Disney&#x27;s Zeke and Luther as himself. In 2015, Hawk acted as a stunt double for Will Ferrell during a skateboarding scene in the film Daddy&#x27;s Home. Hawk sustained an injury that required 10 stitches in his leg while filming the scene.

In 2020, Hawk competed in season three of &quot;The Masked Singer&quot; as &quot;Elephant&quot;. He was the first of Group B to be eliminated.

In 2022, Hawk did a guest voice role in &quot;The Casagrandes&quot; episode &quot;Skaters Gonna Hate&quot; where it was revealed that he had a history with Carlos Casagrande back when he operated as &quot;Carlos X&quot;. That same year, HBO released a documentary on him titled &quot;Tony Hawk: Until the Wheels Fall Off&quot;. Hawk worked with Laughing Dragon Studios to develop the animated series &quot;Skatebirds&quot;.

On March 27, 2024, Hawk made an appearance on AEW Dynamite in a pre-taped segment with Darby Allin.

===Other ventures===
;Radio and podcasting
Hawk hosted a weekly radio show on Sirius XM from 2004 to 2019 called &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Demolition Radio&quot;. In 2021, Hawk partnered with fellow skateboarder and former SiriusXM host Jason Ellis for the weekly podcast &quot;Hawk vs. Wolf&quot;.

;Boom Boom HuckJam
In 2002, Hawk started a show tour featuring freestyle motocross, skateboarding, and BMX. It started in Las Vegas and went on to 31 cities around the U.S. and eventually to Six Flags amusement parks.

;Amusement park rides
A series of amusement park rides known as Tony Hawk&#x27;s Big Spin were built in three Six Flags parks in 2007 and 2008. The ride was originally billed as the &quot;Tony Hawk experience&quot; and was designed to have the look and feel of a giant red-and-black skatepark. It offered a full &quot;extreme sports&quot; experience, with monitors in the queue lines displaying highlights of the history of action sports and a large spinning Tony Hawk figure crowning the ride. In 2010, Six Flags cancelled its license and the rides were renamed to Pandemonium. The ride at Six Flags Discovery Kingdom was moved to Six Flags Mexico in 2012. Additionally, a water park ride called Tony Hawk&#x27;s Half pipe (renamed The Half pipe in 2011) was opened at Six Flags America in Bowie, Maryland.

;Emoji
In February 2018, &quot;New York&quot; magazine reported that Hawk was working with Jeremy Burge to help design Emojipedia&#x27;s skateboard emoji after the company&#x27;s initial design was criticized by Hawk as &quot;a skateboard you would buy at a department store in the &#x27;80s.&quot; The updated design was based on Hawk&#x27;s own skateboard. Subsequent releases of the skateboard emoji from Apple and Samsung resemble Hawk&#x27;s board (including 60mm wheels) despite no direct collaboration between Hawk and these companies.

;Music
In 2022, Hawk signed a contract with Cleopatra Records, and released his first single, a cover of The Jam&#x27;s &quot;In the City&quot;, featuring punk rock supergroup Punk Rock Karaoke. The single was released on July 22, 2022, with its B-side, a cover of The Damned&#x27;s &quot;Neat Neat Neat&quot;. In 2023, Hawk joined Goldfinger on stage and sang &quot;Superman&quot; during their performances at House of Blues and at the When We Were Young Festival. He also performed &quot;Superman&quot; and a cover of Agent Orange&#x27;s &quot;Bloodstains&quot; with Australian band Birdman, during his tour &quot;An Evening with Tony Hawk&quot; across Australia in January 2024.

==Image and legacy==

In December 2011, Hawk was listed by &quot;Transworld Skateboarding&quot; magazine as the second-most-influential skateboarder of all time, particularly for the invention of the backside ollie to tail.

In January 2013, professional skateboarder John Cardiel, ranked by &quot;Transworld Skateboarding&quot; as the eleventh most influential skateboarder of all time, listed Hawk as one of his most important influences, as well as Mark Gonzales and Christian Hosoi. Cardiel explained, &quot;... the insane 540s with no hands, and, just like, all his tricks; he had the ramps, all his ramps, all the ramps he had—I thought that was insane. Tony Hawk&#x27;s the best.&quot;

In an interview for the online series &quot;Free Lunch&quot;, produced by Hawk&#x27;s RIDE Channel, professional skateboarder Andrew Reynolds said:

Tony Hawk—he&#x27;s like, basically, to me it says, &quot;You can be a skater and take over everything and be, you know ... and use skateboarding to be a businessman, a role model to young people,&quot; um, he&#x27;s just the best. And, he called my house when I was fifteen, and was, like, &quot;Do you wanna do something with us?&quot; not knowing anything about me.

In 2012, Reynolds recruited Hawk&#x27;s son Riley, who was 19 years old at the time, for Reynold&#x27;s skateboard deck company, Baker.

Hawk often posts on Twitter about encounters he has with people who do not recognize him or wonder if he is truly Tony Hawk. Various publications have speculated about Hawk&#x27;s motivation:

The cynical among us might argue that as he slides inexorably out of cultural relevancy, Tony Hawk desperately needs to remind us that he&#x27;s still here, still famous. Others might say he’s trying to communicate that he’s fed up with it all, his stream of tweets a not-so-subtle hint... But no. Tony Hawk... thinks it is the funniest thing in the world, and he will keep thinking it is the funniest thing in the world, and keep tweeting about it, for the rest of his life.

==Personal life==
===Relationships===
In April 1990, Hawk married Cindy Dunbar, whom he began dating in high school. Their son, Riley Hawk, was born on December 6, 1992, and was named after one of Hawk&#x27;s ancestors. Riley is also a professional skateboarder. Hawk and Dunbar divorced in 1993. Riley is married to Frances Bean Cobain, daughter of late Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain and Hole frontwoman Courtney Love. They have a son together.

Hawk was married to Erin Lee from 1996 to 2004. They have two children, born in 1999 and 2001. The older of the two, Spencer, is an electronic music producer who releases music as Gupi.

Hawk was married to Lhotse Merriam from 2006 to 2011. Their wedding was held in Fiji and Rancid played for them as the wedding band. The couple&#x27;s only child was born in 2008.

Hawk married his fourth wife, Cathy Goodman, on June 27, 2015, in a ceremony in Limerick, Ireland.

===Interests===
Besides skateboarding, Hawk&#x27;s interests include mathematics, physics and technology. Hawk purchased a camcorder in Japan and had a friend translate the controls for him, and an Amiga 2000 in the late 1980s. NewTek sent him a Video Toaster for his Amiga in exchange for appearing in a promotional video alongside Wil Wheaton and Penn Jillette, which he later used for editing a promotional video for the TurboDuo game &quot;Lords of Thunder&quot; in 1993.

===Philanthropy===

Hawk created the Tony Hawk Foundation in 2002 in response to the lack of safe and legal skateparks in America. As of June 2018, his foundation has awarded US$5.8 million, aiding 596 skatepark projects. In 2015, the foundation received the Robert Wood Johnson Sports award, which honors recipients for their innovative and influential approaches to using sports to build a culture of health in their communities. In 2007, Hawk, Andre Agassi, Muhammad Ali, Lance Armstrong, Warrick Dunn, Jeff Gordon, Mia Hamm, Andrea Jaeger, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Mario Lemieux, Alonzo Mourning, and Cal Ripken Jr. founded the charity Athletes for Hope, an organization that aims to inspire all people to volunteer and support their communities through the actions of professional athletes. In 2020, the Tony Hawk Foundation changed its name to The Skatepark Project to better describe the organization&#x27;s mission. Since then, Hawk has frequently struggled with keeping his relevancy, often feeling the hardships of making it as a pro-skateboarder at over 50 years of age. With his physical capabilities slowly dwindling, and the idea of possible sponsorships seeming less achievable, he decided to make other financial decisions. In 2012, Hawk decided to invest money into digital currency, Bitcoin. His &quot;fun project&quot; became a big source of income and interest for him.

In 2023, Hawk auctioned a signed photograph of himself and Rick Thorne, with 50% of the proceeds to be donated to the Tyre Nichols Memorial Fund. The fund was created following the death of Tyre Nichols at the hands of law enforcement officers. One of the fund&#x27;s plans involve building a skate park in Nichols&#x27; honor.

==Filmography==
===Videos===


==Bibliography==

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295020" start="0" end="18" title="Tony Hawk" label="Anthony Frank Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q295020" start="50" end="57" title="Tony Hawk" label="Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="87" end="99" title="Skateboarding" label="skateboarder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300229" start="155" end="164" title="Birdhouse Skateboards" label="Birdhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922740" start="186" end="208" title="Vert skateboarding" label="vertical skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645583" start="252" end="255" title="900 (skateboarding)" label="900"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189289" start="310" end="357" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s" label="skateboarding video game series named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="372" end="382" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845887" start="626" end="647" title="the Skatepark Project" label="the Skatepark Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="779" end="788" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="1005" end="1016" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="hyperactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="1281" end="1283" title="intelligence quotient" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q447527" start="1579" end="1595" title="Captain Kangaroo" label="Captain Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088626" start="1726" end="1740" title="Powell Peralta" label="Powell Peralta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135366" start="1759" end="1763" title="Vans" label="Vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827097" start="1922" end="1946" title="Torrey Pines High School" label="Torrey Pines High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391108" start="1966" end="1981" title="Steve Caballero" label="Steve Caballero"/>
<link wikidata="Q719262" start="1986" end="2001" title="Christian Hosoi" label="Christian Hosoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645583" start="2245" end="2248" title="900 (skateboarding)" label="900"/>
<link wikidata="Q527512" start="2574" end="2581" title="X Games" label="X Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="2917" end="2929" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312965" start="3018" end="3047" title="Old Executive Office Building" label="Old Executive Office Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300229" start="3313" end="3322" title="Birdhouse Skateboards" label="Birdhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135366" start="3324" end="3328" title="Vans" label="Vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630117" start="3330" end="3341" title="Independent Truck Company" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088626" start="3343" end="3348" title="Powell Peralta" label="Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660409" start="3354" end="3359" title="Nixon (company)" label="Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264782" start="3774" end="3801" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater (video game)" label="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3861" end="3870" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s (series)#Games" label="18 titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q200491" start="3971" end="3981" title="Activision" label="Activision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117176" start="3986" end="3998" title="Bobby Kotick" label="Bobby Kotick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264782" start="4086" end="4113" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater" label="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Pro Skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334495" start="4370" end="4381" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Underground" label="Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="4405" end="4425" title="non-player character" label="non-player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="4451" end="4465" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="4597" end="4603" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17497140" start="4890" end="4905" title="Backyard Sports" label="Backyard Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q41396" start="5045" end="5056" title="Josh Brolin" label="Josh Brolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990842" start="5076" end="5090" title="Thrashin&amp;#x27;" label="Thrashin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5155" end="5191" title="Police Academy 4: Citizens on Patrol" label="Police Academy 4: Citizens on Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650745" start="5266" end="5283" title="Gleaming the Cube" label="Gleaming the Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q283799" start="5380" end="5383" title="XXX (2002 film)" label="xXx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249264" start="5527" end="5536" title="Deck Dogz" label="Deck Dogz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128699" start="5598" end="5627" title="Drake &amp;amp; Josh Go Hollywood" label="Drake &amp;amp; Josh Go Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463176" start="5687" end="5698" title="The New Guy" label="The New Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q968888" start="5769" end="5780" title="Mat Hoffman" label="Mat Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q297173" start="5785" end="5796" title="Bam Margera" label="Bam Margera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138620" start="5818" end="5836" title="Jackass Number Two" label="Jackass Number Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066098" start="5944" end="5954" title="Jackass 3D" label="Jackass 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q104528612" start="5971" end="5986" title="Jackass Forever" label="Jackass Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q549025" start="6037" end="6050" title="Gumball 3000" label="Gumball Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q549025" start="6058" end="6068" title="3000 Miles" label="3000 Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q316036" start="6148" end="6157" title="Ryan Dunn" label="Ryan Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q836622" start="6229" end="6245" title="Lords of Dogtown" label="Lords of Dogtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="6258" end="6267" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822545" start="6408" end="6439" title="Tony Hawk in Boom Boom Sabotage" label="Tony Hawk in Boom Boom Sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="6524" end="6553" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398507" start="6566" end="6585" title="Smells Like Nirvana" label="Smells Like Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209826" start="6661" end="6676" title="Dick Van Patten" label="Dick Van Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q485825" start="6719" end="6730" title="Simple Plan" label="Simple Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419257" start="6753" end="6772" title="I&amp;#x27;m Just a Kid" label="I&amp;#x27;m Just a Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q640760" start="6923" end="6938" title="Yo Gabba Gabba!" label="Yo Gabba Gabba!"/>
<link wikidata="Q9030747" start="6982" end="6991" title="Max Steel (2000 TV series)" label="Max Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="7031" end="7043" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139681" start="7064" end="7076" title="Barting Over" label="Barting Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="7139" end="7148" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720268" start="7394" end="7397" title="Most Extreme Elimination Challenge" label="MXC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245159" start="7469" end="7477" title="PBS Kids" label="PBS Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576777" start="7489" end="7499" title="Cyberchase" label="Cyberchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="7682" end="7685" title="Fox Television" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q674110" start="7699" end="7733" title="Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?" label="Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="7753" end="7768" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599111" start="7859" end="7889" title="Take Two With Phineas and Ferb" label="Take Two With Phineas and Ferb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346933" start="7946" end="7960" title="Epic Meal Time" label="Epic Meal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766201" start="8099" end="8109" title="pizza cake" label="pizza cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665367" start="8257" end="8274" title="Harley Morenstein" label="Harley Morenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q944698" start="8436" end="8453" title="Last Man Standing (American TV series)" label="Last Man Standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349634" start="8502" end="8514" title="Rocket Power" label="Rocket Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999260" start="8560" end="8571" title="Breaking In (TV series)" label="Breaking In"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319429" start="8585" end="8632" title="The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange" label="The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q34397" start="8646" end="8664" title="The Cleveland Show" label="The Cleveland Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="8678" end="8691" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066522" start="8709" end="8719" title="So Random!" label="So Random!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384891" start="8760" end="8777" title="Parental Guidance (film)" label="Parental Guidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q954574" start="8812" end="8823" title="Eric Koston" label="Eric Koston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714104" start="8869" end="8894" title="The Aquabats! Super Show!" label="The Aquabats! Super Show!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109775" start="8992" end="9008" title="Christian Jacobs" label="Christian Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q187239" start="9044" end="9059" title="Zeke and Luther" label="Zeke and Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q218503" start="9114" end="9126" title="Will Ferrell" label="Will Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18619590" start="9168" end="9185" title="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home (film)" label="Daddy&amp;#x27;s Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847721" start="9301" end="9313" title="The Masked Singer (American TV series) season 3" label="season three"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276004" start="9323" end="9340" title="The Masked Singer (American TV series)" label="The Masked Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65065824" start="9465" end="9480" title="The Casagrandes" label="The Casagrandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="9656" end="9659" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q65684241" start="9890" end="9902" title="AEW Dynamite" label="AEW Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194617" start="9931" end="9942" title="Darby Allin" label="Darby Allin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277465" start="10023" end="10032" title="Sirius XM" label="Sirius XM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881641" start="10179" end="10190" title="Jason Ellis (radio host)" label="Jason Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912213" start="10305" end="10324" title="freestyle motocross" label="freestyle motocross"/>
<link wikidata="Q215184" start="10345" end="10348" title="BMX" label="BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q127324768" start="10433" end="10442" title="Six Flags" label="Six Flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q17363780" start="10525" end="10550" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Big Spin" label="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Big Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127324768" start="10571" end="10580" title="Six Flags" label="Six Flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001885" start="11052" end="11079" title="Six Flags Discovery Kingdom" label="Six Flags Discovery Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749186" start="11231" end="11248" title="Six Flags America" label="Six Flags America"/>
<link wikidata="Q755142" start="11252" end="11267" title="Bowie, Maryland" label="Bowie, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="11301" end="11309" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190443" start="11361" end="11373" title="Jeremy Burge" label="Jeremy Burge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908129" start="11389" end="11399" title="Emojipedia" label="Emojipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="11418" end="11423" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="11678" end="11683" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="11688" end="11695" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397901" start="11858" end="11875" title="Cleopatra Records" label="Cleopatra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q916461" start="11919" end="11926" title="The Jam" label="The Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287801" start="11940" end="11951" title="In the City (The Jam song)" label="In the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963282" start="11990" end="12007" title="Punk Rock Karaoke" label="Punk Rock Karaoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="12079" end="12089" title="The Damned (band)" label="The Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984476" start="12103" end="12117" title="Neat Neat Neat" label="Neat Neat Neat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064319" start="12146" end="12156" title="Goldfinger (band)" label="Goldfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="12225" end="12239" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q110800067" start="12251" end="12278" title="When We Were Young (festival)" label="When We Were Young Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q83814" start="12334" end="12346" title="Agent Orange (band)" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052967" start="12562" end="12586" title="Transworld Skateboarding" label="Transworld Skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225100" start="12765" end="12777" title="John Cardiel" label="John Cardiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900081" start="12949" end="12962" title="Mark Gonzales" label="Mark Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q719262" start="12967" end="12982" title="Christian Hosoi" label="Christian Hosoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q506903" start="13317" end="13332" title="Andrew Reynolds (skateboarder)" label="Andrew Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234618" start="13754" end="13759" title="Riley Hawk" label="Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038492" start="13839" end="13844" title="Baker Skateboards" label="Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="13867" end="13874" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234618" start="14645" end="14655" title="Riley Hawk" label="Riley Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="14834" end="14853" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances Bean Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="14872" end="14879" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="14889" end="14900" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="14905" end="14909" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="14921" end="14934" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q96380025" start="15143" end="15147" title="Gupi" label="Gupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="15230" end="15234" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="15239" end="15245" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="15411" end="15419" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q335234" start="15554" end="15563" title="camcorder" label="camcorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q471102" start="15629" end="15639" title="Amiga 2000" label="Amiga 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875172" start="15659" end="15665" title="NewTek" label="NewTek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011359" start="15677" end="15690" title="Video Toaster" label="Video Toaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q264699" start="15764" end="15775" title="Wil Wheaton" label="Wil Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129653" start="15780" end="15793" title="Penn Jillette" label="Penn Jillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q841252" start="15855" end="15863" title="TurboDuo" label="TurboDuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043188" start="15875" end="15891" title="Lords of Thunder" label="Lords of Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="16355" end="16367" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="16369" end="16381" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="16383" end="16398" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278080" start="16400" end="16412" title="Warrick Dunn" label="Warrick Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q313565" start="16414" end="16425" title="Jeff Gordon" label="Jeff Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q222086" start="16427" end="16435" title="Mia Hamm" label="Mia Hamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q236648" start="16437" end="16450" title="Andrea Jaeger" label="Andrea Jaeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q209390" start="16452" end="16472" title="Jackie Joyner-Kersee" label="Jackie Joyner-Kersee"/>
<link wikidata="Q316249" start="16474" end="16487" title="Mario Lemieux" label="Mario Lemieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q310968" start="16489" end="16504" title="Alonzo Mourning" label="Alonzo Mourning"/>
<link wikidata="Q731168" start="16510" end="16524" title="Cal Ripken Jr." label="Cal Ripken Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4813727" start="16545" end="16562" title="Athletes for Hope" label="Athletes for Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845887" start="16755" end="16776" title="The Skatepark Project" label="The Skatepark Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131723" start="17206" end="17213" title="Bitcoin" label="Bitcoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116447988" start="17486" end="17498" title="Tyre Nichols" label="Tyre Nichols"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87475" wikidata="Q514093" url="?curid=87475" title="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska">
<text>Kodiak Island Borough () is a borough in the U.S. state of Alaska. At the 2020 census, the population was 13,101, down from 13,592 in 2010. The borough seat is Kodiak.

==Geography==
The borough has a total area of , of which is land and (45.5%) is water. Most of the land area belongs to Kodiak Island, but a thin strip of coastal area on the western part of the Alaska Peninsula and other nearby islands (Afognak Island, Shuyak Island, Marmot Island, Raspberry Island, Little Raspberry Island, Whale Island, Spruce Island, Woody Island, Uganik Island, Sitkalidak Island, Tugidak Island, Sitkinak Island, Chirikof Island, and the Semidi Islands) are also in the borough. The waterway between the island and mainland is known as the Shelikof Strait. South of the island are the open waters of the Pacific Ocean, so the site is considered good for launching certain types of satellites. The Kodiak Launch Complex is ideal for putting satellites in Molniya and polar orbits.

===Adjacent boroughs===
* Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska - north
* Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska - northwest

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (parts of Alaska Peninsula and Gulf of Alaska units)
** Barren Islands
** Semidi Wilderness
*** Semidi Islands
** Trinity Islands
*** Sitkinak Island
*** Tugidak Island
* Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Becharof National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Becharof Wilderness (part)
* Chugach National Forest (part)
* Katmai National Park and Preserve (part)
** Katmai Wilderness (part)
* Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 13,913 people, 4,424 households, and 3,256 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 5,159 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 59.69% White, 0.96% Black or African American, 14.58% Native American, 16.04% Asian, 0.79% Pacific Islander, 2.78% from other races, and 5.16% from two or more races. 6.10% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 13.10% reported speaking Tagalog at home, a language of the Philippines, while 5.28% speak Spanish.

There were 4,424 households, out of which 45.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.70% were married couples living together, 8.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.40% were non-families. 19.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.70% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.07 and the average family size was 3.52.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 32.40% under the age of 18, 8.30% from 18 to 24, 34.00% from 25 to 44, 20.40% from 45 to 64, and 4.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 112.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 117.40 males.

==Communities==

===Cities===
*Akhiok
*Kodiak (Borough seat)
*Larsen Bay
*Old Harbor
*Ouzinkie
*Port Lions

===Census-designated places===
*Aleneva
*Chiniak
*Karluk
*Kodiak Station
*Mill Bay
*Womens Bay

==Government and politics==






Kodiak Island Borough is strongly Republican, having last voted for a Democrat in 1964.

==See also==

*List of airports in the Kodiak Island Borough

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Kodiak Island Public Access Atlas (Alaska DNR)
* Borough map: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q514093" start="0" end="21" title="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska" label="Kodiak Island Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="30" end="37" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="45" end="55" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="59" end="65" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="74" end="85" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="144" end="156" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="160" end="166" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204387" start="289" end="302" title="Kodiak Island" label="Kodiak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="364" end="380" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q279794" start="407" end="421" title="Afognak Island" label="Afognak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q928624" start="423" end="436" title="Shuyak Island" label="Shuyak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q928611" start="438" end="451" title="Marmot Island" label="Marmot Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q841348" start="453" end="469" title="Raspberry Island (Alaska)" label="Raspberry Island"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="471" end="494" title="Little Raspberry Island" label="Little Raspberry Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q674252" start="496" end="508" title="Whale Island (Alaska)" label="Whale Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815002" start="510" end="523" title="Spruce Island (Alaska)" label="Spruce Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543213" start="525" end="537" title="Woody Island (Alaska)" label="Woody Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473910" start="539" end="552" title="Uganik Island" label="Uganik Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q931028" start="554" end="571" title="Sitkalidak Island" label="Sitkalidak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000269" start="573" end="587" title="Tugidak Island" label="Tugidak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962371" start="589" end="604" title="Sitkinak Island" label="Sitkinak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712141" start="606" end="621" title="Chirikof Island" label="Chirikof Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q928636" start="631" end="645" title="Semidi Islands" label="Semidi Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="676" end="684" title="strait" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="697" end="703" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668640" start="733" end="748" title="Shelikof Strait" label="Shelikof Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="797" end="810" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="874" end="883" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q283842" start="890" end="911" title="Kodiak Launch Complex" label="Kodiak Launch Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063974" start="947" end="954" title="Molniya orbit" label="Molniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q746711" start="959" end="970" title="polar orbit" label="polar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="1000" end="1031" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="1042" end="1076" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1123" end="1163" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q808862" start="1220" end="1234" title="Barren Islands" label="Barren Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q928636" start="1238" end="1255" title="Semidi Wilderness" label="Semidi Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q928636" start="1260" end="1274" title="Semidi Islands" label="Semidi Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1278" end="1293" title="Trinity Islands (Alaska)" label="Trinity Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962371" start="1298" end="1313" title="Sitkinak Island" label="Sitkinak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000269" start="1318" end="1332" title="Tugidak Island" label="Tugidak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q258559" start="1335" end="1376" title="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q813578" start="1386" end="1419" title="Becharof National Wildlife Refuge" label="Becharof National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q813578" start="1430" end="1449" title="Becharof Wilderness" label="Becharof Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="1459" end="1482" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1492" end="1525" title="Katmai National Park and Preserve" label="Katmai National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1536" end="1553" title="Katmai Wilderness" label="Katmai Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778223" start="1563" end="1594" title="Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge" label="Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1641" end="1647" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1749" end="1767" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1876" end="1881" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1889" end="1894" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1898" end="1914" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1923" end="1938" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1947" end="1952" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1960" end="1976" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1989" end="2000" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2065" end="2073" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2077" end="2083" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="2122" end="2129" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2188" end="2195" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2310" end="2325" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q79560" start="2989" end="2995" title="Akhiok, Alaska" label="Akhiok"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="2997" end="3003" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79317" start="3020" end="3030" title="Larsen Bay, Alaska" label="Larsen Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79559" start="3032" end="3042" title="Old Harbor, Alaska" label="Old Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q79939" start="3044" end="3052" title="Ouzinkie, Alaska" label="Ouzinkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q79429" start="3054" end="3064" title="Port Lions, Alaska" label="Port Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731269" start="3098" end="3105" title="Aleneva, Alaska" label="Aleneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074177" start="3107" end="3114" title="Chiniak, Alaska" label="Chiniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497728" start="3116" end="3122" title="Karluk, Alaska" label="Karluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232774" start="3124" end="3138" title="Kodiak Station, Alaska" label="Kodiak Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448473" start="3140" end="3148" title="Mill Bay, Alaska" label="Mill Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035091" start="3150" end="3160" title="Womens Bay, Alaska" label="Womens Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3300" end="3345" title="List of airports in the Kodiak Island Borough" label="List of airports in the Kodiak Island Borough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87476" wikidata="Q4675762" url="?curid=87476" title="Head cheese">
<text>Head cheese () or brawn is a meat jelly or terrine made of meat. Somewhat similar to a jellied meatloaf, it is made with flesh from the head of a calf or pig (less commonly a sheep or cow), typically set in aspic. It is usually eaten cold, at room temperature, or in a sandwich. Despite its name, the dish is not a cheese and contains no dairy products. The parts of the head used vary, and may include the tongue but do not commonly include the brain, eyes or ears. Trimmings from more commonly eaten cuts of pork and veal are often used, and sometimes the feet and heart, with gelatin added as a binder. 

Variations of head cheese exist throughout Europe and elsewhere, with differences in preparation and ingredients. It originated in Europe, perhaps ancient Romania. A version pickled with vinegar is known as &quot;souse&quot;. Historically, meat jellies were made of the head of an animal, less its organs, which would be simmered to produce a naturally gelatinous stock that would congeal as the dish cooled. Meat jellies made this way were commonly a peasant food and have been made since the Middle Ages. Earlier brawns heavily featured spices and herbs, but beginning in the eighteenth century, the amount of seasoning was reduced. Contemporary brawn now features minimal spicing, usually sage, and perhaps a little lemon juice. Head cheese recipes may also require additional gelatin, or more often need to be reduced to set properly.

== Etymology ==
The English term &quot;head cheese&quot; is a calque derived from the Dutch word , which literally translates to . The term can be divided into () originating from the animal heads commonly used to prepare the dish, and () describing the texture, which resembles that of cheese.

== Terminology ==
The term &quot;head cheese&quot; is used in North America, &quot;potted heid&quot; in Scotland, and &quot;brawn&quot; elsewhere in Britain and Australia. The name &quot;brawn&quot;, coming from German and Old French, has had a variety of meanings, from roasted meat to specific types of food. At one point, in English, it referred to the meat of the wild boar, then abundant in Great Britain, from which this jellied dish was made. The term &quot;souse&quot;, a corruption of the German , is used for the pickled variety in North America and the West Indies.

==By country==

===Europe===
* Austria: Head cheese is known as , or in the most western regions. Depending on the region, it is often served with a light dressing (vinegar, sunflower seed oil or pumpkin seed oil, sliced onions).

* Bulgaria: The meal () is prepared from pig&#x27;s heads (primarily the ears), legs, and often tongue. The broth is heavily seasoned with garlic before cooling.

* Croatia: This cut is generally known as , and is commonly produced after the traditional slaughter of pigs. A strongly seasoned version of this cut is called . The name is used for a variant where the chopped parts are stuffed inside the pig&#x27;s stomach, similar to a Scottish haggis.

* Cyprus: made with pork and known as , a word possibly derived from the English word &quot;gelatin&quot;. It is often seasoned with lemon juice.

* Czech Republic: The or &quot;sulc&quot; (from German &#x27;) is made from pig&#x27;s heads or legs boiled together, chopped, mixed in their broth, poured into a pan, and left in the cold to solidify. Other ingredients may include onion, pepper, allspice, bayleaf, vinegar, salt, carrot, parsley, root celery, and sometimes eggs. A similar product, &quot;tlačenka&quot;, is basically &#x27; with some more meat, chopped liver, and various offal, poured into a prepared pig stomach and left to solidify under the weight. is generally thicker than &quot;,&quot; and commonly is eaten with chopped onions and sprinkled with vinegar.

* Denmark, Norway and Sweden: , or , was originally made from the head of pig, but now commonly is made from the forequarters or shanks of pork or veal and seasoned with allspice, bay leaves, and thyme; this forms part of the traditional Christmas &quot;smörgåsbord&quot;, served on &quot;rugbrød&quot; or &quot;lefse&quot; with strong mustard and pickled beetroots. A rolled version (Danish/Norwegian: , Swedish: ) made in an otherwise similar way also exists; however, this contains very little aspic.

* Estonia: is similar to the German or Croatian dish (the name is a loan, as well), but usually is less seasoned and is made from higher quality meat. &#x27; tends to be a rather loose form of head cheese with higher aspic to meat ratio and the aspic soft enough that the dish would usually start to slightly fall apart/melt if left at room temperature (harder variants do exist). Sometimes carrots or greens are added. It is a traditional Christmas dish, but is sold in stores year round. The traditional &#x27; is made from pork using its gelatinous parts. Beef, poultry, and fish variants are also available. &quot; might be served with diluted vinegar to be poured over. Horseradish or strong mustard are also common accompaniments.

* Finland: Head cheese is known as , or .

* France and Belgium: In French, it is referred to as , , (which translates as ) or .
* Germany: Head cheese is known as &quot;, , or . In Bavaria, comes in three varieties (deep red, pinkish, and grey) in the form of a large ( diameter) sausage. can have a tangy flavour by adding pickles or vinegar. It usually takes the form of a rectangular loaf, which is then sliced into portions. There is a white coloured variety and two different red ones, using blood, one made with beef tongue (as in &quot;Zungenwurst&quot;) and aspic, the other without. In Franconia, is served in a salad with a vinaigrette and vegetables. Early references to in documents of the Counts of Katzenelnbogen date from 1410 and 1430.

:When using only pure meat of highest quality (i.e., without fat, gristle or meat of lower quality) it is called (). 
* Greece: In Greece and among Greeks of the diaspora, it is known as &quot;pichti&quot; () and usually incorporates vinegar.

* Hungary: A variant of head cheese, , or (pork cheese or pork head cheese), is made of mixed meat slices (especially from the head of the pig,) spices, paprika, and pieces of bacon cooked in spicy stock. The chopped meat is stuffed into the pig&#x27;s stomach, similar to Scottish haggis, pricked with needles, then pressed down with weights to remove excess fat and make it tight and compact. Often it is smoked like sausages or ham.

* Iceland: , a form of head cheese, is made from &quot;svið&quot;, singed sheep&#x27;s head, sometimes cured in lactic acid.

* Ireland: &quot;brawn&quot; is considered a rare delicacy and is made from pig&#x27;s head. It dates from at least the early 19th century CE.

* Italy: In Genoa, a similar cold cut goes by the name of , literally , but it is possible to find it throughout all of central and northern Italy, where it is called , or simply , in Tuscany, or – in some northern regions – (). In central Italy (Lazio, Umbria), it is common to put orange peel pieces in it, or to serve it in a salad together with oranges and black olives. In the Campania region, the head and foot, called &quot;&#x27;o pere e &#x27;o musso&quot;, is boiled, left whole and sliced, served with lupini beans and fresh lemon. A version in aspic from Sicily known as includes the head, feet, skin and ears, flavored with bay leaf, pepper, vinegar and lemon.

* Latvia: is a similar Latvian food consisting of meat in gelatin, often with vegetables, such as carrots, and celery added to the resulting colloidal suspension. Horseradish or vinegar can be poured over the when serving it.

* Lithuania: (derived from ) or (derived from , , referring to how the dish is served), is usually made from pig&#x27;s feet; sometimes part of head is added.

* Luxembourg: is essentially the same as in the neighbouring Germany and France, made from pork, and commonly eaten on buttered bread (optionally with mustard). A specialty are varying kinds of pastries filled with that are made with aspic containing Riesling wine, most famously &quot;Rieslingspaschtéit&quot;.

* Netherlands and Belgium: Head cheese is known under several regional names and variations. In Brabant, it is called and is made with blood. Pig&#x27;s foot provides the gelatin and a little vinegar is added to it. In Limburg, it is called , meaning , and is eaten on bread or with Limburgisch sausage as a starter. A red, sweet variety and a slightly sour, grey variety are available. The red one can be compared to Brabantine &#x27;. Both &#x27; and are also found in Limburg, though &quot;&quot; is less sour, whereas &quot;preskop&quot; often contains black pepper and is eaten on wholewheat bread. In Belgium, head cheese is also called or , which translates as .

* Poland: The nearest Polish equivalent of head cheese is &quot;salceson&quot;. According to Słownik Wyrazów Obcych PWN, the word comes from the Italian meaning . According to Wielka Encyklopedia Powszechna PWN, &quot;salceson&quot; traditionally is encased in either a pig&#x27;s stomach or a cow&#x27;s bladder. Specific varieties include: which uses beef tongue; which uses liver and is spiced with marjoram; which is spiced with garlic, black pepper, fennel and cumin seeds; which contains blood, semolina and bread crumbs, and can be regarded as a variant of .

* Portugal: Known as , it is mainly prepared in the Alentejo region.

* Romania: Two versions include or, especially in Transylvania, (, akin to the Hungarian ), which looks like a wide, sausage and the marginally similar &quot;piftie&quot;. It is the same dish as Serbian and Macedonian &quot;pihtije&quot;, in which the ingredients are poured into a bowl and refrigerated. is not necessarily head meat, but can be different kinds of meat, boiled with garlic and bay leaves. It is prepared by boiling pig&#x27;s feet to make a soup, as feet contain more gelatin than any other part of the pig. The mixture is then cooled to make a jelly. Usually, garlic is added.

* Russia: Head cheese is a popular food for festive occasions. Beef or lamb head cheese is also popular in the Jewish community. It is more popularly called (), (), or &quot;kholodets&quot; ().

* Serbia: Head cheese in Serbia is called , and it is particularly popular in northern Serbia, Vojvodina. While each village has its special recipe, with particular seasoning or special cuts of meat added, the basic is made with pig&#x27;s tongue, heart, kidneys, skin and meat from the head. The meat is seasoned with paprika, salt, black pepper and garlic. Preparation consists of boiling the ingredients, filling the pig&#x27;s stomach with them, and boiling the whole filled stomach again. Once the boiling is done, is then pressed under weight, and smoked for several days.

* Slovakia: A special variety of head cheese, called &quot;tlačenka&quot; (pressed one), is popular in Slovakia. It is made of pork stomach stuffed with offal and leftover parts of pig&#x27;s heads and legs. It is seasoned with garlic, paprika, black pepper, and other ingredients and usually smoked. It is traditionally served with sliced onion, vinegar, and bread.

:&quot;Huspenina&quot; (also called , meaning ) is similar to a certain extent, but made with less meat and more gelatine. It is more similar to aspic, pork jelly, or &quot;hladetina&quot;.

* Slovenia: it is known as , , or informally as .
* Spain: This cold cut is known as , .

* Sweden: Known as , a few variations are available with different meats, spices, and preparation methods, the most popular being (jellied veal), (pressed pork and veal brawn), and (rolled and pressed side of pork). Common seasonings are onions, white pepper, allspice, cloves, salt and bay leaves, and occasionally carrots and herbs are added to the ingredients. is often regarded as a seasonal food eaten at the &quot;julbord&quot; at Christmas.
* Switzerland: The recipe is known as , and it is typically made with chopped ham or pork.

* Ukraine: known as , or , head cheese is usually a combination of a variety of pork meats made into a pressed loaf.
**Volhynia and Polisia historical regions have a specific variant of the dish, called , which is made to be especially meaty, filled to the brim with cured pork.

* United Kingdom: In England and Wales, head cheese is referred to as brawn or (in Yorkshire and Norfolk) pork cheese. In Scotland, it is known as potted heid (potted head of beef, pork, or sheep); the similar potted &quot;haugh&quot; or &quot;hough&quot; is made from the shank of the animal.

===Africa===
South Africa: Known as in Afrikaans and &quot;brawn&quot; in South African English. It is often flavoured with curry.

===Asia===
Iran: A common breakfast dish is known as . is served in special restaurants known as . It consists of cooked sheep&#x27;s head marinated in its oil and cinnamon. Iranians eat it as a heavy dish from about 5:00am.

China: In certain parts of Northern China, such as Beijing, &#x27;pig head meat&#x27; is cooked and thinly sliced and served at room temperature. In southern China, () is made by boning and pickling pig trotters with brine and alum. The meat is then rolled, pressed and eaten cold. In northeastern China, a jellied pork skin dish is often made and served with a spicy soy sauce and vinegar mixture with crushed garlic and red chili powder.

Korea: In Korean cuisine, a similar dish, &quot;pyeonyuk&quot; (), is made by pressing meat, usually from the head of the pig. It is eaten as &quot;anju&quot; (dishes associated with alcoholic beverages) and usually served to funeral visitors.

Vietnam: In Vietnam, is a similar cold cut dish made around &quot;Tết&quot; for New Year celebrations. It is a dish popular in the North and made of pork belly, pig&#x27;s ears, garlic, scallions, onions, wood ear mushrooms, fish sauce, and cracked black pepper. Traditionally, &quot; is wrapped in banana leaves and compressed in a wooden mold until the gelatin in the pig&#x27;s ears bind it together.
===Australia===
In Australia, it is known as &quot;brawn&quot; or &quot;Presswurst&quot;. It is usually seen as something of an old-fashioned dish, although various large firms, such as D&#x27;Orsogna, Don Smallgoods and KR Castlemaine produce it.

===Caribbean===
Souse is pickled meat and trimmings usually made from pig&#x27;s feet, chicken feet or cow&#x27;s tongue, to name a few parts. The cooked meat or trimmings are cut into bite-sized pieces and soaked in a brine made of water, lime juice, cucumbers, hot pepper, salt and specially prepared seasonings. Usually it is eaten on Saturday mornings, especially in St. Vincent and Barbados. In Trinidad and Tobago, it is served or sold at most social gatherings, such as parties, all-inclusive fetes and sporting competitions. 

===Latin America===
Head cheese is popular and is usually referred to as in Chile and Colombia. In Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Costa Rica, it is also known as . It is known as in Uruguay and Argentina. In Panama, it is known as &quot;sous&quot; (from Caribbean English souse), made with pig&#x27;s feet and prepared the same way as in the Caribbean; it is a dish from the Caribbean coast, where most of Panama&#x27;s West Indian community resides.

In Brazil, head cheese is popular among the &quot;gaucho&quot; population and is commonly known as . In the German-colonized cities, such as Pomerode and Blumenau, it follows the German recipe and is known as .

In Mexico, it is known as and is usually spiced with oregano, vinegar, garlic, and black pepper.

===North America===
Alberta, Canada: the typical jellied meat available in stores is labelled &quot;head cheese&quot;, whether or not it is actually made from the head. The large Eastern European community in the province also has a (declining) tradition of making jellied meat at home, usually from pigs&#x27; feet, and this is called in the local dialect of the Ukrainian language.

Pennsylvania, United States: In the Pennsylvania Dutch language, head cheese is called souse. Pennsylvania Germans usually prepare it from the meat of pig&#x27;s feet or tongue and it is pickled with sausage.

Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, and other portions of the Upper Midwest, United States: Head cheese and sulze are both made from pork snouts and tongues, but head cheese often uses larger chunks of smoked meat, while sulze generally uses unsmoked, chopped meat and has added vinegar and pickles.

Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and other portions of the Deep South, United States: The highly seasoned hog&#x27;s head cheese is very popular as a cold cut or appetizer. A pig&#x27;s foot provides the gelatin that sets the cheese, and vinegar is typically added to give a sour taste. It is a popular Cajun food and is often encountered seasoned with green onions. It is called in Louisiana French . In Mississippi, Alabama, and other Southern states, it is encountered in a spicy form known as souse or less spicy hog&#x27;s head cheese.

Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada: Throughout Newfoundland, brawn is typically made from wild game such as moose and caribou.

Ontario, Canada: Commercial, processed versions made with pork are sold in the deli section in some grocery stores in Ontario, such as in the German &#x27;heimat&#x27; of Waterloo Region.

Quebec, Canada: Called , it is commonly available in grocery stores and butcher shops along with &quot;cretons&quot; and .

Prince Edward Island, Canada: Now uncommon and seen as old fashioned. It was common before 1970 and often referred to as potted head or potted meat.

New Brunswick, Canada: A spread similar to cretons made from pork head and Boston butt and seasoned primarily with onion, salt, and summer savory, is often referred to as head cheese.

==See also==

* Blood tongue
* Pork jelly
* P&#x27;tcha

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="0" end="11" title="Head cheese" label="Head cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="18" end="23" title="Head cheese" label="brawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="29" end="39" title="meat jelly" label="meat jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175039" start="43" end="50" title="terrine (food)" label="terrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807565" start="95" end="103" title="meatloaf" label="meatloaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="207" end="212" title="aspic" label="aspic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558649" start="407" end="413" title="Tongue (foodstuff)" label="tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="579" end="586" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="598" end="604" title="binder (material)" label="binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158418" start="1060" end="1072" title="peasant food" label="peasant food"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1510" end="1516" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1534" end="1539" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1806" end="1819" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1848" end="1856" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1893" end="1900" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1905" end="1914" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="2015" end="2027" title="Roasting" label="roasted meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="2308" end="2319" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="2692" end="2698" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333740" start="2795" end="2824" title="slaughter of pigs in Croatia and Serbia" label="traditional slaughter of pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q209500" start="2998" end="3004" title="haggis" label="haggis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793741" start="3510" end="3518" title="tlačenka" label="tlačenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963621" start="3956" end="3964" title="allspice" label="allspice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370943" start="3966" end="3976" title="bay leaves" label="bay leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="3982" end="3987" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070156" start="4040" end="4051" title="smörgåsbord" label="smörgåsbord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302944" start="4075" end="4082" title="rugbrød" label="rugbrød"/>
<link wikidata="Q888720" start="4098" end="4103" title="lefse" label="lefse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="4122" end="4129" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q165437" start="4142" end="4150" title="beetroot" label="beetroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314532" start="4155" end="4169" title="Rullepølse" label="rolled version"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="4682" end="4688" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="4693" end="4699" title="Leaf vegetable" label="greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="5211" end="5218" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872856" start="5573" end="5584" title="Zungenwurst" label="Zungenwurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q150907" start="5625" end="5634" title="Franconia" label="Franconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q636133" start="5742" end="5756" title="Katzenelnbogen" label="Katzenelnbogen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5976" end="5982" title="pichti" label="pichti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075310" start="6225" end="6230" title="Stock (food)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757401" start="6519" end="6523" title="svið" label="svið"/>
<link wikidata="Q161249" start="6576" end="6587" title="lactic acid" label="lactic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596242" start="7165" end="7193" title="&amp;#x27;O pere e &amp;#x27;o musso" label="&amp;#x27;o pere e &amp;#x27;o musso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8082" end="8100" title="Rieslingspaschtéit" label="Rieslingspaschtéit"/>
<link wikidata="Q848831" start="8205" end="8212" title="Province of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="8280" end="8287" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569278" start="8325" end="8335" title="Province of Limburg (1815–1839)" label="In Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q102172" start="8392" end="8403" title="Limburgisch" label="Limburgisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996033" start="8844" end="8852" title="salceson" label="salceson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20963720" start="9399" end="9407" title="Alentejo" label="Alentejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="9467" end="9479" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="9575" end="9581" title="piftie" label="piftie"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="9641" end="9648" title="pihtije" label="pihtije"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="10187" end="10196" title="kholodets (dish)" label="kholodets"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793741" start="10847" end="10855" title="tlačenka" label="tlačenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="10891" end="10899" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="10941" end="10946" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="11016" end="11022" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="11024" end="11031" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="11033" end="11045" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682434" start="11081" end="11087" title="Smoked meat" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="11163" end="11172" title="Huspenina" label="Huspenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="11269" end="11277" title="gelatine" label="gelatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="11301" end="11306" title="aspic" label="aspic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="11308" end="11318" title="pork jelly" label="pork jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="11329" end="11338" title="hladetina" label="hladetina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963686" start="11568" end="11580" title="jellied veal" label="jellied veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441913" start="11824" end="11837" title="seasonal food" label="seasonal food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070156" start="11857" end="11864" title="julbord" label="julbord"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="11874" end="11883" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="12591" end="12600" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="12626" end="12647" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q164606" start="12676" end="12681" title="curry" label="curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118905" start="13109" end="13121" title="pig trotters" label="pig trotters"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="13127" end="13132" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="13137" end="13141" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q647500" start="13361" end="13375" title="Korean cuisine" label="Korean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207282" start="13399" end="13407" title="pyeonyuk" label="pyeonyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q716622" start="13493" end="13509" title="anju (food)" label="&amp;quot;anju&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="13534" end="13553" title="alcoholic beverages" label="alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q912988" start="13662" end="13665" title="Tết" label="Tết"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="14860" end="14865" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="14870" end="14878" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="14898" end="14905" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="14989" end="14995" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567134" start="15035" end="15052" title="Caribbean English" label="Caribbean English"/>
<link wikidata="Q210377" start="15283" end="15289" title="gaucho" label="gaucho"/>
<link wikidata="Q326651" start="15374" end="15382" title="Pomerode" label="Pomerode"/>
<link wikidata="Q155557" start="15387" end="15395" title="Blumenau" label="Blumenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="15563" end="15570" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161010" start="15886" end="15925" title="Canadian Ukrainian" label="local dialect of the Ukrainian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="15928" end="15940" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22711" start="15964" end="15991" title="Pennsylvania Dutch language" label="Pennsylvania Dutch language"/>
<link wikidata="Q702220" start="16022" end="16041" title="Pennsylvania German" label="Pennsylvania German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="16138" end="16147" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="16149" end="16157" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="16159" end="16167" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="16195" end="16208" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="16434" end="16443" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="16445" end="16456" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="16458" end="16465" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="16493" end="16503" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q10426" start="16584" end="16592" title="cold cut" label="cold cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q96749544" start="16596" end="16605" title="appetizer" label="appetizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="16638" end="16645" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="16737" end="16747" title="Cajun food" label="Cajun food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="16976" end="17001" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="17103" end="17110" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q175735" start="17274" end="17289" title="Waterloo Region" label="Waterloo Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="17292" end="17298" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q586535" start="17395" end="17402" title="cretons" label="cretons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="17416" end="17436" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="17566" end="17579" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q586535" start="17609" end="17616" title="cretons" label="cretons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420447" start="17641" end="17652" title="Boston butt" label="Boston butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q157283" start="17698" end="17711" title="summer savory" label="summer savory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872856" start="17767" end="17779" title="Blood tongue" label="Blood tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="17782" end="17792" title="Pork jelly" label="Pork jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051646" start="17795" end="17806" title="P&amp;#x27;tcha" label="P&amp;#x27;tcha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87477" wikidata="Q511679" url="?curid=87477" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska">
<text>Lake and Peninsula Borough (, &quot;Leyk-end-Peninsula&quot;) is a borough in the state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 1,476, down from 1,631 in 2010. The borough seat of King Salmon is located in neighboring Bristol Bay Borough, although is not the seat of that borough. The most populous community in the borough is the census-designated place of Port Alsworth. With an average of , the Lake and Peninsula Borough is the least densely populated organized county-equivalent in the United States; only the unorganized Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area has a lower density.

==Geography==

The borough has an area of , of which is land and (28.2%) is water. The borough contains Iliamna Lake, the largest lake in Alaska and third largest within United States borders, and occupies most of the Alaska Peninsula. Its land area is larger than that of San Bernardino County, California, the largest county in the contiguous Lower 48 states.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska – north
* Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska – east
* Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Aleutians East Borough, Alaska – west
* Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska – west
* Dillingham Census Area, Alaska – west

===National protected areas===
* Alagnak Wild River
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Alaska Peninsula unit)
** Sutwik Island
* Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve
* Becharof National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Becharof Wilderness (part)
* Katmai National Park and Preserve (part)
** Katmai Wilderness (part)
* Lake Clark National Park and Preserve (part)
** Lake Clark Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,823 people, 588 households, and 418 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,557 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 18.76% White, 0.05% Black or African American, 73.51% Native American, 0.22% Asian, 0.16% Pacific Islander, 0.33% from other races, and 6.97% from two or more races. 1.15% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. About 5.41% reported speaking a Yupik language at home, while 3.87% speak Alutiiq and 1.23% an Athabaskan language.

Some 44.70% of households had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.50% were married couples living together, 9.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.90% were non-families. About 24.70% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.90% consisted of a sole occupant 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.10 and the average family size was 3.74.

In the borough, the age of the population was spread out, with 37.80% under the age of 18, 8.50% from 18 to 24, 28.00% from 25 to 44, 20.20% from 45 to 64, and 5.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females, there were 113.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 124.10 males.

The dominant religion is Orthodox Christianity.

==Government==
The Borough is governed by an elected assembly. The Borough&#x27;s mayor is Glen R. Alsworth, Sr. The deputy mayor is Myra J. Olsen. The other members of the assembly are Randy Alvarez, Scott Anderson, Alvin Pedersen, Michelle Pope-Ravenmoon, and Christina Salmon-Bringhurst.

Lake and Peninsula Borough is somewhat of a national bellwether, having only voted for the losing presidential candidate four times since statehood: in 1976, 1992, 2008, and 2016. 







==Communities==
Despite King Salmon being the borough seat, it is not in Lake and Peninsula Borough and instead in Bristol Bay Borough, therefore it is not included in the list.
===Cities===
*Chignik
*Egegik
*Newhalen
*Nondalton
*Pilot Point
*Port Heiden

===Census-designated places===

*Chignik Lagoon
*Chignik Lake
*Igiugig
*Iliamna
*Ivanof Bay
*Kokhanok
*Levelock
*Pedro Bay
*Perryville
*Pope-Vannoy Landing
*Port Alsworth
*Ugashik
===Ghost town===
*Kijik

==See also==

*List of airports in the Lake and Peninsula Borough

==References==
==External links==


* Borough map: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511679" start="0" end="26" title="Lake and Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Lake and Peninsula Borough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67" end="74" title="Borough (United States)#Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="82" end="87" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="91" end="97" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="109" end="120" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="177" end="189" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q532057" start="193" end="204" title="King Salmon, Alaska" label="King Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q501130" start="231" end="250" title="Bristol Bay Borough" label="Bristol Bay Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q24229376" start="344" end="367" title="List of census-designated places in Alaska" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740280" start="371" end="384" title="Port Alsworth, Alaska" label="Port Alsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="445" end="468" title="population density" label="least densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="479" end="496" title="county-equivalent" label="county-equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="540" end="565" title="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q965436" start="692" end="704" title="Iliamna Lake" label="Iliamna Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="806" end="822" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q108053" start="861" end="894" title="San Bernardino County, California" label="San Bernardino County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="933" end="941" title="Lower 48" label="Lower 48"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="994" end="1020" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="1031" end="1062" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q514093" start="1072" end="1101" title="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska" label="Kodiak Island Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q504371" start="1116" end="1146" title="Aleutians East Borough, Alaska" label="Aleutians East Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q501130" start="1156" end="1183" title="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska" label="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q277728" start="1193" end="1223" title="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska" label="Dillingham Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q641592" start="1265" end="1283" title="Alagnak Wild River" label="Alagnak Wild River"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1286" end="1326" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650397" start="1366" end="1379" title="Sutwik Island" label="Sutwik Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q258559" start="1382" end="1423" title="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q488569" start="1433" end="1473" title="Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve" label="Aniakchak National Monument and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q813578" start="1476" end="1509" title="Becharof National Wildlife Refuge" label="Becharof National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q813578" start="1520" end="1539" title="Becharof Wilderness" label="Becharof Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1549" end="1582" title="Katmai National Park and Preserve" label="Katmai National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q609902" start="1593" end="1610" title="Katmai Wilderness" label="Katmai Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1620" end="1657" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1668" end="1689" title="Lake Clark Wilderness" label="Lake Clark Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1725" end="1731" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1828" end="1846" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1955" end="1960" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1968" end="1973" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1977" end="1993" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2002" end="2017" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2025" end="2030" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2038" end="2054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2067" end="2078" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2143" end="2151" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2155" end="2161" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="2207" end="2221" title="Yupik language" label="Yupik language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27992" start="2249" end="2256" title="Alutiiq language" label="Alutiiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="2270" end="2289" title="Athabaskan languages" label="Athabaskan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2381" end="2396" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3068" end="3089" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q532057" start="3596" end="3607" title="King Salmon, Alaska" label="King Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q501130" start="3687" end="3706" title="Bristol Bay Borough, Alaska" label="Bristol Bay Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q79530" start="3764" end="3771" title="Chignik, Alaska" label="Chignik"/>
<link wikidata="Q80060" start="3773" end="3779" title="Egegik, Alaska" label="Egegik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79547" start="3781" end="3789" title="Newhalen, Alaska" label="Newhalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79326" start="3791" end="3800" title="Nondalton, Alaska" label="Nondalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79339" start="3802" end="3813" title="Pilot Point, Alaska" label="Pilot Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q79464" start="3815" end="3826" title="Port Heiden, Alaska" label="Port Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514831" start="3861" end="3875" title="Chignik Lagoon, Alaska" label="Chignik Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371148" start="3877" end="3889" title="Chignik Lake, Alaska" label="Chignik Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682014" start="3891" end="3898" title="Igiugig, Alaska" label="Igiugig"/>
<link wikidata="Q509197" start="3900" end="3907" title="Iliamna, Alaska" label="Iliamna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836951" start="3909" end="3919" title="Ivanof Bay, Alaska" label="Ivanof Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137823" start="3921" end="3929" title="Kokhanok, Alaska" label="Kokhanok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148252" start="3931" end="3939" title="Levelock, Alaska" label="Levelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820282" start="3941" end="3950" title="Pedro Bay, Alaska" label="Pedro Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740286" start="3952" end="3962" title="Perryville, Alaska" label="Perryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837522" start="3964" end="3983" title="Pope-Vannoy Landing, Alaska" label="Pope-Vannoy Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740280" start="3985" end="3998" title="Port Alsworth, Alaska" label="Port Alsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837575" start="4000" end="4007" title="Ugashik, Alaska" label="Ugashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406159" start="4026" end="4031" title="Kijik, Alaska" label="Kijik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="4048" end="4098" title="List of airports in the Lake and Peninsula Borough" label="List of airports in the Lake and Peninsula Borough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87478" wikidata="Q512925" url="?curid=87478" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska">
<text>Matanuska-Susitna Borough (often referred to as the Mat-Su Borough) is a borough located in the U.S. state of Alaska. Its borough seat is Palmer, and the largest community is the census-designated place of Knik-Fairview. As of the 2020 census, the borough&#x27;s population was 107,801.

The borough is part of the Anchorage Metropolitan Statistical Area, along with the municipality of Anchorage on its south.

The Mat-Su Borough is so designated because it contains the entire Matanuska and Susitna Rivers. They empty into Cook Inlet, which is the southern border of the Mat-Su Borough. It is one of the few agricultural areas of Alaska.

==Geography==

The borough seat is Palmer, and the largest community is the census-designated place of Knik-Fairview, Alaska.

As of the 2020 census, the population was 107,081, up from 88,995 in 2010. It is the fastest growing subdivision in Alaska.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , of which is land and (2.6%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Denali Borough, Alaska - north
* Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska - northeast
* Copper River Census Area, Alaska - east
* Chugach Census Area, Alaska - east
* Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska - south
* Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska - south
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska - west
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska - west

===National protected areas in the borough===
* Chugach National Forest (part)
* Denali National Park and Preserve (part)
** Denali Wilderness (part)
* Lake Clark National Park and Preserve (part)
** Lake Clark Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 59,322 people, 20,556 households, and 15,046 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 27,329 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 87.55% White, 0.69% Black or African American, 5.50% Native American, 0.70% Asian, 0.12% Pacific Islander, 0.86% from other races, and 4.57% from two or more races. 2.50% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 20,556 households, out of which 42.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.90% were married couples living together, 9.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.80% were non-families. 20.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.84 and the average family size was 3.29.

In the borough the population was spread out, with 32.20% under the age of 18, 7.40% from 18 to 24, 31.10% from 25 to 44, 23.40% from 45 to 64, and 5.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 108.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.10 males.

Schools in the borough are administered by the Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District.

==Politics and government==







Republicans have carried the Matanuska-Susitna borough in every election except for 1964. Though the borough has aligned with the statewide presidential election winner in Alaska in every election since statehood, it has come to stand out as one of the most Republican areas in Alaska, alongside the neighboring, less populated Southeast Fairbanks Census Area. In 2020, around 20% of Donald Trump&#x27;s vote share in the state came from this borough alone.

Edna DeVries is the mayor of the Matanuska-Susitna Borough. The borough has a strong-manager form of government. Mike Brown is the borough manager. Long-time Manager John Duffy retired in 2010.

Sarah Palin was previously the mayor of Wasilla, the largest city in the borough.

==Communities==
===Cities===
*Houston
*Palmer (Borough seat)
*Wasilla

===Census-designated places===

*Big Lake
*Buffalo Soapstone
*Butte
*Chase
*Chickaloon
*Eureka Roadhouse
*Farm Loop
*Fishhook
*Gateway
*Glacier View
*Knik River
*Knik-Fairview
*Lake Louise
*Lazy Mountain
*Meadow Lakes
*North Lakes
*Petersville
*Point MacKenzie
*Skwentna
*South Lakes
*Susitna
*Susitna North
*Sutton-Alpine
*Talkeetna
*Tanaina
*Trapper Creek
*Willow
===Unincorporated community===
*Alexander Creek

==Cyber attack==
In July 2018, the borough&#x27;s computer systems, including the library and animal shelter, were hit by a ransomware attack, forcing employees to do without computers, using electric typewriters where available. The borough declared a state of emergency and incurred over $2 million in costs. The method is thought to have been a targeted phishing e-mail; data left by the malware indicated Mat-Su was the 210th target attacked.

==Education==
The school district is Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District.

==Gallery==
==See also==

*Matanuska-Susitna Valley
*List of Airports in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough
*Matanuska Formation
*Deshka Landing Fire

==References==
==External links==
* official government website
* Borough Facebook
* Borough newsroom
*Borough map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
*Borough map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="0" end="25" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="52" end="66" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Mat-Su Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946305" start="73" end="80" title="Borough (United States)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="96" end="106" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="110" end="116" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79849" start="138" end="144" title="Palmer, Alaska" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023640" start="206" end="219" title="Knik-Fairview, Alaska" label="Knik-Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="231" end="242" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752744" start="315" end="354" title="Anchorage metropolitan area" label="Anchorage Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="371" end="396" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="municipality of Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468104" start="479" end="488" title="Matanuska River" label="Matanuska"/>
<link wikidata="Q60065" start="493" end="500" title="Susitna River" label="Susitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="660" end="672" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79849" start="676" end="682" title="Palmer, Alaska" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023640" start="744" end="765" title="Knik-Fairview, Alaska" label="Knik-Fairview, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="778" end="789" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="910" end="937" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q179950" start="1055" end="1077" title="Denali Borough, Alaska" label="Denali Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="1088" end="1127" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481796" start="1142" end="1174" title="Copper River Census Area, Alaska" label="Copper River Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481098" start="1184" end="1211" title="Chugach Census Area, Alaska" label="Chugach Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="1221" end="1254" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="1265" end="1296" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="1307" end="1333" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="1343" end="1376" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="1433" end="1456" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="1466" end="1499" title="Denali National Park and Preserve" label="Denali National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q217136" start="1510" end="1527" title="Denali Wilderness" label="Denali Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1537" end="1574" title="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve" label="Lake Clark National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q712296" start="1585" end="1606" title="Lake Clark Wilderness" label="Lake Clark Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1642" end="1648" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1752" end="1770" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1880" end="1885" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1893" end="1898" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1902" end="1918" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1926" end="1941" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1949" end="1954" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1962" end="1978" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1991" end="2002" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2067" end="2075" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2079" end="2085" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2213" end="2228" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786072" start="2908" end="2949" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002019" start="3071" end="3075" title="1964 United States presidential election in Alaska" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="3315" end="3346" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="3351" end="3355" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="3371" end="3390" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q111467584" start="3446" end="3458" title="Edna DeVries" label="Edna DeVries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="3641" end="3652" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79957" start="3681" end="3688" title="Wasilla" label="Wasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q80122" start="3754" end="3761" title="Houston, Alaska" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79849" start="3763" end="3769" title="Palmer, Alaska" label="Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79957" start="3786" end="3793" title="Wasilla, Alaska" label="Wasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q859012" start="3828" end="3836" title="Big Lake, Alaska" label="Big Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002085" start="3838" end="3855" title="Buffalo Soapstone, Alaska" label="Buffalo Soapstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018029" start="3857" end="3862" title="Butte, Alaska" label="Butte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067972" start="3864" end="3869" title="Chase, Alaska" label="Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q914161" start="3871" end="3881" title="Chickaloon, Alaska" label="Chickaloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5852087" start="3883" end="3899" title="Eureka Roadhouse, Alaska" label="Eureka Roadhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q942831" start="3901" end="3910" title="Farm Loop, Alaska" label="Farm Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420757" start="3912" end="3920" title="Fishhook, Alaska" label="Fishhook"/>
<link wikidata="Q225480" start="3922" end="3929" title="Gateway, Alaska" label="Gateway"/>
<link wikidata="Q686854" start="3931" end="3943" title="Glacier View, Alaska" label="Glacier View"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498068" start="3945" end="3955" title="Knik River, Alaska" label="Knik River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023640" start="3957" end="3970" title="Knik-Fairview, Alaska" label="Knik-Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343275" start="3972" end="3983" title="Lake Louise, Alaska" label="Lake Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q928166" start="3985" end="3998" title="Lazy Mountain, Alaska" label="Lazy Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q545384" start="4000" end="4012" title="Meadow Lakes, Alaska" label="Meadow Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448479" start="4014" end="4025" title="North Lakes, Alaska" label="North Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836528" start="4027" end="4038" title="Petersville, Alaska" label="Petersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006932" start="4040" end="4055" title="Point MacKenzie, Alaska" label="Point MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494568" start="4057" end="4065" title="Skwentna, Alaska" label="Skwentna"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448483" start="4067" end="4078" title="South Lakes, Alaska" label="South Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837393" start="4080" end="4087" title="Susitna, Alaska" label="Susitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018020" start="4089" end="4102" title="Susitna North, Alaska" label="Susitna North"/>
<link wikidata="Q607768" start="4104" end="4117" title="Sutton-Alpine, Alaska" label="Sutton-Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q668224" start="4119" end="4128" title="Talkeetna, Alaska" label="Talkeetna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729157" start="4130" end="4137" title="Tanaina, Alaska" label="Tanaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q920795" start="4139" end="4152" title="Trapper Creek, Alaska" label="Trapper Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q923710" start="4154" end="4160" title="Willow, Alaska" label="Willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833100" start="4193" end="4208" title="Alexander Creek, Alaska" label="Alexander Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q926331" start="4334" end="4344" title="ransomware" label="ransomware"/>
<link wikidata="Q135005" start="4567" end="4575" title="phishing" label="phishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786072" start="4695" end="4736" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246118" start="4766" end="4790" title="Matanuska-Susitna Valley" label="Matanuska-Susitna Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="4792" end="4841" title="List of Airports in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough" label="List of Airports in the Matanuska-Susitna Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786074" start="4843" end="4862" title="Matanuska Formation" label="Matanuska Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q67205930" start="4864" end="4883" title="Deshka Landing Fire" label="Deshka Landing Fire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87480" wikidata="Q503023" url="?curid=87480" title="Nome Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Nome Census Area is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska, mostly overlapping with the Seward Peninsula. As of the 2020 census, the population was 10,046, up from 9,492 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest community by far is the city of Nome.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (18.8%) is water. It also includes the large offshore St. Lawrence Island, which has about 14 percent of the census area&#x27;s population and two of its larger cities in Gambell and Savoonga. Nome Census 
Area is the 7th largest county-equivalent in the state of Alaska.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska - north
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska - east
* Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska - south
* Chukotsky District, Chukotka Autonomous Okrug - west

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Bering Sea unit)
** Besboro Island
** King Island
** Sledge Island
* Bering Land Bridge National Preserve (part)
* Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Andreafsky Wilderness (part)
==Demographics==
===2020 Census===
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 9,196 people, 2,693 households, and 1,898 families living in the census area. The population density was . There were 3,649 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 19.32% White, 0.38% Black or African American, 75.20% Native American, 0.67% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.20% from other races, and 4.21% from two or more races. 1.00% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.32% reported speaking a Yupik language at home, while 8.75% speak Inupiaq; a further 2.02% reported speaking &quot;Eskimo&quot;, a term that covers both Yupik and Inupiaq.

Of the 2,693 households, 45.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.40% were married couples living together, 15.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.50% were non-families. 23.20% of households were one person, and 3.30% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.33 and the average family size was 4.01.

In the census area 37.10% of the population was under the age of 18, 9.30% was from 18 to 24, 29.00% from 25 to 44, 18.60% from 45 to 64, and 5.90% was 65 or older. The median age was 28 years. For every 100 females, there were 117.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 122.70 males.

==Communities==
===Cities===

*Brevig Mission
*Diomede
*Elim
*Gambell
*Golovin
*Koyuk
*Nome
*Savoonga
*Shaktoolik
*Shishmaref
*St. Michael
*Stebbins
*Teller
*Unalakleet
*Wales
*White Mountain
===Census-designated place===
* Port Clarence

===Unincorporated communities===
*Haycock
*Solomon

==Politics==






Nome Census Area is somewhat of a national bellwether, having backed the national winner all but five times since statehood: in 1960, 1976, 1980, 2016, and 2024.

==See also==
*List of airports in the Nome Census Area
*Army Peak

==References==
==External links==
* Census Area map: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503023" start="0" end="16" title="Nome Census Area, Alaska" label="Nome Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="22" end="33" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="49" end="59" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="63" end="69" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q971586" start="99" end="115" title="Seward Peninsula" label="Seward Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="127" end="138" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="208" end="227" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="249" end="261" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="307" end="311" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="345" end="372" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q638407" start="487" end="506" title="St. Lawrence Island" label="St. Lawrence Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q79677" start="604" end="611" title="Gambell, Alaska" label="Gambell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79513" start="616" end="624" title="Savoonga, Alaska" label="Savoonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q511723" start="749" end="781" title="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska" label="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="792" end="825" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q379474" start="835" end="863" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska" label="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q741588" start="874" end="892" title="Chukotsky District" label="Chukotsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984" start="894" end="919" title="Chukotka Autonomous Okrug" label="Chukotka Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="961" end="1001" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q829471" start="1035" end="1049" title="Besboro Island" label="Besboro Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q126043" start="1053" end="1064" title="King Island (Alaska)" label="King Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018698" start="1068" end="1081" title="Sledge Island" label="Sledge Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q820652" start="1084" end="1120" title="Bering Land Bridge National Preserve" label="Bering Land Bridge National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q168074" start="1130" end="1166" title="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge" label="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q168074" start="1177" end="1198" title="Andreafsky Wilderness" label="Andreafsky Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1269" end="1275" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q27970" start="1756" end="1770" title="Yupik language" label="Yupik language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27183" start="1798" end="1805" title="Inupiat language" label="Inupiaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q79698" start="2615" end="2629" title="Brevig Mission, Alaska" label="Brevig Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q80082" start="2631" end="2638" title="Diomede, Alaska" label="Diomede"/>
<link wikidata="Q79557" start="2640" end="2644" title="Elim, Alaska" label="Elim"/>
<link wikidata="Q79677" start="2646" end="2653" title="Gambell, Alaska" label="Gambell"/>
<link wikidata="Q79379" start="2655" end="2662" title="Golovin, Alaska" label="Golovin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80055" start="2664" end="2669" title="Koyuk, Alaska" label="Koyuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="2671" end="2675" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q79513" start="2677" end="2685" title="Savoonga, Alaska" label="Savoonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q79397" start="2687" end="2697" title="Shaktoolik, Alaska" label="Shaktoolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79723" start="2699" end="2709" title="Shishmaref, Alaska" label="Shishmaref"/>
<link wikidata="Q80160" start="2711" end="2722" title="St. Michael, Alaska" label="St. Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q79689" start="2724" end="2732" title="Stebbins, Alaska" label="Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79856" start="2734" end="2740" title="Teller, Alaska" label="Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q79812" start="2742" end="2752" title="Unalakleet, Alaska" label="Unalakleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80043" start="2754" end="2759" title="Wales, Alaska" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q79361" start="2761" end="2775" title="White Mountain, Alaska" label="White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836938" start="2808" end="2821" title="Port Clarence, Alaska" label="Port Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30622079" start="2857" end="2864" title="Haycock, Alaska" label="Haycock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837757" start="2866" end="2873" title="Solomon, Alaska" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3071" end="3111" title="List of airports in the Nome Census Area" label="List of airports in the Nome Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794206" start="3113" end="3122" title="Army Peak" label="Army Peak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87482" wikidata="Q2029146" url="?curid=87482" title="Kannapolis, North Carolina">
<text>Kannapolis () is a city in Cabarrus and Rowan counties, in the U.S. state of North Carolina, northwest of Concord and northeast of Charlotte and is a suburb in the Charlotte metropolitan area. The city of Kannapolis was incorporated in 1984. The population was 53,114 at the 2020 census, which makes Kannapolis the 19th-most populous city in North Carolina. It is the home of the Kannapolis Cannon Ballers, the Low-A baseball affiliate of the Chicago White Sox, and it is the hometown of the Earnhardt racing family. It is also the headquarters for the Haas F1 racing team. The center of the city is home to the North Carolina Research Campus, a public-private venture that focuses on food, nutrition, and biotech research.

==History==
===Name===
Early meaning and usage of the city&#x27;s name was a direct reference to Cannon Mills Corporation, or James William Cannon himself. Early published name variations include &quot;Cannon-opolis&quot; and &quot;Cannapolis&quot;. A widely accepted origin of the word &quot;Kannapolis&quot; comes from the combination of the Greek words &quot;kanna&quot; (reeds, not looms) and &quot;polis&quot; (city), which some believed meant &quot;City of Looms&quot;. Dr. Gary Freeze, Catawba College history and politics department chairman, said a Concord newspaper used the name &quot;Cannon City&quot; in 1906. After mill workers or newspapers called the town &quot;Cannapolis&quot;, J.W. Cannon asked Cabarrus County commissioners to give the town the name, but starting with a &quot;K&quot;. Kannapolis historian Norris Dearmon said the K might have been to distinguish the town from his Concord mill village. Since, Freeze said, &quot;Jim Cannon didn&#x27;t study Greek,&quot; Cannon did not name the town &quot;city of looms&quot;. In 1906 J.W. Cannon purchased the land that later became Kannapolis, and acquired a total of 1,008 acres in Cabarrus and Rowan Counties. Approximately 808 of those acres of farmland, purchased along the historic wagon road between Salisbury and Charlotte, became the location of the new textile mill, Cannon Manufacturing. Cannon Manufacturing began production in 1908. In 1914 Cannon Manufacturing became known as the world&#x27;s largest producer of sheets and towels. Shortly after, Cannon opened plants in Rowan County, Concord and in South Carolina totaling 20,000 workers. Mill founder J.W. Cannon&#x27;s youngest son, Charles A. Cannon, consolidated all the separate mills into the giant Cannon Mills Company in 1928.

==Geography==

Kannapolis is located on the boundary of Cabarrus and Rowan counties, with a greater portion of its area in Cabarrus County. U.S. Route 29 (Cannon Boulevard) passes through the city east of the downtown area; U.S. 29 leads northeast to Salisbury and south to Concord. Interstate 85 bypasses the city on the south and the east, with access from Exits 54 through 63 (five exits total). I-85 leads northeast to Greensboro and southwest to Charlotte.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (1.64%) is water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 census, there were 53,114 people, 17,248 households, and 12,092 families residing in the city.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 36,910 people, 14,804 households, and 10,140 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 15,941 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was: 77.74% White, 16.45% Black or African American, 6.33% Hispanic or Latino American, 0.86% Asian American, 0.34% Native American, 0.01% Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, 3.43% some other race, and 1.16% two or more races.

There were 14,804 households, out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.4% were married couples living together, 13.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.5% were non-families. 26.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.96.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 24.2% under the age of 18, 9.0% from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 20.8% from 45 to 64, and 15.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $35,532, and the median income for a family was $42,445. Males had a median income of $30,990 versus $23,277 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,539. About 7.7% of families and 10.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.6% of those under age 18 and 10.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Arts and culture==
===National Register of Historic Places===
The Gem Theater, Meek House, and Harvey Jeremiah Peeler House are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

===Museums===
* Curb Museum for Music and Motorsports 

==Sports==
* Kannapolis Cannon Ballers, Class &quot;A&quot; Baseball Affiliate of the Chicago White Sox
* Stewart-Haas Racing, a NASCAR Cup Series team established by Gene Haas
* Haas F1 Team, a Formula One team, also established by Gene Haas

==Parks and recreation==

===Public===
Kannapolis has several public recreational areas. These include parks, athletic fields and greenways. One public park in the city, Vietnam Veterans Park (formerly, North Cabarrus Park) is
maintained and operated by Cabarrus County.
* Bakers Creek Park
* Dale Earnhardt Plaza
* Veterans Park
* Vietnam Veterans Park (formerly, North Cabarrus Park)
* Village Park
* Walter M. Safrit Park

=== Private ===
* The Club at Irish Creek (formerly, Kannapolis Country Club)
* Kannapolis Recreation Park

==Education==
===K–12===
Kannapolis City Schools is the primary school system for the city. Two additional systems also serve its jurisdiction: Cabarrus County Schools and Rowan–Salisbury School System.

Faith Christian Academy (FCA) is a private, non-profit Christian educational institution that is operated by Faith Baptist Church. Faith Christian Academy offers a combination of the A Beka program (K5–2nd grade) and the Alpha-Omega computerized, individual learning program (3rd–12th grade). FCA was organized in 1982.

Franklin Heights Christian Academy (FHCA) is a private, non-profit Christian educational institution that is operated by Franklin Heights Baptist Church. FHCA was organized in 2009. This school is now closed.

===Higher education===
Shaw University has an extramural site in Kannapolis offering undergraduate, graduate and continuing educational programs.

Ambassador Christian College has a campus in Kannapolis offering undergraduate and graduate degrees in theology. The school was founded in 2003 by Dr. Keith Slough.

===North Carolina Research Campus===

The North Carolina Research Campus in Kannapolis is a research center.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Kannapolis is located adjacent to Interstate 85, approximately northeast of Charlotte.

Concord Kannapolis Area Transit, also known as Rider, provides multiple local bus routes, with its farthest point reaching Concord Mills Mall.

Charlotte Area Transit System (CATS) provides multiple transportation options including bus, vanpool or carpool. CATS provides a bus stop and parking at Kannapolis&#x27; Home Depot parking lot.

The Kannapolis Amtrak station is located at 201 South Main Street.

==Notable people==
* Tavis Bailey, Olympic discus thrower representing Team USA, competed at the 2016 Summer Olympics
* George Clinton, leader of Parliament-Funkadelic
* Dale Earnhardt, former 7-time NASCAR Cup Series champion, member of the NASCAR Hall of Fame
* Dale Earnhardt Jr., former NASCAR driver, member of the NASCAR Hall of Fame
* Kelley Earnhardt Miller, businesswoman and vice president of JR Motorsports
* Kerry Earnhardt, former NASCAR driver
* Ralph Earnhardt, former NASCAR driver
* Carl Ford, member of the North Carolina Senate
* Daniel Hemric, current NASCAR driver
* Ethan Horton, former NFL tight end
* Skip Hollandsworth, writer
* Argie Johnson, educator
* Kameron Marlowe, country music singer-songwriter
* Glenn McDuffie, retired World War II sailor, picture subject of &quot;V-J Day in Times Square&quot;
* James McDuffie, North Carolina Senator
* Eddie Mills, actor
* Melissa Morrison-Howard, track hurdler and winner of two Olympic bronze medals
* Mike Morton, NFL linebacker, Super Bowl XXXIV champion with the St. Louis Rams
* Brandon Parker, NFL offensive tackle
* Corey Seager, MLB shortstop, 2020 World Series champion and MVP for the Los Angeles Dodgers
* Kyle Seager, MLB third baseman 
* George Shinn, former owner of the Charlotte Hornets
* Haskel Stanback, former NFL running back
* Dixie Upright, former MLB player

==In popular culture==
In 2004, a silent film about Kannapolis, showing the everyday behavior of ordinary people, which was made in 1941 by itinerant filmmaker H. Lee Waters, was selected by the Library of Congress for listing in the United States National Film Registry, as a representative of this kind of filmed &quot;town portrait&quot; popular in the 1930s and 1940s.

==See also==
* List of municipalities in North Carolina

==References==
==Further reading==
* Minchin, Timothy J., &quot;&#x27;It Knocked This City to Its Knees&#x27;: The Closure of Pillowtex Mills in Kannapolis, North Carolina, and the Decline of the U.S. Textile Industry,&quot; &quot;Labor History&quot; 50 (Aug. 2009), 287–311
* Vanderburg, Timothy W. &quot;Cannon Mills and Kannapolis: Persistent Paternalism in a Textile Town&quot; (University of Tennessee Press; 2013) 255 pages

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2029146" start="0" end="10" title="Kannapolis, North Carolina" label="Kannapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176307" start="27" end="35" title="Cabarrus County, North Carolina" label="Cabarrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507966" start="40" end="45" title="Rowan County, North Carolina" label="Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="63" end="73" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="77" end="91" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="106" end="113" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="131" end="140" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705539" start="164" end="191" title="Charlotte metropolitan area" label="Charlotte metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="275" end="286" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674577" start="315" end="338" title="List of municipalities in North Carolina" label="19th-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363988" start="380" end="405" title="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers" label="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="443" end="460" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074531" start="492" end="501" title="Earnhardt Ganassi Racing" label="Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16300222" start="553" end="560" title="Haas F1 Team" label="Haas F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q13402906" start="612" end="642" title="North Carolina Research Campus" label="North Carolina Research Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032777" start="822" end="846" title="Cannon Mills Corporation" label="Cannon Mills Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145556" start="851" end="871" title="James William Cannon" label="James William Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1069" end="1074" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051596" start="1218" end="1233" title="Catawba College" label="Catawba College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="1283" end="1290" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q176307" start="1439" end="1454" title="Cabarrus County, North Carolina" label="Cabarrus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028813" start="2004" end="2013" title="Salisbury, North Carolina" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="2018" end="2027" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="2060" end="2072" title="textile mill" label="textile mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569516" start="2639" end="2652" title="U.S. Route 29 in North Carolina" label="U.S. Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028813" start="2750" end="2759" title="Salisbury, North Carolina" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="2773" end="2780" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447997" start="2782" end="2795" title="Interstate 85 in North Carolina" label="Interstate 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q49238" start="2922" end="2932" title="Greensboro, North Carolina" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="2950" end="2959" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2979" end="3006" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3124" end="3135" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3250" end="3261" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3354" end="3372" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3480" end="3485" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3494" end="3499" title="Black (U.S. Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3503" end="3519" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3527" end="3535" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="3539" end="3554" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latino American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="3562" end="3576" title="Asian American" label="Asian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3584" end="3599" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="3607" end="3622" title="Native Hawaiian" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="3626" end="3648" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Other Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3656" end="3671" title="Race (United States Census)" label="some other race"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="3683" end="3700" title="Multiracial American" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3814" end="3829" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4626" end="4643" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4736" end="4748" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q43094943" start="4892" end="4903" title="Gem Theatre (Kannapolis, North Carolina)" label="Gem Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154298" start="4905" end="4915" title="Meek House" label="Meek House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155804" start="4921" end="4949" title="Harvey Jeremiah Peeler House" label="Harvey Jeremiah Peeler House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4968" end="5004" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363988" start="5076" end="5101" title="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers" label="Kannapolis Cannon Ballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q511684" start="5169" end="5188" title="Stewart-Haas Racing" label="Stewart-Haas Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="5192" end="5209" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094091" start="5230" end="5239" title="Gene Haas" label="Gene Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16300222" start="5242" end="5254" title="Haas F1 Team" label="Haas F1 Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="5258" end="5269" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363983" start="5866" end="5889" title="Kannapolis City Schools" label="Kannapolis City Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015260" start="5985" end="6008" title="Cabarrus County Schools" label="Cabarrus County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371773" start="6013" end="6042" title="Rowan–Salisbury School System" label="Rowan–Salisbury School System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443493" start="6599" end="6614" title="Shaw University" label="Shaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13402906" start="6931" end="6961" title="North Carolina Research Campus" label="North Carolina Research Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447997" start="7073" end="7086" title="Interstate 85 in North Carolina" label="Interstate 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="7115" end="7124" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158814" start="7127" end="7158" title="Concord Kannapolis Area Transit" label="Concord Kannapolis Area Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158824" start="7250" end="7263" title="Concord Mills" label="Concord Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085831" start="7271" end="7300" title="Charlotte Area Transit System" label="Charlotte Area Transit System"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708006" start="7470" end="7495" title="Kannapolis (Amtrak station)" label="Kannapolis Amtrak station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25909425" start="7555" end="7567" title="Tavis Bailey" label="Tavis Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="7577" end="7583" title="discus throw" label="discus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="7631" end="7651" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="7654" end="7668" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353842" start="7680" end="7701" title="Parliament-Funkadelic" label="Parliament-Funkadelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q355420" start="7704" end="7718" title="Dale Earnhardt" label="Dale Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="7734" end="7740" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="7741" end="7751" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443089" start="7776" end="7795" title="NASCAR Hall of Fame" label="NASCAR Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q355388" start="7798" end="7816" title="Dale Earnhardt Jr." label="Dale Earnhardt Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16214092" start="7876" end="7899" title="Kelley Earnhardt Miller" label="Kelley Earnhardt Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094266" start="7937" end="7951" title="JR Motorsports" label="JR Motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394515" start="7954" end="7969" title="Kerry Earnhardt" label="Kerry Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q668638" start="7994" end="8009" title="Ralph Earnhardt" label="Ralph Earnhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090718" start="8034" end="8043" title="Carl Ford (politician)" label="Carl Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="8059" end="8080" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233851" start="8083" end="8096" title="Daniel Hemric" label="Daniel Hemric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402946" start="8122" end="8134" title="Ethan Horton" label="Ethan Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="8143" end="8146" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535678" start="8159" end="8177" title="Skip Hollandsworth" label="Skip Hollandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108016353" start="8188" end="8201" title="Argie Johnson" label="Argie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q98066287" start="8214" end="8229" title="Kameron Marlowe" label="Kameron Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q626926" start="8265" end="8279" title="Glenn McDuffie" label="Glenn McDuffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8289" end="8301" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q626926" start="8335" end="8358" title="V-J Day in Times Square" label="V-J Day in Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q20016190" start="8367" end="8381" title="James McDuffie" label="James McDuffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282898" start="8408" end="8419" title="Eddie Mills" label="Eddie Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q436990" start="8429" end="8452" title="Melissa Morrison-Howard" label="Melissa Morrison-Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q537769" start="8460" end="8467" title="hurdling" label="hurdler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="8486" end="8493" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593543" start="8510" end="8521" title="Mike Morton (linebacker)" label="Mike Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="8527" end="8537" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q176843" start="8539" end="8555" title="Super Bowl XXXIV" label="Super Bowl XXXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="8574" end="8588" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q51077981" start="8591" end="8605" title="Brandon Parker" label="Brandon Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="8611" end="8627" title="tackle (gridiron football position)" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403431" start="8630" end="8642" title="Corey Seager" label="Corey Seager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="8644" end="8647" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79465885" start="8659" end="8676" title="2020 World Series" label="2020 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372040" start="8690" end="8693" title="World Series Most Valuable Player Award" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="8702" end="8721" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152662" start="8724" end="8735" title="Kyle Seager" label="Kyle Seager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524076" start="8758" end="8770" title="George Shinn" label="George Shinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="8792" end="8809" title="Charlotte Hornets" label="Charlotte Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679182" start="8812" end="8827" title="Haskel Stanback" label="Haskel Stanback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284904" start="8855" end="8868" title="Dixie Upright" label="Dixie Upright"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="8923" end="8934" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595834" start="9029" end="9048" title="itinerant filmmaker" label="itinerant filmmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734908" start="9049" end="9062" title="Herbert Lee Waters" label="H. Lee Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="9084" end="9103" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="9137" end="9159" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674577" start="9278" end="9318" title="List of municipalities in North Carolina" label="List of municipalities in North Carolina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87483" wikidata="Q511806" url="?curid=87483" title="North Slope Borough, Alaska">
<text>The North Slope Borough is the northernmost borough in the US state of Alaska and, thus, the northernmost county or equivalent of the United States as a whole. As of the 2020 census, the population was 11,031. The borough seat and largest city, comprising nearly half of the borough’s population, is Utqiaġvik (known as Barrow from 1901 to 2016), the northernmost settlement in the United States.

==History==
The borough was established in 1972 by an election of the majority Indigenous people in the region, following Congressional passage of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act. Most are Inupiat. The borough was named for the Alaska North Slope basin. In 1974, it adopted a Home Rule Charter, enabling it to exercise any legitimate governmental power. The borough has first-class status and exercises the powers of planning, zoning, taxation, and schools.

In 2020, the airline Ravn Alaska went into bankruptcy and ended operations. The government of North Slope Borough attempted to take control of the airline&#x27;s assets to keep flights and shipments coming to the community, but the Alaska Attorney General stated that the borough did not have that authority.

==Government==
The borough is governed by an eleven-member assembly, elected to staggered three-year terms, which meets monthly. Representation on the assembly is apportioned among the various communities; Utqiaġvik is allotted six seats, Nuiqsut, Point Hope, and Wainwright one seat apiece, while the remaining two seats combine two communities; Anaktuvuk Pass with Kaktovik and Atqasuk with Point Lay. The borough&#x27;s executive and administrative powers are vested in a mayor, who is limited to two consecutive three-year terms.

===Mayors===
*1972–1980: Eben Hopson (died in office)
*1980–1981: Jacob Anaġi Adams, Sr.
*1981–1984: Eugene Brower
*1984–1990: George Ahmaogak, Sr.
*1990–1993: Jeslie Kaleak
*1993–1996: George Ahmaogak, Sr.
*1996–1999: Benjamin Nageak
*1999–2005: George Ahmaogak, Sr.
*2005–2011: Edward Itta
*2011–2016: Charlotte Brower 
*2016–2023: Harry Brower, Jr.
*2023–present: Josiah Patkotak

===Politics===






North Slope Borough has generally hosted competitive elections, it has only backed a Democrat for president three times since 1980.

Former mayor Eugene Brower, Charlotte Brower&#x27;s husband, was convicted of tax evasion involving contractor kickbacks in the 1980s.

Former mayor George Ahmaogak had billed the Borough for a family vacation in Hawaii. His wife, Maggie, was later convicted of embezzlement by the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission in 2015.

Edward Itta succeeded George Ahmaogak and served two terms, 2005–2011. In 2011, Charlotte Brower defeated Ahmaogak in a runoff election after his Hawaii vacation was revealed. She was recalled in April 2016, after it was reported the year before that her office had made numerous donations to individuals (including family members), sports clubs, and other groups that amounted to more than $800,000 since 2011.

In July 2016, Harry K. Brower Jr., Charlotte Brower&#x27;s brother-in-law, was first elected in a run-off election to serve the rest of Charlotte Brower&#x27;s second term.

Harry K. Brower Jr. ran for a full term as mayor in October 2017 but was forced into a November runoff against his nephew, Frederick Brower, where he easily won a full 3-year term.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , of which is land and (6.4%) is water. The borough is larger than 39 states.

Its western coastline is along the Chukchi Sea, while its eastern shores (beyond Point Barrow) are on the Beaufort Sea.

The North Slope Borough is the largest county-level political subdivision in the United States by area, with a larger land area than the state of Utah, the 13th-largest state in the nation. Although the adjacent Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area is larger in area, it has no borough-level government. The borough is the fourth-least densely populated county-level entity in the United States. The Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area is the least densely populated county-level entity.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska – southeast
* Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska – southwest
It shares its eastern border with Yukon, Canada, which has no subdivisions.

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Chukchi Sea unit)
** Cape Lisburne
** Cape Thompson
* Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Mollie Beattie Wilderness (part)
* Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve (part)
** Gates of the Arctic Wilderness (part)
* Noatak National Preserve (part)
** Noatak Wilderness (part)

===Other federal areas===
* National Petroleum Reserve–Alaska

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the census of 2020, the borough had 11,031 people and 1,979 households. The population density was . There were 2,631 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 53.2% Native American or Alaska Native, 32.7% White, 4.3% Hispanic or Latino, 1.8% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, 1.6% African American, and 5.3% were from two or more races. 4.6% of the population were veterans, and 6.3% were born outside of the United States. The average household size was 3.36 people. 7.9% of the population were under the age of 5, 26.8% were under the age of 18, 65.7% were between the ages of 18 and 64, and 7.5% were aged 65 or older. 62.4% of the population were male and 37.6% were female. 86.2% of households contained a computer, with 69.8% of households having a broadband Internet connection. 89.7% of the population had a high school diploma or higher, with 16.5% having a Bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher. 79.0% of the population were in the civilian labor force. (72.8% of women) The median household income was $79,306, with the average per capita income from May 2019 to April 2020 being $48,730. 11.4% of the population were in poverty.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, 9,430 people, 2,109 households, and 1,524 families residing in the borough. The population density was per person. There were 2,538 housing units at an average density of per unit. The racial makeup of the borough was 33.37% White, 1% Black or African American, 54.08% Native American (mostly Iñupiat), 4.51% Asian, 1.1% Pacific Islander, 0.71% from other races, and 5.23% from two or more races. 2.64% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race. 42.84% reported speaking Iñupiaq or &quot;Eskimo&quot; at home, while 4.21% reported speaking Tagalog.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,385 people. The racial makeup was 17.09% White, 0.72% Black or African American, 68.38% Native American (mostly Iñupiat), 5.92% Asian, 0.84% Pacific Islander, 0.50% from other races, and 6.55% from two or more races. 2.37% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 2,109 households, out of which 48.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.3% were married couples living together, 18.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.70% were non-families. 21.4% of all households comprised individuals, and 1.9% had someone who was 65 or older living alone. The average household size was 3.45, and the average family size was 4.05.

The borough&#x27;s population was spread out, with 38.2% under 18, 9.50% from 18 to 24, 30.1% from 25 to 44, 18.10% from 45 to 64, and 4.2% who were 65 or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 112.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 113.90 males.

===2020 Census===


==Economics==
&quot;Among all North Slope Borough communities, a higher percentage of Nuiqsut households use subsistence resources for more than half of their diet.&quot;

==Communities==
===Cities===
*Anaktuvuk Pass
*Atqasuk
*Kaktovik
*Nuiqsut
*Point Hope
*Utqiagvik (Borough seat)
*Wainwright

===Census-designated places===
*Point Lay
*Prudhoe Bay

===Unincorporated communities===
*Alpine
*Deadhorse
*Sagwon
*Umiat

==Education==
The borough has a single school district: North Slope Borough School District. It is also the largest school district in the United States by area, totaling 
==See also==

*Eskimo
*List of airports in Alaska
*Nalukataq
*Thetis Mound

==References==
==External links==
*Borough map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
*Borough map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511806" start="4" end="23" title="North Slope Borough, Alaska" label="North Slope Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="44" end="51" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="71" end="77" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="134" end="147" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="170" end="181" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79809" start="300" end="309" title="Utqiaġvik" label="Utqiaġvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="382" end="395" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="549" end="584" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="595" end="602" title="Inupiat" label="Inupiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q85740507" start="634" end="658" title="Alaska North Slope basin" label="Alaska North Slope basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="682" end="699" title="Home Rule Charter" label="Home Rule Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418307" start="886" end="897" title="Ravn Alaska" label="Ravn Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="908" end="918" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708496" start="1097" end="1120" title="Alaska Attorney General" label="Alaska Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q58815549" start="1735" end="1746" title="Eben Hopson" label="Eben Hopson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145578" start="1929" end="1944" title="Benjamin Nageak" label="Benjamin Nageak"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949781" start="1990" end="2001" title="Edward Itta" label="Edward Itta"/>
<link wikidata="Q105086763" start="2077" end="2092" title="Josiah Patkotak" label="Josiah Patkotak"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949781" start="2573" end="2584" title="Edward Itta" label="Edward Itta"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3373" end="3400" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="3548" end="3559" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343019" start="3594" end="3606" title="Point Barrow" label="Point Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="3619" end="3631" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="3780" end="3784" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q150340" start="3790" end="3822" title="List of US states by area" label="13th-largest state in the nation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3946" end="3976" title="County statistics of the United States#Least densely populated" label="fourth-least densely populated"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="4023" end="4048" title="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="4145" end="4170" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q511723" start="4193" end="4217" title="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska" label="Northwest Arctic Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="4272" end="4277" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="4348" end="4388" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034901" start="4423" end="4436" title="Cape Lisburne (Alaska)" label="Cape Lisburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035081" start="4440" end="4453" title="Cape Thompson" label="Cape Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q638097" start="4456" end="4487" title="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge" label="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348827" start="4498" end="4523" title="Mollie Beattie Wilderness" label="Mollie Beattie Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="4533" end="4579" title="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve" label="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="4590" end="4620" title="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness" label="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="4630" end="4654" title="Noatak National Preserve" label="Noatak National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="4665" end="4682" title="Noatak Wilderness" label="Noatak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974897" start="4719" end="4752" title="National Petroleum Reserve–Alaska" label="National Petroleum Reserve–Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4799" end="4805" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="4871" end="4889" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="4997" end="5012" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="5016" end="5029" title="Alaska Native" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="5037" end="5042" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="5049" end="5067" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283606" start="5074" end="5089" title="Native Hawaiian" label="Native Hawaiian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="5093" end="5109" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="5116" end="5132" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="5200" end="5208" title="veterans" label="veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="5590" end="5599" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="5600" end="5608" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="5702" end="5724" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6000" end="6006" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="6096" end="6114" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="6241" end="6246" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="6251" end="6276" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6285" end="6300" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="6309" end="6316" title="Iñupiat" label="Iñupiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="6325" end="6330" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="6337" end="6353" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="6441" end="6459" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27183" start="6498" end="6505" title="Inupiat language" label="Iñupiaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="6567" end="6574" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6605" end="6611" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="6675" end="6680" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="6688" end="6713" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6722" end="6737" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417088" start="6746" end="6753" title="Iñupiat" label="Iñupiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="6762" end="6767" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="6775" end="6791" title="Pacific Islander Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="6879" end="6897" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7023" end="7038" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q79755" start="7846" end="7860" title="Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska" label="Anaktuvuk Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q79714" start="7862" end="7869" title="Atqasuk, Alaska" label="Atqasuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79717" start="7871" end="7879" title="Kaktovik, Alaska" label="Kaktovik"/>
<link wikidata="Q80112" start="7881" end="7888" title="Nuiqsut, Alaska" label="Nuiqsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q79813" start="7890" end="7900" title="Point Hope, Alaska" label="Point Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q79809" start="7902" end="7911" title="Utqiaġvik, Alaska" label="Utqiagvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q80033" start="7928" end="7938" title="Wainwright, Alaska" label="Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025954" start="7972" end="7981" title="Point Lay, Alaska" label="Point Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013046" start="7983" end="7994" title="Prudhoe Bay, Alaska" label="Prudhoe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002762" start="8030" end="8036" title="Alpine, Alaska" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q605671" start="8038" end="8047" title="Deadhorse, Alaska" label="Deadhorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461466" start="8049" end="8055" title="Sagwon, Alaska" label="Sagwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548222" start="8057" end="8062" title="Umiat, Alaska" label="Umiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q398141" start="8103" end="8118" title="school district" label="school district"/>
<link wikidata="Q24264987" start="8120" end="8155" title="North Slope Borough School District" label="North Slope Borough School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q131242" start="8251" end="8257" title="Eskimo" label="Eskimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="8259" end="8285" title="List of airports in Alaska" label="List of airports in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4814034" start="8287" end="8296" title="Nalukataq" label="Nalukataq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531726" start="8298" end="8310" title="Thetis Mound" label="Thetis Mound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87484" wikidata="Q511723" url="?curid=87484" title="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska">
<text>Northwest Arctic Borough is a borough located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 7,793, up from 7,523 in 2010. The borough seat is Kotzebue. The borough was formed on June 2, 1986.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of , of which is land and (12.7%) is water. By land area, it is slightly larger than the state of Maine.

Its coastline is limited by the Chukchi Sea. The Kotzebue Sound, a significant wildlife area, is a prominent water body within the Northwest Arctic Borough. The largest polar bear sighted in history, a male weighing , was sighted at Kotzebue Sound.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* North Slope Borough, Alaska - north
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska - east
* Nome Census Area, Alaska - south

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of the Chukchi Sea unit)
** Chamisso Wilderness
* Bering Land Bridge National Preserve (part)
* Cape Krusenstern National Monument
* Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve (part)
** Gates of the Arctic Wilderness (part)
* Kobuk Valley National Park
** Kobuk Valley Wilderness
* Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Noatak National Preserve (part)
** Noatak Wilderness (part)
* Selawik National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Selawik Wilderness

==Politics==






Northwest Arctic Borough has backed the national winner all but five times since statehood.

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census, there were 7,208 people, 1,780 households and 1,404 families residing in the borough. The population density was . There were 2,540 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the borough was 12.32% White, 0.21% Black or African American, 82.46% Native American, 0.89% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.36% from other races, and 3.70% from two or more races. 0.79% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 40.00% reported speaking Inupiat or &quot;Eskimo&quot; at home.

There were 1,780 households, of which 55.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.90% were married couples living together, 19.70% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.10% were non-families. 16.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.87 and the average family size was 4.36.

Age distribution was 41.50% under the age of 18, 10.00% from 18 to 24, 28.10% from 25 to 44, 15.50% from 45 to 64, and 5.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 24 years. For every 100 females, there were 114.50 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 120.70 males.

===2020 Census===
==Communities==
===Cities===

*Ambler
*Buckland
*Deering
*Kiana
*Kivalina
*Kobuk
*Kotzebue
*Noorvik
*Selawik
*Shungnak
===Census-designated places===
*Noatak
*Red Dog Mine

==See also==

*List of airports in the Northwest Arctic Borough
==References==
==External links==
*Official website
*Borough map: Alaska Department of Labor
*Summaries of Division of Subsistence research projects in northwest Alaska / Division of Subsistence, Alaska Department of Fish and Game. hosted by the Alaska State Publications Program.
*Subsistence wildlife harvests in five northwest Alaska communities, 2001-2003 : results of a household survey / by Kawerak, Inc., Maniilaq Association, and the Alaska Department of Fish and Game; by Susan Georgette ... [et al.]. Hosted by Alaska State Publications Program.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511723" start="0" end="24" title="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska" label="Northwest Arctic Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="30" end="37" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="53" end="63" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="67" end="73" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="85" end="96" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="151" end="163" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79810" start="167" end="175" title="Kotzebue, Alaska" label="Kotzebue"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="249" end="267" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="396" end="401" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159252" start="436" end="447" title="Chukchi Sea" label="Chukchi Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q943234" start="453" end="467" title="Kotzebue Sound" label="Kotzebue Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="573" end="583" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q511806" start="697" end="724" title="North Slope Borough, Alaska" label="North Slope Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="735" end="768" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q503023" start="778" end="802" title="Nome Census Area, Alaska" label="Nome Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="845" end="885" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q595925" start="920" end="939" title="Chamisso Wilderness" label="Chamisso Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q820652" start="942" end="978" title="Bering Land Bridge National Preserve" label="Bering Land Bridge National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937254" start="988" end="1022" title="Cape Krusenstern National Monument" label="Cape Krusenstern National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1025" end="1071" title="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve" label="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1082" end="1112" title="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness" label="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q836264" start="1122" end="1148" title="Kobuk Valley National Park" label="Kobuk Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q836264" start="1152" end="1175" title="Kobuk Valley Wilderness" label="Kobuk Valley Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423292" start="1178" end="1210" title="Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge" label="Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="1220" end="1244" title="Noatak National Preserve" label="Noatak National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="1255" end="1272" title="Noatak Wilderness" label="Noatak Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267504" start="1282" end="1314" title="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge" label="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267504" start="1325" end="1343" title="Selawik Wilderness" label="Selawik Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1486" end="1492" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1584" end="1602" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1711" end="1716" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1724" end="1729" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1733" end="1749" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1758" end="1773" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1781" end="1786" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1794" end="1810" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1823" end="1834" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1899" end="1907" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1911" end="1917" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27183" start="1956" end="1963" title="Inupiaq language" label="Inupiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2104" end="2119" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q602422" start="2773" end="2779" title="Ambler, Alaska" label="Ambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79731" start="2781" end="2789" title="Buckland, Alaska" label="Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79729" start="2791" end="2798" title="Deering, Alaska" label="Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q79730" start="2800" end="2805" title="Kiana, Alaska" label="Kiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q80133" start="2807" end="2815" title="Kivalina, Alaska" label="Kivalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q79333" start="2817" end="2822" title="Kobuk, Alaska" label="Kobuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79810" start="2824" end="2832" title="Kotzebue, Alaska" label="Kotzebue"/>
<link wikidata="Q79377" start="2834" end="2841" title="Noorvik, Alaska" label="Noorvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79395" start="2843" end="2850" title="Selawik, Alaska" label="Selawik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79353" start="2852" end="2860" title="Shungnak, Alaska" label="Shungnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q763921" start="2893" end="2899" title="Noatak, Alaska" label="Noatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836979" start="2901" end="2913" title="Red Dog Mine, Alaska" label="Red Dog Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="2930" end="2978" title="List of airports in the Northwest Arctic Borough" label="List of airports in the Northwest Arctic Borough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87485" wikidata="Q18120072" url="?curid=87485" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 5,753, up from 5,559 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest communities are Metlakatla and Craig. It was formerly part of the Census Bureau&#x27;s Prince of Wales–Outer Ketchikan Census Area, but the name was changed in 2008 after most of the Outer Ketchikan (except the parts near the community of Hyder, and Annette Island) was lost to annexation by the Ketchikan Gateway Borough.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (48.9%) is water. The present-day Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area includes Prince of Wales Island, the Hyder area as an exclave, and Annette Island, which is mostly surrounded by territory of Ketchikan Gateway Borough. Before the transfer of territory, Ketchikan Gateway Borough was enclaved within (surrounded by) the census area.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Petersburg Borough – north
* City and Borough of Wrangell, Alaska – northeast
* Ketchikan Gateway Borough – between Prince of Wales and Hyder
* Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine, British Columbia, Canada – east
* North Coast Regional District, British Columbia, Canada – south (water boundary only, across Dixon Entrance to Hecate Strait)
* Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska
* City and borough of Sitka, Alaska

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of Gulf of Alaska unit)
** Forrester Island Wilderness
* Tongass National Forest (part)
** Karta River Wilderness
** Maurille Islands Wilderness
** South Prince of Wales Wilderness
** Warren Island Wilderness

==Politics==
Prince of Wales Hyder is something of a bellwether in Alaska, having voted for the national winner in all but three elections since 1980.







==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 6,146 people, 2,262 households, and 1,535 families residing in the then-census area. The population density was . There were 3,055 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 53.12% White, 0.15% African American, 38.68% Native American, 0.36% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.50% from other races, and 7.14% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.74% of any race.
Of the 2,262 households, 37.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.80% were married couples living together, 10.00% have a woman whose husband does not live with her, and 32.10% were non-families. 26.00% of households were one person, and 5.00% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.25.

In the census area the population was spread out, with 31.00% under the age of 18, 7.50% from 18 to 24, 30.10% from 25 to 44, 25.80% from 45 to 64, and 5.70% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 119.80 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 125.60 males.

==Communities==
===Cities===

* Coffman Cove
* Craig
* Edna Bay
* Hydaburg
* Kake
* Kasaan
* Klawock
* Port Alexander
* Thorne Bay
* Whale Pass

=== Census-designated places ===

* Hollis
* Hyder
* Metlakatla
* Naukati Bay
* Point Baker
* Port Protection

=== Unincorporated Community ===
* Waterfall

===Indian reservation===
* Annette Island Reserve

==See also==
* List of airports in Alaska

==References==
==External links==

* Prince of Wales–Outer Ketchikan Census Area map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area map, January 2014: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="0" end="33" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="39" end="50" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="66" end="76" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="80" end="86" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="98" end="109" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="178" end="197" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="219" end="231" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037538" start="261" end="271" title="Metlakatla, Alaska" label="Metlakatla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002001" start="276" end="281" title="Craig, Alaska" label="Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="332" end="375" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales–Outer Ketchikan Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640042" start="484" end="489" title="Hyder, Alaska" label="Hyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q566596" start="495" end="509" title="Annette Island" label="Annette Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q506064" start="541" end="566" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska" label="Ketchikan Gateway Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="600" end="618" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q601637" start="756" end="778" title="Prince of Wales Island (Alaska)" label="Prince of Wales Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="801" end="808" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q506064" start="934" end="959" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska" label="Ketchikan Gateway Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="964" end="971" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q25408755" start="1057" end="1075" title="Petersburg Borough, Alaska" label="Petersburg Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="1106" end="1122" title="Wrangell, Alaska" label="Wrangell, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q506064" start="1137" end="1162" title="Ketchikan Gateway Borough, Alaska" label="Ketchikan Gateway Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138250" start="1201" end="1237" title="Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine" label="Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1239" end="1255" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q277291" start="1273" end="1302" title="North Coast Regional District" label="North Coast Regional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1304" end="1320" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231779" start="1366" end="1380" title="Dixon Entrance" label="Dixon Entrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592911" start="1384" end="1397" title="Hecate Strait" label="Hecate Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="1401" end="1434" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="1457" end="1470" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="1505" end="1545" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679989" start="1579" end="1606" title="Forrester Island Wilderness" label="Forrester Island Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="1609" end="1632" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373483" start="1643" end="1665" title="Karta River Wilderness" label="Karta River Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="1669" end="1696" title="Maurille Islands Wilderness" label="Maurille Islands Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947766" start="1700" end="1732" title="South Prince of Wales Wilderness" label="South Prince of Wales Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970292" start="1736" end="1760" title="Warren Island Wilderness" label="Warren Island Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1944" end="1955" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2143" end="2156" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2187" end="2192" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2200" end="2216" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2225" end="2240" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2248" end="2253" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2261" end="2277" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2290" end="2301" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2337" end="2345" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2349" end="2355" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q80129" start="3110" end="3122" title="Coffman Cove, Alaska" label="Coffman Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002001" start="3125" end="3130" title="Craig, Alaska" label="Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q975982" start="3133" end="3141" title="Edna Bay, Alaska" label="Edna Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79680" start="3144" end="3152" title="Hydaburg, Alaska" label="Hydaburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79533" start="3155" end="3159" title="Kake, Alaska" label="Kake"/>
<link wikidata="Q79528" start="3162" end="3168" title="Kasaan, Alaska" label="Kasaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79338" start="3171" end="3178" title="Klawock, Alaska" label="Klawock"/>
<link wikidata="Q80172" start="3181" end="3195" title="Port Alexander, Alaska" label="Port Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q79360" start="3198" end="3208" title="Thorne Bay, Alaska" label="Thorne Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q519276" start="3211" end="3221" title="Whale Pass, Alaska" label="Whale Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043786" start="3259" end="3265" title="Hollis, Alaska" label="Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640042" start="3268" end="3273" title="Hyder, Alaska" label="Hyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037538" start="3276" end="3286" title="Metlakatla, Alaska" label="Metlakatla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208768" start="3289" end="3300" title="Naukati Bay, Alaska" label="Naukati Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837948" start="3303" end="3314" title="Point Baker, Alaska" label="Point Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989913" start="3317" end="3332" title="Port Protection, Alaska" label="Port Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566676" start="3369" end="3378" title="Waterfall, Alaska" label="Waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q566596" start="3407" end="3429" title="Annette Island Reserve" label="Annette Island Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3446" end="3472" title="List of airports in Alaska" label="List of airports in Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87486" wikidata="Q79804" url="?curid=87486" title="Sitka, Alaska">
<text>Sitka (; ) is a unified city-borough in the southeast portion of the U.S. state of Alaska. It was under Russian rule from 1799 to 1867. The city is situated on the west side of Baranof Island and the south half of Chichagof Island in the Alexander Archipelago of the Pacific Ocean (part of the Alaska Panhandle). As of the 2020 census, Sitka had a population of 8,458, making it the fifth-most populated city in the state.

With a consolidated land area of and total area (including water) of , Sitka is the largest city by total area in the U.S.

==History==
As part of Russia, it was known as New Archangel ().

The current name &quot;Sitka&quot; (derived from &#x27;, a contraction of the Tlingit &#x27;) means &quot;People on the Outside of Baranof Island&quot;, whose Tlingit name is &#x27; (here contracted to &#x27;).

===Russian America===


Russian explorers settled Old Sitka in 1799, naming it Fort of Archangel Michael (, &quot;&quot;). The governor of Russian America, Alexander Baranov, arrived under the auspices of the Russian-American Company, a colonial trading company chartered by Tsar Paul I. In June 1802, Tlingit warriors destroyed the original settlement, killing many of the Russians, with only a few managing to escape. Baranov was forced to levy 10,000 rubles in ransom to Captain Barber of the British sailing ship &quot;Unicorn&quot; for the safe return of the surviving settlers.

Baranov returned to Sitka in August 1804 with a large force, including Yuri Lisyansky&#x27;s &quot;Neva&quot;. The ship bombarded the Tlingit fortification on the 20th but was not able to cause significant damage. The Russians then launched an attack on the fort and were repelled. Following two days of bombardment, the Tlingit &quot;hung out a white flag&quot; on the 22nd, deserting the fort on the 26th.

Following their victory at the Battle of Sitka in October 1804, the Russians established the settlement &quot;New Archangel&quot;, named after Arkhangelsk. As a permanent settlement, New Archangel became the largest city in the region. The Tlingit re-established their fort on the Chatham Strait side of Peril Strait to enforce a trade embargo with the Russian establishment. In 1808, with Baranov still governor, Sitka was designated the capital of Russian America.

Bishop Innocent lived in Sitka after 1840. He was known for his interest in education, and his house, the Russian Bishop&#x27;s House, parts of which served as a schoolhouse, has since been restored by the National Park Service as part of the Sitka National Historical Park.

The original Cathedral of Saint Michael was built in Sitka in 1848 and became the seat of the Russian Orthodox bishop of Kamchatka, the Kurile and Aleutian Islands, and Alaska. The original church burned to the ground in 1966, losing its handmade bells, the large icon of the Last Supper that decorated the top of the royal doors, and the clock in the bell tower. Also lost was the large library containing books in the Russian, Tlingit, and Aleut languages. Although the church was restored to its original appearance, one exception was its clock face, which is black in photographs taken before 1966, but white in subsequent photos.

Swedes, Finns and other nationalities of Lutherans worked for the Russian-American Company, which led to the creation of a Lutheran congregation. The Sitka Lutheran Church building was built in 1840 and was the first Protestant church on the Pacific coast. After the transition to American control, following the purchase of Alaska from Russia by the United States in 1867, the influence of other Protestant religions increased, and Saint-Peter&#x27;s-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church was consecrated as &quot;the Cathedral of Alaska&quot; in 1900.

===Territorial Alaska===


Sitka was the site of the transfer ceremony for the Alaska purchase on October 18, 1867. Russia was going through economic and political turmoil after it lost the Crimean War to Britain, France, and the Ottoman Empire in 1856, and decided it wanted to sell Alaska before British Canadians tried to conquer the territory. Russia offered to sell it to the United States. Secretary of State William Seward had wanted to purchase Alaska for quite some time, as he saw it as an integral part of Manifest Destiny and America&#x27;s reach to the Pacific Ocean. While the agreement to purchase Alaska was made in April 1867, the actual purchase and transfer of control took place on October 18, 1867. The cost to purchase Alaska was $7.2 million, at 2 cents per acre.

Sitka served as both the U.S. Government Capital of the Department of Alaska (1867–1884) and District of Alaska (1884–1906). The seat of government was relocated north to Juneau in 1906 due to the declining economic importance of Sitka relative to Juneau, which gained population in the Klondike Gold Rush.

===Alaska Native Brotherhood, Alaska Native Sisterhood===
The Alaska Native Brotherhood was founded in Sitka in 1912 to address racism against Alaska Native people in Alaska. By 1914, the organization had constructed the Alaska Native Brotherhood Hall on Katlian Street, which was named after a Tlingit war chief in the early period of Russian colonization.

===World War II===
In 1937, the United States Navy established the first seaplane base in Alaska on Japonski Island, across the Sitka Channel from the town. In 1941, construction began on Fort Ray, an army garrison to protect the naval air station. Both the army and navy remained in Sitka until the end of WWII, when the army base was put into caretaker status. The naval station in Sitka was deactivated in June 1944. A shore boat system was then established to transfer the approximately 1,000 passengers a day until the O&#x27;Connell Bridge was built in 1972.

===Economy===
The Alaska Pulp Corporation was the first Japanese investment in the United States after WWII. In 1959, it began to produce pulp harvested from the Tongass National Forest under a 50-year contract with the US Forest Service. At its peak, the mill employed around 450 people before closing in 1993.

Sitka&#x27;s Filipino community established itself in Sitka before 1929. It later became institutionalized as the Filipino Community of Sitka in 1981.

Gold mining and fish canning paved the way for the town&#x27;s initial growth. Today Sitka encompasses portions of Baranof Island and the smaller Japonski Island, which is connected to Baranof Island by the O&#x27;Connell Bridge. The John O&#x27;Connell Bridge was the first cable-stayed bridge built in the Western Hemisphere. Japonski Island is home to Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport (: SIT; : PASI), the Sitka branch campus of the University of Alaska Southeast, Mt. Edgecumbe High School (a state-run boarding school for rural Alaskans), Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium&#x27;s Mt. Edgecumbe Hospital, U.S. Coast Guard Air Station Sitka, and the port and facilities for the &quot;Kukui&quot;.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough is the largest incorporated city by area in the U.S., with a total area of , of which is land and , comprising 40.3%, is water. As a comparison, this is almost four times the size of the state of Rhode Island.

Sitka displaced Juneau, Alaska, as the largest incorporated city by area in the United States upon the 2000 incorporation with of incorporated area. Juneau&#x27;s incorporated area is . Jacksonville, Florida, is the largest city in area in the contiguous 48 states at .

===Climate===

Sitka has an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) with moderate, but generally cool, temperatures and abundant precipitation. The average annual precipitation is ; average seasonal snowfall is , falling on 233 and 19 days, respectively. The mean annual temperature is , with monthly means ranging from in January to in August.

The climate is relatively mild when compared to other parts of the state. Only 5.1 days per year see highs at or above ; conversely, there are only 10 days with the high not above freezing. The winters are extremely mild compared to inland areas of similar and much more southerly parallels, due to the intense maritime moderation. The relatively mild nights ensure that four months stay above the isotherm that normally separates inland areas from being boreal in nature. Due to the mild winter nights, hardiness zone is high for the latitude (from 6b to 8a).

The highest temperature ever recorded was on July 30, 1976, and July 31, 2020. The lowest temperature ever recorded was on February 16–17, 1948.


===Geology===

Mount Edgecumbe, a &quot;historically active&quot; stratovolcano, is located on southern Kruzof Island, approximately west of Sitka and can be seen from the city on a clear day.

On April 22, 2022, the Alaska Volcano Observatory reported that: 

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska – north, northeast
* Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska – southeast

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of Gulf of Alaska unit)
** Saint Lazaria Wilderness (formerly Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge)
* Sitka National Historical Park
* Tongass National Forest (part)
** South Baranof Wilderness
** West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
===1880 and 1890 censuses===
Sitka first reported on the 1880 census as an unincorporated village. Of 916 residents, there were 540 Tlingit, 219 Creole (Mixed Russian and Native) and 157 Whites reported. It was the largest community in Alaska at that census. In 1890, it fell to second place behind Juneau. It reported 1,190 residents, of whom 861 were Native, 280 were White, 31 were Asian, 17 Creole, and 1 Other. In 1900, it fell to 4th place behind Nome, Skagway and Juneau. It did not report a racial breakdown.

===1910 and 1920 censuses===
In 1910, Sitka was reported as two separate communities based on race: the village with mostly non-natives (population 539) and the part of the village with natives (population 500). Separately, they placed as the 15th and 17th largest communities. United, they would be 8th largest. For the purposes of comparison and the fact that the village was not officially politically/racially divided except by the census bureau report, the combined total (1,039) is reported on the historic population list. In 1913, Sitka was incorporated as a city, rendering the division by the census bureau for 1910 moot. In 1920, Sitka became the 4th largest city in the territory. In 1930, it fell to 7th place with 1,056 residents. Of those, 567 reported as Native, 480 as White and 9 as Other. In 1940, it rose to 5th place, but did not report a racial breakdown.

===1950 and 1960 censuses===
In 1950, it reported as the 9th largest community in Alaska (6th largest incorporated city). It did not report a racial breakdown. At statehood in 1960, it became the 6th largest community (5th largest incorporated city). With the annexations increasing its population to 3,237, it reported a White majority for its first time: 2,160 Whites, 1,054 Others (including Natives) and 23 Blacks. In 1970, it fell to 14th place overall (though 7th largest incorporated city) with 3,370 residents. Of those, 2,503 were White, 676 Native Americans, 95 Others, 74 Asians and 22 Blacks. In 1980, Sitka rose to 4th largest city with 7,803 residents (of whom 5,718 were non-Hispanic White, 1,669 were Native American, 228 were Asian, 108 were Hispanic (of any race), 87 were Other, 44 were Black and 7 were Pacific Islander).

===1990 and 2000 censuses===
In 1990, Sitka fell to 5th largest (4th largest incorporated) with 8,588 residents. 6,270 were non-Hispanic White; 1,797 were Native American; 315 were Asian; 209 were Hispanic (of any race); 60 were Other; 39 were Black and 18 Pacific Islanders. In 2000, Sitka retained its 5th largest (and 4th largest incorporated) position. In 2010, it slipped to 7th largest community overall (but still remained the 4th largest incorporated city).

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 8,881 people living in the borough. The racial makeup of the borough, based on one race alone or in combination with one or more other races, was, 64.6% White (including White Hispanic and Latino Americans), 1% Black or African American, 24.6% Native American, 8.1% Asian, 0.9% Pacific Islander, 1.8% from other races. In addition, 4.9% of the population were Hispanic and Latino Americans of any race.

There were 3,545 households, out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.5% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.1% had a male householder with no wife present, and 37.6% were non-families. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 3.01.

==Economy==
In 2010, Sitka&#x27;s two largest employers were the Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium (SEARHC), employing 482 people, and the Sitka School District, which employs 250 people. However, there are more people employed in the seafood industry than in any other sector. An estimated 18% of Sitka&#x27;s population earns at least a portion of their income from fishing and seafood harvesting and processing. Many Sitkans hunt and gather subsistence foods such as fish, deer, berries, seaweeds and mushrooms for personal use.

Within the total 2010 population of 8,881 residents, an estimated 7,161 were over 16 years of age. Of residents aged 16 and over, an estimated 4,692 were employed within the civilian labor force, 348 were unemployed (looking for work), 192 were employed in the armed forces (U.S. Coast Guard), and 1,929 were not in the labor force. The average unemployment rate between 2006 and 2010 was 6.9%. The median household income in 2010 inflation adjusted dollars was $62,024. An estimated 4.3% of all families / 7% of all residents had incomes below the poverty level &quot;in the past twelve months&quot;(2010).

Sitka&#x27;s electrical power is generated by dams at Blue Lake and Green Lake, with supplemental power provided by burning diesel when electric demand exceeds hydro capacity. In December 2012 the Blue Lake Expansion project began, which added 27 percent more electricity for the residents of Sitka. The project was completed in November 2014.

===Port===
Sitka is the 6th largest port by value of seafood harvest in the United States. International trade is relatively minor, with total exports and imports valued at $474,000 and $146,000, respectively, in 2005 by the American Association of Port Authorities. The port has the largest harbor system in Alaska with 1,347 permanent slips.

During Russian rule, Sitka was a busy seaport on the west coast of North America, mentioned a number of times by Dana in his popular account of an 1834 sailing voyage &quot;Two Years Before the Mast&quot;. After the transfer of Alaska to U.S. rule, the Pacific Coast Steamship Company began tourist cruises to Sitka in 1884. By 1890, Sitka was receiving 5,000 tourist passengers a year.

Old Sitka Dock, located at Halibut Point, one mile south of the Old Sitka State Historical Park, commemorating the 1800s Russian settlement, and six miles north of downtown Sitka, is a private deep water port offering moorage facilities. A 470-foot-long floating dock for vessels up to 1100 feet was constructed there by its owners in 2012 and was first used in 2013. In Spring 2016, Holland America Line agreed to dock its ships at the Old Sitka Dock.
 Since then, the majority of the cruise ships calling on Sitka berth at the Old Sitka Dock, with the remainder anchoring offshore in Crescent Harbor and tendering their passengers to downtown Sitka. In the 2017 season, there were 136 cruise ship calls at Sitka with more than 150,000 passengers in total; of these fewer than 30,000 were tendered.

The United States Coast Guard plans to homeport one of its Sentinel-class cutters in Sitka.

==Arts and culture==
There are 22 buildings and sites in Sitka that appear in the National Register of Historic Places.

On October 18, Alaska celebrates Alaska Day to commemorate the Alaska purchase. The City of Sitka holds an annual Alaska Day Festival. This week-long event includes a reenactment ceremony of the signing of the Alaska purchase, as well as interpretive programs at museums and parks, special exhibits, aircraft displays and film showings, receptions, historic sites and buildings tours, food, prose writing contest essays, Native and other dancing, and entertainment and more. The first recorded Alaska Day Festival was held in 1949.

==Government==






The City and Borough of Sitka is a Unified Home Rule city.
The home rule charter of the City and Borough of Sitka was adopted on December 2, 1971, for the region of the Greater Sitka Borough, which included Japonski Island and Port Alexander and Baranof Warm Springs on Baranof Island. The city was incorporated on September 24, 1963. On October 23, 1973, the city of Port Alexander was detached from the borough.

==Education==
===Colleges and universities===
Sitka hosts one active post-secondary institution, the University of Alaska Southeast-Sitka Campus, located on Japonski Island in an old World War II hangar. Sheldon Jackson College, a small Presbyterian-affiliated private college, suspended operations in June 2007, after several years of financial stress. Outer Coast College, a private liberal arts college established in 2015, is currently in development as an undergraduate institution founded on the former campus of Sheldon Jackson College.

===Schools===

The Sitka School District, the designated public school district, runs several schools in Sitka, including Sitka High School and Pacific High School, as well as the town&#x27;s only middle school, Blatchley Middle School. It also runs a home school assistance program through Terry&#x27;s Learning Center.

Mt. Edgecumbe High School, a State of Alaska-run boarding high school for rural, primarily Native students, is located on Japonski Island adjacent to University of Alaska Southeast.

One private school is available in Sitka: Sitka Adventist School.

===Alaska State Trooper Academy===
The Alaska State Trooper Academy – the academy for all Alaska State Troopers – is located in Sitka.

===Libraries===
Sitka Public Library, formerly Kettleson Memorial Library, is the public library for Sitka. It receives about 100,000 guests annually and houses a collection of 75,000 books, audiobooks, music recordings, reference resources, videos (DVD and VHS), as well as an assortment of Alaskan and national periodicals. Its annual circulation is 133,000. The library is well known by visitors for its view. The large windows in front of the reading area look south across Eastern Channel towards the Pyramids.

Until its closing, Sitka was also home to Stratton Library, the academic library of Sheldon Jackson College.

==Media==
===Print===
Sitka is served by the &quot;Daily Sitka Sentinel&quot;, one of the few remaining independently owned daily newspapers in the state. Sitka also receives circulation of the &quot;Capital City Weekly,&quot; a weekly regional newspaper based out of Juneau.

Alaska&#x27;s first newspaper following the Alaska purchase, the &quot;Sitka Times&quot;, was published by Barney O. Ragan on September 19, 1868. Only four issues were published that year, as Ragan cited a lack of resources available at the time. The paper resumed publishing the following year as the &quot;Alaska Times&quot;. In 1870, it moved to Seattle, where the year following it was renamed the &quot;Seattle Times&quot; (not to be confused with the modern-day newspaper of the same name).

===Radio===
Sitka has three radio stations, public radio station KCAW (Raven Radio), and commercial radio stations KIFW, and KSBZ. Sitka previously had a Presbyterian Church owned KSEW.

===Television===
KTNL-TV (MeTV) broadcasts out of Sitka on Channel 13 (Cable 6) serving Southeast Alaska. Additionally, KSCT-LP (NBC) Channel 5, KTOO (PBS) Channel 10, and KJUD (ABC/CW) serve the region. There was a previous NBC affiliate in the Region, KSA-TV, available to cable systems, which is now defunct.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Sitka is only accessible by boat or plane as it is on a pair of islands in the Pacific Ocean. Vehicles are usually brought to Sitka via the Alaska Marine Highway ferry system or the barge. However, a vehicle is not an absolute necessity in Sitka, as there are only of road from one end of the island to another. Almost everything is within walking distance from the downtown area, which is where the majority of employers are situated. Public transportation is also available.

By air, Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport offers scheduled passenger jet service operated year-round by Alaska Airlines and seasonally by Delta Connection.

Delays in fall and winter due to Sitka&#x27;s weather are frequent. The airport is located on Japonski Island, which is connected to Baranof Island by the O&#x27;Connell Bridge. The O&#x27;Connell Bridge, completed in 1972, was the first vehicular cable-stayed bridge in the United States. The Sitka Seaplane Base is a seaplane landing area situated in the Sitka Channel, adjacent to the airport.

Ferry travel back and forth to Juneau, Ketchikan and other towns in Southeast Alaska is provided through the Alaska Marine Highway System. The ferry terminal is located north of downtown and a ferry ticket costs about $89 per person each way to Juneau (as of February 2023). Vehicles, pets and bicycles can also be taken on the ferry for an additional charge.

Sitka&#x27;s location on the outer coast of the Alaska Panhandle is removed from routes running through Chatham Strait. The tides of Peril Strait allow mainline vessels through only at slack tide.

Alaska Marine Lines, a barge and freight company, has the ability to move cars to other communities connected to the mainland by road systems.

A three-way partnership of non-profits (Center for Community, Sitka Tribe of Alaska, and Southeast Senior Services) offers public bus transit, funded by the Federal Transit Administration and the Alaska Department of Transportation. All buses are fully accessible, with service from 6:30 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.

In 2008, the League of American Bicyclists awarded Sitka the bronze level in bicycle friendliness, making Sitka the first bicycle-friendly community in Alaska. In 2013, the Walk Friendly Communities program awarded Sitka with a bronze award, making Sitka the first Alaska community with a Walk Friendly Communities designation. Sitka is the only Alaska community to have both a Bicycle Friendly Community and a Walk Friendly Communities designation.

===Healthcare===
There is currently one hospital serving Sitka, Edgecumbe Hospital, which sits on Japonski Island across Sitka Harbor from the city. The facility is part of the Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium, or SEARHC, a non-profit tribal health consortium of 18 Native communities. The hospital serves as a regional referral center for people throughout Southeast Alaska, and also provides primary outpatient care. Numerous specialty clinics are offered at the hospital that are not available in the smaller communities such as neurology, orthopedic, dermatology, ophthalmology and denture clinics.

The former Sitka Community Hospital was purchased by the Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium (SEARHC) in April 2019, and now functions as a long-term care facility for patients of Edgecumbe hospital.

==Notable people==
*Augusta Cohen Coontz (1867–1940), American First Lady of Guam
*Dale DeArmond (1914–2006), printmaker, book illustrator
*Annie Furuhjelm (1859–1937), Finnish journalist, legislator
*Sheldon Jackson (1834–1909), Presbyterian missionary in Alaska in the late 19th century
*Rebecca Himschoot, State representative
*Richard Nelson (1941–2019), cultural anthropologist, writer, activist
*Teri Rofkar (1956–2016), Tlingit weaver
*John Straley (born 1953), award-winning author
*Mary Bong (1880-1958), as Sing Deuh, Ah Fuh/Fur, or Qui Fah. One of the first Chinese immigrants to live in Sitka; also known as &quot;China Mary&quot;.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Sitka has the following sister city:
* Nemuro, Hokkaido, Japan

==Attractions==
Sitka&#x27;s attractions include:

* Alaska Raptor Center
* Baranof Castle Hill
* Fortress of the Bear
* Sheet&#x27;ká Kwáan Naa Kahídi
* Russian Bishop&#x27;s House
* Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge
* St. Michael&#x27;s Cathedral
* Sheldon Jackson Museum
* Sitka Fine Arts Camp
* Sitka Historical Museum
* Sitka Jazz Festival
* Sitka Lutheran Church
* Sitka National Historical Park
* Sitka Pioneer Home
* Sitka Summer Music Festival
* Swan Lake
* Tongass National Forest

The flora and fauna of Sitka and its surrounding area are popular. Day cruises and guided day trips (hiking) are large enterprises in Sitka. Floatplane &quot;flightseeing&quot; excursions are a way to view the area&#x27;s sights from above.

===Outdoor opportunities===

Sitka&#x27;s position between the Pacific Ocean and the most mountainous island in the Alexander Archipelago creates a variety of outdoor opportunities:

* Kayaking is a popular activity and small guided day excursions are offered locally.
* There are a number of maintained trails in the Sitka area, many of which are accessible from Sitka&#x27;s road system.
* The dormant volcano Mount Edgecumbe is also a popular mountain to summit and features a seven-mile (11 km) trail up to the top. Guided day-trips are available, but the trip does not require much knowledge to undertake.

==In popular culture==
* Louis L&#x27;Amour penned &quot;Sitka&quot;, his fictional account of the events surrounding the United States&#x27; purchase of the Alaska Territory from the Russians for $7.2 million in 1867.
* Novelist James Michener lived at Sitka&#x27;s Sheldon Jackson College while doing research for his epic work, &quot;Alaska&quot;.
* The 1952 film &quot;The World in His Arms&quot; has Russian Sitka as one of its settings.
* Sitka is the opening setting in Ivan Doig&#x27;s 1982 historical fiction, &quot;The Sea Runners&quot;.
* Sitka is mentioned in Chapter 53 of James Clavell&#x27;s 1993 historical fiction about Japan, &quot;Gai-Jin&quot;.
* Mystery author John Straley described Sitka as &quot;...an island town where people feel crowded by the land and spread out on the sea.&quot;
* Part of the action in the novel &quot;César Cascabel&quot; by Jules Verne takes place in Sitka in May–June 1867, during the transfer of ownership to the United States.
* A fictionalized Sitka, inhabited by several million Jews who fled from Nazi-occupied Europe and their descendants, is the setting of the alternate history detective story &quot;The Yiddish Policemen&#x27;s Union&quot;, by Michael Chabon.
* Sitka is featured in the episode &quot;Z-9000&quot; of the Argentine TV series &quot;Los simuladores&quot; as the place where its antagonist, Lorenzo, is sent to keep him away from his wife whom he used to assault, under the pretext that a clone of him is trying to kill him.
* Sitka is a setting in the 2009 film &quot;The Proposal&quot; starring Sandra Bullock and Ryan Reynolds, although the scenes were filmed in Rockport, Massachusetts.
* Sitka is the name of one of the characters in the Disney film &quot;Brother Bear&quot; (2004).
* Sitka was featured in a 2012 episode of the Travel Channel&#x27;s popular series &quot;Bizarre Foods&quot;, starring Andrew Zimmern. In this episode Zimmern ate herring eggs, stink heads, and sea cucumbers.
* Sitka was named one of the &quot;Top 20 Small Towns to Visit in 2013&quot; by &quot;Smithsonian&quot; magazine.

==See also==

* List of United States cities by area
* Maritime fur trade

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Tlingit Geographical Place Names for the Sheet&#x27;ká Kwáan — Sitka Tribe of Alaska, an interactive map of Sitka Area native place names.
==External links==
* City &amp; Borough of Sitka website
* Historic images
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="0" end="5" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888675" start="16" end="23" title="municipal home rule" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="24" end="36" title="Consolidated city-county" label="city-borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="69" end="79" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="83" end="89" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="104" end="116" title="Russian America" label="Russian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q807267" start="177" end="191" title="Baranof Island" label="Baranof Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072094" start="214" end="230" title="Chichagof Island" label="Chichagof Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q140510" start="238" end="259" title="Alexander Archipelago" label="Alexander Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="267" end="280" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="294" end="310" title="Alaska Panhandle" label="Alaska Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="323" end="334" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869" start="383" end="408" title="List of cities in Alaska" label="fifth-most populated city"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="508" end="534" title="List of United States cities by area" label="largest city by total area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="571" end="577" title="Russian America" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="692" end="699" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084977" start="876" end="885" title="Old Sitka Site" label="Old Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="965" end="980" title="Russian America" label="Russian America"/>
<link wikidata="Q440782" start="982" end="999" title="Alexander Andreyevich Baranov" label="Alexander Baranov"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="1035" end="1059" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q896086" start="1101" end="1105" title="list of Russian tsars" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="1106" end="1112" title="Paul of Russia" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="1280" end="1286" title="Russian ruble" label="rubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713896" start="1482" end="1496" title="Yuri Lisyansky" label="Yuri Lisyansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315603" start="1510" end="1514" title="Russian warship Neva" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648550" start="1851" end="1866" title="Battle of Sitka" label="Battle of Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851" start="1963" end="1974" title="Arkhangelsk" label="Arkhangelsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068226" start="2101" end="2115" title="Chatham Strait" label="Chatham Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045384" start="2124" end="2136" title="Peril Strait" label="Peril Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q982977" start="2288" end="2303" title="Saint Innocent of Alaska" label="Bishop Innocent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391553" start="2394" end="2421" title="Russian Bishop&amp;#x27;s House" label="Russian Bishop&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2494" end="2515" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531931" start="2531" end="2561" title="Sitka National Historical Park" label="Sitka National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472818" start="2577" end="2603" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Sitka, Alaska)" label="Cathedral of Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q694002" start="2658" end="2674" title="Orthodox Church in America" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="2840" end="2851" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2984" end="2991" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="2993" end="3000" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="3006" end="3011" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016766" start="3350" end="3371" title="Sitka Lutheran Church" label="Sitka Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3417" end="3427" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="3442" end="3455" title="Pacific coast" label="Pacific coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591437" start="3633" end="3679" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s by-the-Sea Episcopal Church (Sitka, Alaska)" label="Saint-Peter&amp;#x27;s-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="3824" end="3839" title="Alaska purchase" label="Alaska purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="3935" end="3946" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3959" end="3965" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3975" end="3989" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="4160" end="4174" title="William Seward" label="William Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="4262" end="4278" title="Manifest Destiny" label="Manifest Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="4704" end="4710" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="4820" end="4838" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708570" start="4903" end="4928" title="Alaska Native Brotherhood" label="Alaska Native Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708571" start="5062" end="5092" title="Alaska Native Brotherhood Hall" label="Alaska Native Brotherhood Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159341" start="5300" end="5315" title="Japonski Island" label="Japonski Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531923" start="5328" end="5341" title="Sitka Channel" label="Sitka Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="5928" end="5951" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159341" start="6377" end="6392" title="Japonski Island" label="Japonski Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250805" start="6465" end="6491" title="John O&amp;#x27;Connell Bridge" label="John O&amp;#x27;Connell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q158555" start="6506" end="6525" title="cable-stayed bridge" label="cable-stayed bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129080" start="6586" end="6615" title="Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport" label="Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="6617" end="6617" title="IATA" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="6624" end="6624" title="ICAO" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q94279" start="6664" end="6694" title="University of Alaska Southeast" label="University of Alaska Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920555" start="6696" end="6721" title="Mt. Edgecumbe High School" label="Mt. Edgecumbe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104354" start="6847" end="6881" title="List of United States Coast Guard air stations" label="U.S. Coast Guard Air Station Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201938" start="6919" end="6936" title="USCGC Kukui (WLB-203)" label="&amp;quot;Kukui&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6970" end="6997" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="7026" end="7063" title="list of United States cities by area" label="incorporated city by area in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="7207" end="7219" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568" start="7408" end="7429" title="Jacksonville, Florida" label="Jacksonville, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="7521" end="7536" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7538" end="7544" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="8345" end="8359" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q288383" start="8565" end="8580" title="Mount Edgecumbe (Alaska)" label="Mount Edgecumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="8616" end="8629" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353743" start="8654" end="8667" title="Kruzof Island" label="Kruzof Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348502" start="8767" end="8793" title="Alaska Volcano Observatory" label="Alaska Volcano Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="8854" end="8887" title="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="8909" end="8950" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="8997" end="9037" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401637" start="9071" end="9095" title="Saint Lazaria Wilderness" label="Saint Lazaria Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401637" start="9106" end="9144" title="Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge" label="Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531931" start="9148" end="9178" title="Sitka National Historical Park" label="Sitka National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="9181" end="9204" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963578" start="9215" end="9239" title="South Baranof Wilderness" label="South Baranof Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984733" start="9243" end="9275" title="West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness" label="West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977254" start="9358" end="9369" title="1880 United States census" label="1880 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="12036" end="12042" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="12216" end="12221" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994805" start="12233" end="12268" title="White Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="White Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="12274" end="12279" title="African Americans" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="12307" end="12322" title="Alaska Natives" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="12329" end="12334" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="12341" end="12357" title="Pacific Islands Americans" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12369" end="12380" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="12423" end="12452" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic and Latino Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569288" start="12885" end="12928" title="Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium" label="Southeast Alaska Regional Health Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572679" start="13274" end="13285" title="subsistence economy" label="subsistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929324" start="14026" end="14035" title="Blue Lake (Alaska)" label="Blue Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602743" start="14040" end="14050" title="Green Lake (Alaska)" label="Green Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614033" start="14542" end="14582" title="American Association of Port Authorities" label="American Association of Port Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="14669" end="14681" title="Russian America" label="Russian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q527981" start="14775" end="14779" title="Richard Henry Dana Jr." label="Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024921" start="14835" end="14860" title="Two Years Before the Mast" label="Two Years Before the Mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084977" start="15114" end="15145" title="Old Sitka Site" label="Old Sitka State Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="15855" end="15880" title="United States Coast Guard" label="United States Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468587" start="15910" end="15931" title="Sentinel-class cutter" label="Sentinel-class cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977468" start="15978" end="16006" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Sitka, Alaska" label="buildings and sites in Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="16026" end="16062" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q402350" start="16098" end="16108" title="Alaska Day" label="Alaska Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q80172" start="16846" end="16860" title="Port Alexander, Alaska" label="Port Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883822" start="16865" end="16885" title="Baranof Warm Springs, Alaska" label="Baranof Warm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493517" start="17238" end="17261" title="Sheldon Jackson College" label="Sheldon Jackson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="17271" end="17283" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397873" start="17388" end="17407" title="Outer Coast College" label="Outer Coast College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531934" start="17598" end="17619" title="Sitka School District" label="Sitka School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531925" start="17701" end="17718" title="Sitka High School" label="Sitka High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122487" start="17723" end="17742" title="Pacific High School (Sitka)" label="Pacific High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531934" start="17791" end="17814" title="Blatchley Middle School" label="Blatchley Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920555" start="17901" end="17926" title="Mt. Edgecumbe High School" label="Mt. Edgecumbe High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="17950" end="17958" title="boarding school" label="boarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="17959" end="17970" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708612" start="18190" end="18218" title="Alaska State Trooper Academy" label="Alaska State Trooper Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708614" start="18241" end="18262" title="Alaska State Troopers" label="Alaska State Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395555" start="18303" end="18323" title="Sitka Public Library" label="Sitka Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330052" start="18765" end="18780" title="Eastern Channel" label="Eastern Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209365" start="18965" end="18985" title="Daily Sitka Sentinel" label="Daily Sitka Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035526" start="19114" end="19133" title="Capital City Weekly" label="Capital City Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="19540" end="19547" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="19644" end="19685" title="Seattle Times" label="the modern-day newspaper of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326558" start="19754" end="19758" title="KCAW" label="KCAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330691" start="19804" end="19808" title="KIFW" label="KIFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337514" start="19814" end="19818" title="KSBZ" label="KSBZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378547" start="19869" end="19873" title="KSEW (Sitka, Alaska)" label="KSEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338971" start="19893" end="19900" title="KTNL-TV" label="KTNL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325385" start="19996" end="20003" title="KSCT-LP" label="KSCT-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325019" start="20021" end="20025" title="KTOO-TV" label="KTOO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331651" start="20048" end="20052" title="KJUD" label="KJUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q104868047" start="20130" end="20136" title="KSA-TV" label="KSA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="20369" end="20390" title="Alaska Marine Highway" label="Alaska Marine Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129080" start="20715" end="20744" title="Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport" label="Sitka Rocky Gutierrez Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q822614" start="20807" end="20822" title="Alaska Airlines" label="Alaska Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370696" start="20841" end="20857" title="Delta Connection" label="Delta Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250805" start="21015" end="21036" title="John O&amp;#x27;Connell Bridge" label="O&amp;#x27;Connell Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531935" start="21154" end="21173" title="Sitka Seaplane Base" label="Sitka Seaplane Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="21179" end="21187" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q801878" start="21367" end="21395" title="Alaska Marine Highway System" label="Alaska Marine Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531942" start="22023" end="22044" title="Sitka Tribe of Alaska" label="Sitka Tribe of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440472" start="22118" end="22148" title="Federal Transit Administration" label="Federal Transit Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708536" start="22157" end="22192" title="Alaska Department of Transportation" label="Alaska Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508988" start="22305" end="22334" title="League of American Bicyclists" label="League of American Bicyclists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22414" end="22440" title="League of American Bicyclists#Bicycle Friendly Communities" label="bicycle-friendly community"/>
<link wikidata="Q109735050" start="23587" end="23607" title="Augusta Cohen Coontz" label="Augusta Cohen Coontz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210401" start="23650" end="23663" title="Dale DeArmond" label="Dale DeArmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949278" start="23707" end="23722" title="Annie Furuhjelm" label="Annie Furuhjelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493513" start="23768" end="23783" title="Sheldon Jackson" label="Sheldon Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="23797" end="23809" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="23810" end="23820" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q117289477" start="23857" end="23874" title="Rebecca Himschoot" label="Rebecca Himschoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328022" start="23898" end="23912" title="Richard Nelson (author)" label="Richard Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113824" start="23969" end="23980" title="Teri Rofkar" label="Teri Rofkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259366" start="24010" end="24022" title="John Straley" label="John Straley"/>
<link wikidata="Q123399363" start="24058" end="24067" title="China Mary" label="Mary Bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q502205" start="24283" end="24289" title="Nemuro, Hokkaidō" label="Nemuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="24291" end="24299" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708594" start="24361" end="24381" title="Alaska Raptor Center" label="Alaska Raptor Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050134" start="24384" end="24403" title="Castle Hill (Sitka, Alaska)" label="Baranof Castle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q116874482" start="24406" end="24426" title="Fortress of the Bear" label="Fortress of the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277070" start="24429" end="24459" title="Sheet&amp;#x27;ká Kwáan Naa Kahídi" label="Sheet&amp;#x27;ká Kwáan Naa Kahídi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391553" start="24462" end="24489" title="Russian Bishop&amp;#x27;s House" label="Russian Bishop&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401637" start="24492" end="24530" title="Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge" label="Saint Lazaria National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472818" start="24533" end="24561" title="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral (Sitka, Alaska)" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493517" start="24564" end="24586" title="Sheldon Jackson Museum" label="Sheldon Jackson Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531926" start="24589" end="24609" title="Sitka Fine Arts Camp" label="Sitka Fine Arts Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531927" start="24612" end="24635" title="Isabel Miller Museum" label="Sitka Historical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531929" start="24638" end="24657" title="Sitka Jazz Festival" label="Sitka Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016766" start="24660" end="24681" title="Sitka Lutheran Church" label="Sitka Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531931" start="24684" end="24714" title="Sitka National Historical Park" label="Sitka National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531933" start="24717" end="24735" title="Sitka Pioneer Home" label="Sitka Pioneer Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531938" start="24738" end="24765" title="Sitka Summer Music Festival" label="Sitka Summer Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348463" start="24768" end="24777" title="Swan Lake (Alaska)" label="Swan Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="24780" end="24803" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="24946" end="24956" title="Seaplane" label="Floatplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q140510" start="25163" end="25184" title="Alexander Archipelago" label="Alexander Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q288383" start="25459" end="25474" title="Mount Edgecumbe (Alaska)" label="Mount Edgecumbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q379895" start="25684" end="25702" title="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour" label="Louis L&amp;#x27;Amour"/>
<link wikidata="Q361653" start="25889" end="25903" title="James Michener" label="James Michener"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493517" start="25926" end="25949" title="Sheldon Jackson College" label="Sheldon Jackson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708484" start="25990" end="26008" title="Alaska (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Alaska&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625975" start="26032" end="26053" title="The World in His Arms" label="The World in His Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096163" start="26136" end="26145" title="Ivan Doig" label="Ivan Doig"/>
<link wikidata="Q316802" start="26245" end="26258" title="James Clavell" label="James Clavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756363" start="26309" end="26316" title="Gai-Jin (novel)" label="Gai-Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259366" start="26341" end="26353" title="John Straley" label="John Straley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150003" start="26508" end="26522" title="César Cascabel" label="César Cascabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="26532" end="26543" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086100" start="26692" end="26731" title="Emigration of Jews from Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe" label="Jews who fled from Nazi-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="26777" end="26794" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q603645" start="26817" end="26851" title="The Yiddish Policemen&amp;#x27;s Union" label="The Yiddish Policemen&amp;#x27;s Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q313466" start="26862" end="26876" title="Michael Chabon" label="Michael Chabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601158" start="26965" end="26980" title="Los simuladores" label="Los simuladores"/>
<link wikidata="Q108586" start="27200" end="27212" title="The Proposal (2009 film)" label="The Proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40791" start="27228" end="27242" title="Sandra Bullock" label="Sandra Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192682" start="27247" end="27260" title="Ryan Reynolds" label="Ryan Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079395" start="27297" end="27320" title="Rockport, Massachusetts" label="Rockport, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333711" start="27508" end="27521" title="Bizarre Foods" label="Bizarre Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405404" start="27538" end="27552" title="Andrew Zimmern" label="Andrew Zimmern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487014" start="27714" end="27725" title="Smithsonian (magazine)" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="27759" end="27795" title="List of United States cities by area" label="List of United States cities by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="27798" end="27816" title="Maritime fur trade" label="Maritime fur trade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87487" wikidata="Q500827" url="?curid=87487" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Hoonah–Angoon Census Area is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 2,365, up from 2,150 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest community is the city of Hoonah.

==History==
The census area was significantly larger in the 1990 census, at which time it was the Skagway–Yakutat–Angoon Census Area. After Yakutat was incorporated as a consolidated-city borough on September 22, 1992, it was renamed Skagway–Hoonah–Angoon Census Area; When Skagway followed suit on June 20, 2007, the census area assumed its current name.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (31.1%) is water. A map showing its current boundaries is shown here:

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska – northwest
* Haines Borough, Alaska – northeast
* Juneau City and Borough, Alaska – northeast
* Petersburg Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Sitka City and Borough, Alaska – southwest
* Stikine Region, British Columbia – northwest, east
* Kitimat-Stikine Regional District, British Columbia – southeast

=== National protected areas ===
* Glacier Bay National Park (part)
** Glacier Bay Wilderness (part)
* Tongass National Forest (part)
** Admiralty Island National Monument (part)
*** Kootznoowoo Wilderness (part)
** Chuck River Wilderness
** Pleasant/Lemesurier/Inian Islands Wilderness
** Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness (part)
** West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==

:&quot;Note: Demographic data below is for the former &quot;Skagway–Hoonah–Angoon&quot; Census Area, which still includes Skagway Borough.&quot;

As of the census of 2000, there were 3,436 people, 1,369 households, and 866 families residing in the census area. The population density was . There are 2,108 housing units. The racial makeup of the census area was 58.15% White, 0.15% Black or African American, 35.01% Native American, 0.38% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 0.96% from other races, and 5.21% from two or more races. 2.82% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 3.95% reported speaking Tlingit at home, while 1.83% speak Spanish .

There were 1,369 households, out of which 30.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.30% were married couples living together, 8.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.70% were non-families. 30.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.60% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 3.14.

In the census area, the population was spread out, with 26.80% under the age of 18, 7.10% from 18 to 24, 29.50% from 25 to 44, 29.30% from 45 to 64, and 7.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 116.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 120.70 males.

==Politics==
One of the most Democratic areas in Alaska, the Hoonah-Angoon Census Area has only voted for a Republican for president once (during the 2000 election).







==Communities==
===Cities===
* Angoon
* Gustavus
* Hoonah
* Pelican
* Tenakee Springs

===Census-designated places===
* Elfin Cove
* Game Creek
* Klukwan
* Whitestone Logging Camp

===Unincorporated community===
* Cube Cove

==See also==
* List of airports in the Hoonah-Angoon Census Area

==References==
==External links==

* Skagway-Hoonah-Angoon Census Area map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Hoonah-Angoon Census Area map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Hoonah-Angoon Census Area map, January 2014: Alaska Department of Labor
* Alaska ShoreZone Coastal Mapping and Imagery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="0" end="25" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="31" end="42" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="58" end="68" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="72" end="78" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="170" end="189" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="211" end="223" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="262" end="268" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q862577" start="331" end="342" title="1990 United States Census" label="1990 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q615975" start="545" end="552" title="Skagway" label="Skagway"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="659" end="677" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="852" end="884" title="Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska" label="Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512981" start="899" end="921" title="Haines Borough, Alaska" label="Haines Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="936" end="967" title="Juneau City and Borough, Alaska" label="Juneau City and Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q25408755" start="982" end="1008" title="Petersburg Borough, Alaska" label="Petersburg Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="1023" end="1053" title="Sitka City and Borough, Alaska" label="Sitka City and Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430348" start="1068" end="1100" title="Stikine Region, British Columbia" label="Stikine Region, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138250" start="1121" end="1172" title="Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine" label="Kitimat-Stikine Regional District, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="1221" end="1246" title="Glacier Bay National Park" label="Glacier Bay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="1257" end="1279" title="Glacier Bay Wilderness" label="Glacier Bay Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="1289" end="1312" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q359266" start="1323" end="1357" title="Admiralty Island National Monument" label="Admiralty Island National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430877" start="1369" end="1391" title="Kootznoowoo Wilderness" label="Kootznoowoo Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115686" start="1402" end="1424" title="Chuck River Wilderness" label="Chuck River Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="1428" end="1472" title="Pleasant/Lemesurier/Inian Islands Wilderness" label="Pleasant/Lemesurier/Inian Islands Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447654" start="1476" end="1509" title="Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness" label="Tracy Arm-Fords Terror Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984733" start="1520" end="1552" title="West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness" label="West Chichagof-Yakobi Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1735" end="1741" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1844" end="1862" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1948" end="1953" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1961" end="1966" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1970" end="1986" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1995" end="2010" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2018" end="2023" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2031" end="2047" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2060" end="2071" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2136" end="2144" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2148" end="2154" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="2192" end="2199" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2227" end="2234" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2350" end="2365" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q79367" start="3207" end="3213" title="Angoon, Alaska" label="Angoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80116" start="3216" end="3224" title="Gustavus, Alaska" label="Gustavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="3227" end="3233" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q80039" start="3236" end="3243" title="Pelican, Alaska" label="Pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q79409" start="3246" end="3261" title="Tenakee Springs, Alaska" label="Tenakee Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328588" start="3296" end="3306" title="Elfin Cove, Alaska" label="Elfin Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836929" start="3309" end="3319" title="Game Creek, Alaska" label="Game Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634780" start="3322" end="3329" title="Klukwan, Alaska" label="Klukwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599136" start="3332" end="3355" title="Whitestone Logging Camp, Alaska" label="Whitestone Logging Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006697" start="3390" end="3399" title="Cube Cove, Alaska" label="Cube Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3416" end="3465" title="List of airports in the Hoonah-Angoon Census Area" label="List of airports in the Hoonah-Angoon Census Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87489" wikidata="Q508618" url="?curid=87489" title="Valdez–Cordova Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Valdez–Cordova Census Area was a census area located in the state of Alaska, United States. As of the 2010 census, the population was 9,636. It was part of the Unorganized Borough and therefore had no borough seat. On January 2, 2019, it was abolished and replaced by the Chugach Census Area and the Copper River Census Area.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area had a total area of , of which was land and (15.1%) was water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska – north
* Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska – west
* Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska – west
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska – west
* Yukon Territory, Canada – east

===National protected areas===
* Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (part of Gulf of Alaska unit)
** Middleton Island
* Chugach National Forest (part)
* Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve (part)
** Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 10,195 people, 3,884 households, and 2,559 families residing in the census area. The population density was less than 1 person per square mile (less than 1/km2). There were 5,148 housing units at an average density of less than 1/sq mi (less than 1/km2). The racial makeup of the census area was 75.90% White, 0.32% Black or African American, 13.25% Native American, 3.55% Asian, 0.26% Pacific Islander, 1.13% from other races, and 5.58% from two or more races. 2.81% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 2.33% reported speaking Spanish at home, while 2.26% speak Tagalog.

There were 3,884 households, out of which 37.30% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.10% were married couples living together, 8.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.10% were non-families. 27.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 3.18.

In the census area, the population was spread out, with 29.60% under the age of 18, 7.00% from 18 to 24, 30.90% from 25 to 44, 26.50% from 45 to 64, and 6.00% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 113.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 115.90 males.

==Politics==







==Communities==
===Cities===
* Cordova
* Valdez
* Whittier

===Census-designated places===

* Chenega
* Chisana
* Chistochina
* Chitina
* Copper Center
* Gakona
* Glennallen
* Gulkana
* Kenny Lake
* McCarthy
* Mendeltna
* Mentasta Lake
* Nabesna
* Nelchina
* Paxson
* Silver Springs
* Slana
* Tatitlek
* Tazlina
* Tolsona
* Tonsina
* Willow Creek
===Other places===
* Copperville (former CDP)
* Eyak (within Cordova)

==See also==
* List of airports in the Valdez–Cordova Census Area

==References==
==External links==
* Census Area map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Census Area map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q508618" start="0" end="26" title="Valdez–Cordova Census Area, Alaska" label="Valdez–Cordova Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="33" end="44" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60" end="65" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="69" end="75" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="77" end="90" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="102" end="113" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="160" end="179" title="Unorganized Borough" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="201" end="213" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481098" start="272" end="291" title="Chugach Census Area" label="Chugach Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481796" start="300" end="324" title="Copper River Census Area" label="Copper River Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="358" end="376" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="501" end="540" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="551" end="583" title="Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska" label="Yakutat City and Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512713" start="598" end="629" title="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska" label="Kenai Peninsula Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="639" end="672" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Municipality of Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="682" end="715" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="725" end="740" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132370" start="790" end="830" title="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge" label="Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895138" start="864" end="880" title="Middleton Island" label="Middleton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="883" end="906" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q955538" start="916" end="947" title="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge" label="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="957" end="1002" title="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="1013" end="1044" title="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness" label="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1080" end="1086" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1192" end="1210" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1410" end="1415" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1423" end="1428" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1432" end="1448" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1457" end="1472" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1480" end="1485" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1493" end="1509" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1522" end="1533" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1598" end="1606" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1610" end="1616" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1654" end="1661" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="1689" end="1696" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1811" end="1826" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q79607" start="2515" end="2522" title="Cordova, Alaska" label="Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q80037" start="2525" end="2531" title="Valdez, Alaska" label="Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q79716" start="2534" end="2542" title="Whittier, Alaska" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685056" start="2578" end="2585" title="Chenega, Alaska" label="Chenega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837791" start="2588" end="2595" title="Chisana, Alaska" label="Chisana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685380" start="2598" end="2609" title="Chistochina, Alaska" label="Chistochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074916" start="2612" end="2619" title="Chitina, Alaska" label="Chitina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923536" start="2622" end="2635" title="Copper Center, Alaska" label="Copper Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491623" start="2638" end="2644" title="Gakona, Alaska" label="Gakona"/>
<link wikidata="Q730642" start="2647" end="2657" title="Glennallen, Alaska" label="Glennallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282173" start="2660" end="2667" title="Gulkana, Alaska" label="Gulkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955811" start="2670" end="2680" title="Kenny Lake, Alaska" label="Kenny Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q590790" start="2683" end="2691" title="McCarthy, Alaska" label="McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023153" start="2694" end="2703" title="Mendeltna, Alaska" label="Mendeltna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731261" start="2706" end="2719" title="Mentasta Lake, Alaska" label="Mentasta Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q946867" start="2722" end="2729" title="Nabesna, Alaska" label="Nabesna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033414" start="2732" end="2740" title="Nelchina, Alaska" label="Nelchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640374" start="2743" end="2749" title="Paxson, Alaska" label="Paxson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2241923" start="2752" end="2766" title="Silver Springs, Alaska" label="Silver Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027101" start="2769" end="2774" title="Slana, Alaska" label="Slana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816643" start="2777" end="2785" title="Tatitlek, Alaska" label="Tatitlek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673845" start="2788" end="2795" title="Tazlina, Alaska" label="Tazlina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837351" start="2798" end="2805" title="Tolsona, Alaska" label="Tolsona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825182" start="2808" end="2815" title="Tonsina, Alaska" label="Tonsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928429" start="2818" end="2830" title="Willow Creek, Alaska" label="Willow Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182532" start="2852" end="2863" title="Copperville, Alaska" label="Copperville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422547" start="2879" end="2883" title="Eyak, Alaska" label="Eyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="2917" end="2967" title="List of airports in the Valdez–Cordova Census Area" label="List of airports in the Valdez–Cordova Census Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87491" wikidata="Q500845" url="?curid=87491" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Southeast Fairbanks Census Area is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 6,808, down from 7,029 in 2010. It is part of the unorganized borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest communities are Deltana and Tok, both unincorporated CDPs.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (1.2%) is water. For comparison, it is slightly bigger than the state of West Virginia.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska – Northwest
* Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska – North
* Copper River Census Area, Alaska – South
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska – Southwest
* Denali Borough, Alaska – West
* Yukon Territory, Canada – East

===National protected areas===
* Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge (part)
* Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve (part)
** Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness (part)
* Yukon-Charley Rivers National Preserve (part)

==Politics==
Southeast Fairbanks is one of the most Republican parts of Alaska, frequently giving Republican candidates well over 70% of the vote. Southeast Fairbanks has consistently mirrored Alaska&#x27;s overall electoral preferences, voting for the statewide winner in every presidential election since Alaska&#x27;s statehood in 1960. Donald Trump received the highest share of the vote for a Republican candidate in Southeast Fairbanks in 2024.







==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 6,174 people, 2,098 households, and 1,506 families living in the census area. The population density was . There were 3,225 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 78.99% White, 1.98% Black or African American, 12.71% Native American, 0.68% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 0.73% from other races, and 4.76% from two or more races. 2.70% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 4.29% reported speaking an Athabaskan language at home, while 4.02% speak Russian, 3.76% Ukrainian, and 2.34% Spanish.

Of the 2,098 households, 39.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.20% were married couples living together, 8.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.20% were non-families. 23.50% of households were one person, and 5.50% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.80 and the average family size was 3.34.

In the census area, the population was spread out, with 32.80% under the age of 18, 7.60% from 18 to 24, 27.80% from 25 to 44, 25.70% from 45 to 64, and 6.10% 65 or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 107.20 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 108.60 males.

===2020 Census===
==Communities==
===Cities===
*Delta Junction
*Eagle

===Census-designated places===

*Alcan Border
*Big Delta
*Chicken
*Deltana
*Dot Lake
*Dot Lake Village
*Dry Creek
*Eagle Village
*Fort Greely
*Healy Lake
*Northway
*Northway Junction (former)
*Northway Village (former)
*Tanacross
*Tetlin
*Tok
*Whitestone
==See also==
*List of airports in the Southeast Fairbanks Census Area

==References==
==External links==
* Census Area map, 2000 census: Alaska Department of Labor
* Census Area map, 2010 census: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="0" end="31" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="37" end="48" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="64" end="74" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="78" end="84" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="96" end="107" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="178" end="197" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="219" end="231" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131636" start="261" end="268" title="Deltana, Alaska" label="Deltana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093690" start="273" end="276" title="Tok, Alaska" label="Tok"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="298" end="301" title="Census-designated place" label="CDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="336" end="354" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q512901" start="547" end="583" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska" label="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="598" end="631" title="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q91481796" start="642" end="674" title="Copper River Census Area, Alaska" label="Copper River Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="685" end="718" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q179950" start="733" end="755" title="Denali Borough, Alaska" label="Denali Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="765" end="780" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="782" end="788" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q955538" start="830" end="861" title="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge" label="Tetlin National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="871" end="916" title="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="927" end="958" title="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness" label="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q388928" start="968" end="1006" title="Yukon-Charley Rivers National Preserve" label="Yukon-Charley Rivers National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1500" end="1506" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="1987" end="2006" title="Athabaskan language" label="Athabaskan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="2034" end="2041" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="2049" end="2058" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2070" end="2077" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79365" start="2813" end="2827" title="Delta Junction, Alaska" label="Delta Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023677" start="2829" end="2834" title="Eagle, Alaska" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q772651" start="2869" end="2881" title="Alcan Border, Alaska" label="Alcan Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q691255" start="2883" end="2892" title="Big Delta, Alaska" label="Big Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q750006" start="2894" end="2901" title="Chicken, Alaska" label="Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131636" start="2903" end="2910" title="Deltana, Alaska" label="Deltana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836021" start="2912" end="2920" title="Dot Lake, Alaska" label="Dot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q428696" start="2922" end="2938" title="Dot Lake Village, Alaska" label="Dot Lake Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660800" start="2940" end="2949" title="Dry Creek, Alaska" label="Dry Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987044" start="2951" end="2964" title="Eagle Village, Alaska" label="Eagle Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438565" start="2966" end="2977" title="Fort Greely, Alaska" label="Fort Greely"/>
<link wikidata="Q378233" start="2979" end="2989" title="Healy Lake, Alaska" label="Healy Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768393" start="2991" end="2999" title="Northway, Alaska" label="Northway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436993" start="3001" end="3018" title="Northway Junction, Alaska" label="Northway Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090657" start="3029" end="3045" title="Northway Village, Alaska" label="Northway Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927486" start="3056" end="3065" title="Tanacross, Alaska" label="Tanacross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075337" start="3067" end="3073" title="Tetlin, Alaska" label="Tetlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093690" start="3075" end="3078" title="Tok, Alaska" label="Tok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167246" start="3080" end="3090" title="Whitestone, Alaska" label="Whitestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="3105" end="3160" title="List of airports in the Southeast Fairbanks Census Area" label="List of airports in the Southeast Fairbanks Census Area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87492" wikidata="Q690633" url="?curid=87492" title="Oryza">
<text>Oryza is a genus of plants in the grass family. It includes the major food crop rice (species &quot;Oryza sativa&quot; and &quot;Oryza glaberrima&quot;). Members of the genus grow as tall, wetland grasses, growing to tall; the genus includes both annual and perennial species.

&quot;Oryza&quot; is situated in tribe Oryzeae, which is characterized morphologically by its single-flowered spikelets whose glumes are almost completely suppressed. In &quot;Oryza&quot;, two sterile lemma simulate glumes. The tribe Oryzeae is in subfamily Ehrhartoideae, a group of Poaceae tribes with certain features of internal leaf anatomy in common. The most distinctive leaf characteristics of this subfamily are the arm cells and fusoid cells found in their leaves.

One species, Asian rice (&quot;O. sativa&quot;), provides 20% of global grain and is a food crop of major global importance. The species are divided into two subgroups within the genus.

==Species==
Inside the genus &quot;Oryza&quot;, species can be divided by their genomes types. They include the diploid (2n = 24) of cultivated rice and their relatives, , , , and as well as the tetraploid (4n = 48) , , , and . Species of the same genome type cross easily, while hybridizing different types requires techniques like embryo rescue.

Over 300 names have been proposed for species, subspecies, and other infraspecific taxa within the genus. Published sources disagree as to how many of these should be recognized as distinct species. The following follows the World Checklist maintained by Kew Garden in London.
# &quot;Oryza australiensis&quot; (EE) – Australia
# &quot;Oryza barthii&quot; (AA) – tropical Africa
# &quot;Oryza brachyantha&quot; (FF) – tropical Africa
# &quot;Oryza coarctata&quot; (KKLL) – India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar
# &quot;Oryza eichingeri&quot; (CC) – tropical Africa, Sri Lanka
# &quot;Oryza glaberrima&quot; (AA) – African rice – tropical Africa
# &quot;Oryza grandiglumis&quot; (CCDD) – Brazil, Venezuela, Fr Guiana, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia
# &quot;Oryza latifolia&quot; (CCDD) – Latin America + West Indies from Sinaloa + Cuba to Argentina
# &quot;Oryza longiglumis&quot; (HHJJ) – New Guinea
# &quot;Oryza longistaminata&quot; (AA) – Madagascar, tropical + southern Africa
# &quot;Oryza meyeriana&quot; (GG) – China, Indian Subcontinent, Southeast Asia
# &quot;Oryza minuta&quot; (BBCC) – Himalayas, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, Northern Territory of Australia
# &quot;Oryza neocaledonica&quot; (GG) – New Caledonia
# &quot;Oryza officinalis&quot; (CC) – China, Indian Subcontinent, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, Australia
# &quot;Oryza punctata&quot; (BB) – Madagascar, tropical + southern Africa
# &quot;Oryza ridleyi&quot; (HHJJ) – Southeast Asia, New Guinea
# &quot;Oryza rufipogon&quot; (AA) – brownbeard or red rice – China, Indian Subcontinent, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, Australia
# &quot;Oryza sativa&quot; (AA) – Asian rice – China, Indian Subcontinent, Japan, Southeast Asia; naturalized many places
# &quot;Oryza schlechteri&quot; (HHKK) – New Guinea

===Formerly included===
Many species are now regarded as better suited to other genera:
*&quot;Echinochloa&quot;
*&quot;Leersia&quot;
*&quot;Maltebrunia&quot;
*&quot;Potamophila&quot;
*&quot;Prosphytochloa&quot;
*&quot;Rhynchoryza&quot;

==See also==
* Specialized metabolism in &quot;Oryza&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="11" end="16" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="34" end="46" title="Poaceae" label="grass family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="80" end="84" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q161426" start="100" end="112" title="Oryza sativa" label="Oryza sativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670252" start="129" end="145" title="Oryza glaberrima" label="Oryza glaberrima"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="189" end="196" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="247" end="253" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="258" end="267" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301040" start="317" end="324" title="Oryzeae" label="Oryzeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="404" end="410" title="chaff" label="glumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q149316" start="479" end="484" title="lemma (botany)" label="lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q161426" start="779" end="800" title="Oryza sativa" label="&amp;quot;O. sativa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="1053" end="1060" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141015" start="1094" end="1109" title="crop wild relative" label="their relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="1136" end="1146" title="tetraploid" label="tetraploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370214" start="1274" end="1287" title="embryo rescue" label="embryo rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251837" start="1575" end="1594" title="Oryza australiensis" label="Oryza australiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15296109" start="1626" end="1639" title="Oryza barthii" label="Oryza barthii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15245638" start="1677" end="1694" title="Oryza brachyantha" label="Oryza brachyantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q21396728" start="1732" end="1747" title="Oryza coarctata" label="Oryza coarctata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15245169" start="1808" end="1824" title="Oryza eichingeri" label="Oryza eichingeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670252" start="1873" end="1889" title="Oryza glaberrima" label="Oryza glaberrima"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937182" start="1942" end="1960" title="Oryza grandiglumis" label="Oryza grandiglumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15248559" start="2038" end="2053" title="Oryza latifolia" label="Oryza latifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2138" end="2155" title="Oryza longiglumis" label="Oryza longiglumis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105328" start="2190" end="2210" title="Oryza longistaminata" label="Oryza longistaminata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2271" end="2286" title="Oryza meyeriana" label="Oryza meyeriana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2351" end="2363" title="Oryza minuta" label="Oryza minuta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2458" end="2477" title="Oryza neocaledonica" label="Oryza neocaledonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10882643" start="2513" end="2530" title="Oryza officinalis" label="Oryza officinalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104136" start="2618" end="2632" title="Oryza punctata" label="Oryza punctata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2693" end="2706" title="Oryza ridleyi" label="Oryza ridleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217322" start="2757" end="2772" title="Oryza rufipogon" label="Oryza rufipogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161426" start="2885" end="2897" title="Oryza sativa" label="Oryza sativa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3007" end="3024" title="Oryza schlechteri" label="Oryza schlechteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q163965" start="3147" end="3158" title="Echinochloa" label="Echinochloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q158961" start="3172" end="3179" title="Leersia" label="Leersia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753217" start="3193" end="3204" title="Maltebrunia" label="Maltebrunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138277" start="3218" end="3229" title="Potamophila" label="Potamophila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310533" start="3243" end="3257" title="Prosphytochloa" label="Prosphytochloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309722" start="3271" end="3282" title="Rhynchoryza" label="Rhynchoryza"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100551" start="3305" end="3348" title="Specialized metabolism in Oryza" label="Specialized metabolism in &amp;quot;Oryza&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87493" wikidata="Q214724" url="?curid=87493" title="Snowshoe">
<text>Snowshoes are specialized outdoor gear for walking over snow. Their large footprint spreads the user&#x27;s weight out and allows them to travel largely on top of rather than through snow. Adjustable bindings attach them to appropriate winter footwear.

Traditional snowshoes have a hardwood frame filled in with rawhide latticework. Modern snowshoes are made of lightweight metal, plastic, and other synthetic materials.

In the past, snowshoes were essential equipment for anyone dependent on travel in deep and frequent snowfall, such as fur trappers. They retain that role in areas where motorized vehicles cannot reach or are inconvenient to use. However, their greatest contemporary use is for recreation.

Snowshoeing is easy to learn and in appropriate conditions is a relatively safe and inexpensive recreational activity. However, doing so in icy, steep terrain requires both advanced skill and mountaineering-style pivoting-crampon snowshoes.

==Development==

===Origins===

Before people built snowshoes, nature provided examples. Several animals, most notably the snowshoe hare, had evolved over the years with oversized feet enabling them to move more quickly through deep snow.

The origin and age of snowshoes are not precisely known, although historians believe they were invented from 4,000 to 6,000 years ago, probably starting in Central Asia. British archaeologist Jacqui Wood hypothesized that the equipment interpreted to be the frame of a backpack of the Chalcolithic mummy Ötzi was actually part of a snowshoe. Strabo wrote that the inhabitants of the Caucasus used to attach flat surfaces of leather under their feet and that its inhabitants used round wooden surfaces, something akin to blocks, instead. However, the &quot;traditional&quot; webbed snowshoe as used today had direct origins to North American Indigenous people, e.g., the Huron, Cree, and so forth. Samuel de Champlain wrote, referencing the Huron and Algonquin First Nations, in his travel memoirs (V.III, p. 164), &quot;Winter, when there is much snow, they (the Indians) make a kind of snowshoe that are two to three times larger than those in France, that they tie to their feet, and thus go on the snow, without sinking into it, otherwise they would not be able to hunt or go from one location to the other&quot;.

===North American Indigenous peoples===

The Indigenous peoples of North America developed the most advanced and diverse snowshoes prior to the 20th century. Different shapes were adapted to the different conditions in each region. Despite their great diversity in form, snowshoes were, in fact, one of the few cultural elements common to all tribes that lived where the winters were snowy, in particular, the Northern regions. Nearly every Indigenous peoples of the Americas culture developed its own particular shape of shoe, the simplest being those of the far north.

The Inuit have two styles, one being triangular in shape and about in length, and the other almost circular, both reflecting the need for high flotation in deep, loose and powdery snow. However, contrary to popular perception, the Inuit did not use their snowshoes much since they did most of their foot travel in winter over sea ice or on the tundra, where snow does not pile up deeply.

Southward the shoe becomes gradually narrower and longer, one of the largest being the hunting snowshoe of the Cree, which is nearly long and turned up at the toe.

Athapaskan snowshoes are made for travelling quickly on dry powder over flat, open land in Alaska and the Canadian northwest. They were used for keeping up with dog sleds, and breaking trail for them. They can be over long, and are narrow with an upturned toe.

Ojibwa snowshoes were designed for manuverability, and are pointed at both ends, making it easier to step backwards. They are also easier to construct, as the outer frame is made in two pieces.

Huron snowshoes are tailheavy, which means they track well but do not turn easily. They are broad enough that the maximum width has to be tucked against the tail of the other snowshoe with each step, or the straddle will be too wide for the wearer. They are also meant for open country, and can carry heavy loads.

Snowshoes developed by the Iroquois are narrower and shorter, reflecting the need for maneuverability in forested areas.

The Bearpaw style was widely used in the dense forests of Quebec and Labrador. It has no tail, and turns easily.

The Plains Indians wore snowshoes on their winter season bison hunts before horses were introduced.

===Use by Europeans===
====Pre-contact Eurasian ski-snowshoes====

In 2016, &quot;the oldest [extant] snowshoe in the world&quot;, found in a melting glacier in the Dolomites in Italy, was dated to between 3800 and 3700 BCE. It was a crude frame snowshoe.

Solid-wood &quot;ski-snowshoes&quot;, essentially short, wide versions of traditional skis, were used in Eurasia. They were made of light woods such as pine. Slender skis seem to have been more popular. Both types of footwear were lined with furs for climbing.

In Northwest North America in the early twentieth century, Roald Amundsen compared the solid-wood Norwegian skis he used with the local snowshoes worn by his travelling companions; he judged the skis faster in some conditions and the snowshoes faster in others.

====Post-American-contact====
North-American-type snowshoes were slowly adopted by Europeans during early colonialism in what later became Canada and the United States. The French &quot;voyageurs&quot; and coureurs des bois began to travel throughout the land of the Cree, Huron, and Algonquin nations in the late 17th century to trap animals and trade goods. In order to travel effectively in the terrain and climate, they utilized the tools of the Native populations, such as snowshoes and canoes.

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; reports the term &quot;snowshoe&quot; being used by the English as early as 1674. In 1690, after a French-Indian raiding party attacked a British settlement near what is today Schenectady, New York, the British took to snowshoes and pursued the attackers for almost , ultimately recovering both people and goods taken by their attackers. Snowshoes became popular by the time of the French and Indian Wars, during engagements such as The Battle on Snowshoes, when combatants of both sides wore snowshoes atop a reported four feet (1.22 meters) of snow.

The &quot;teardrop&quot; snowshoes worn by lumberjacks are about long and broad in proportion, while the tracker&#x27;s shoe is over long and very narrow. This form, the stereotypical snowshoe, resembles a tennis racquet, and indeed the French term is &quot;raquette à neige&quot;. This form was copied by the Canadian snowshoe clubs of the late 18th century. Founded for military training purposes, they became the earliest recreational users of snowshoes.

The snowshoe clubs such as the Montreal Snow Shoe Club (1840) shortened the teardrop to about long and broad, slightly turned up at the toe and terminating in a kind of tail behind. This is made very light for racing purposes, but much stouter for touring or hunting. The tail keeps the shoe straight while walking.

Another variant, the &quot;bearpaw&quot;, ends in a curved heel instead of a tail. While many early enthusiasts found this more difficult to learn on, as they were thicker in the middle and rather cumbersome, they did have the advantage of being easier to pack and nimbler in tight spaces. Two forms of traditional bearpaw snowshoes developed: an eastern version used by &quot;spruce gummers&quot; consisting of an oval frame with wooden cross braces, and a western version with a rounded triangular frame and no wooden bracing.

Traditional snowshoes are made of a single strip of some tough wood, usually white ash, curved round and fastened together at the ends and supported in the middle by a light cross-bar. The space within the frame is filled with a close webbing of dressed caribou or neat&#x27;s-hide strips, leaving a small opening just behind the cross-bar for the toe of the moccasined foot. They are fastened to the moccasin by leather thongs, sometimes by buckles. Such shoes are still made and sold by native peoples.

Compared to modern Indigenous-made snowshoes, wood-and-rawhide snowshoes mass-produced by Europeans tend to have looser, simpler webbing, with wider rawhide strips, as this is cheaper to make. However, this may reduce the floatation and let the shoes sink in powder.

==Modern==
Outside of Indigenous populations and some competitions such as the Arctic Winter Games, very few of the old-fashioned snowshoes are actually used by enthusiasts anymore, although some value them for the artisanship involved in their construction. They are sometimes seen as decorations, mounted on walls or on mantels in ski lodges.

Even though many enthusiasts prefer aluminum snowshoes, there is still a large group of snowshoe enthusiasts who prefer wooden snowshoes. Wooden frames do not freeze as readily. Many enthusiasts also prefer wood snowshoes because they are very quiet.

While recreational use of snowshoes began with snowshoe clubs in Quebec, Canada (who held events where races and hikes were combined with fine food and drink), the manufacture of snowshoes for recreational purposes effectively began in the late 19th century, when serious recreational use became more widespread.

In the late 20th century the snowshoe underwent a radical redesign. It started in the 1950s when the Vermont-based Tubbs company created the Green Mountain Bearpaw, which combined the shortness of that style with an even narrower width than had previously been used (Pospisil 1979). This rapidly became one of the most popular snowshoes of its day.

===The &quot;Western&quot;===
In 1972, experimenting with new designs in Washington&#x27;s Cascade Mountains, Gene and Bill Prater created the snowshoe known today. They began using aluminum tubing and replaced the lace with neoprene and nylon decking. To make them easier to use in mountaineering, the Praters developed a hinged binding and added cleats to the bottom of the shoe.

The Sherpa Snowshoe company started manufacturing these &quot;Western&quot; shoes and they proved very popular. Eastern snowshoers were a bit more skeptical at first, believing that the style was unnecessary in the east, until the Praters demonstrated their improved effectiveness on New Hampshire&#x27;s Mount Washington.

These use an aluminum or stainless steel frame and take advantage of technical advances in plastics and injection molding to make a lighter and more durable shoe. They require little maintenance, and usually incorporate aggressive crampons.

Some, such as the &quot;Denali&quot; model made by Mountain Safety Research, use no metal frame and can be fitted with optional detachable tail extenders. Newer models have heel-lifters, called &quot;ascenders&quot;, that flip up to facilitate hill climbing.

The use of solid decking in place of the standard latticework of lacing came as a surprise to many enthusiasts, since it challenged a long-held belief that the lattice was necessary to prevent snow from accumulating on the shoe. In practice, however, it seems that very little snow comes through the openings in either type of shoe.

Neoprene/nylon decks also displayed superior water resistance, neither stretching as rawhide will when wet nor requiring annual treatment with spar varnish, features that were immediately appreciated. Eventually they were replaced with even lighter materials such as polypropylene. This tendency also gave way to the creation of inflatable snowshoes made of different fabrics such as cordura and thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU).

These more athletic designs have helped the sport enjoy a renaissance after a period of eclipse when winter recreationists showed more interest in skiing. In the U.S., the number of snowshoers tripled during the 1990s.

In fact, ski resorts with available land are beginning to offer snowshoe trails to visitors, and some popular hiking areas are almost as busy in the colder months as they are on warm summer weekends.

Some modern frames are a vertical edge instead of a tube, making the entire edge of the snowshoe a crampon.

== Selection ==

As many winter recreationists rediscover snowshoeing, many more new models of snowshoe are becoming available. Ski areas and outdoor equipment stores are offering snowshoes for rent.

Snowshoes today are divided into three types:
* aerobic/running (small and light; not intended for backcountry use);
* recreational (a bit larger; meant for use in gentle-to moderate walks of ); and
* mountaineering (the largest, meant for serious hill-climbing, long-distance trips and off-trail use).

Sizes are often given in inches, even though snowshoes are nowhere near perfectly rectangular. Mountaineering shoes can be at least long by wide; a lighter pair of racing shoes can be slightly narrower and or shorter.

Regardless of configuration, all wooden shoes are referred to as &quot;traditional&quot; and all shoes made of other materials are called &quot;modern&quot;.

Notwithstanding these variations in planned use, larger users should plan on buying larger snowshoes. A common formula is that for every pound of body weight, there should be one square inch of snowshoe surface (14.5 cm2/kg) per snowshoe to adequately support the wearer. Users should also consider the weight of any gear they will be packing, especially if they expect to break trail. Those planning to travel into deep powder look for even larger shoes.

Many manufacturers now include weight-based flotation ratings for their shoes, although there is no standard for setting this yet.

===Bindings===
As is often the case with downhill skis, wood-frame snowshoes and suitable bindings are typically marketed and purchased separately rather than as a single piece. One common style is termed the &quot;H&quot; binding, as it consists of a strap around the heel crossing a strap around the toe and one at the instep, forming a rough version of the eponymous letter.

On modern shoes, there are two styles of binding: fixed-rotation (also known as &quot;limited-rotation&quot;) bindings, and full-rotation (also known as &quot;pivot&quot;) bindings. With either binding system, the heel is left free, and the difference is in how the ball of the foot is attached to the snowshoe.

In fixed-rotation bindings, the binding is attached to the snowshoe with an elastic strap that brings the tail of the snowshoe up with each step. The snowshoe therefore moves with the foot and the tail does not drag. Fixed-rotation bindings are preferred for racing. Full-rotation bindings allow the user&#x27;s toes to pivot below the deck of the snowshoe. They allow the crampon cleats that are under the foot to be kicked into a slope for grip in climbing, but are relatively awkward for stepping sideways and backwards as the tail of the snowshoe can drag. Fixed-rotation bindings often cause snow to be kicked up the back of the wearer&#x27;s legs; this does not tend to happen with full-rotation bindings.

A series of straps, usually three, are used to fasten the foot to the snowshoe. Some styles of binding use a cup for the toe. It is important that a user be able to manipulate these straps easily, as removing or securing the foot often must be done outdoors in cold weather with bare hands, exposing him or her to the possibility of frostbite. When putting on snowshoes, left is distinguished from right by which way the loose ends of the binding straps point: always outward, to avoid stepping on them repeatedly.

In 1994, Bill Torres and a younger associate developed the step-in binding, designed to make it easier for snowshoers wearing hard-shelled plastic boots (serious mountaineers) to change from snowshoes to crampons and back again as needed.

===Accessories===

Snowshoers often use trekking poles as an accessory to help them keep their balance on the snow. Some manufacturers have begun making special snowshoeing models of their poles, with larger baskets more like those found on ski poles (which can also be used).

Other than that, no other special accessories are required. Most types of footwear can be worn with snowshoes, although hiking boots are the preferred choice among most recreational users (except racers, who prefer running shoes). Ski boots, however, will only work with certain snowshoes such as the MSR Denali, otherwise requiring backcountry skiers to carry other footwear for the snowshoe portion of their trip.

If going into deep snow, snowshoers will often take along gaiters to keep snow from getting into their boots from above. Some manufacturers make their snowshoes with boot or toe covers to provide the same protection.

A carrier of some type is also advisable, particularly if the trip will not take place entirely on snowshoes. Some backpack manufacturers have designed special packs with &quot;daisy chains,&quot; strips of looped nylon webbing on which the shoes can be secured. Snowshoe manufacturers, too, have begun including carriers and tote bags for their products, if for no other reason than to prevent the often-sharp cleats on the bottom from damaging surfaces they come in contact with.

Since snowshoeing is commonly done in cold weather, users typically prepare for it by dressing in layers and carrying the appropriate equipment.

==Techniques employed with snowshoes==
Snowshoes function best when there is enough snow beneath them to pack a layer between them and the ground, usually at a depth of or more. However, contrary to popular belief, snowshoes perform poorly on very icy and steep terrain. Compared to crampons, entry level modern snowshoes give relatively little grip on ice. It is common for novice snowshoers to climb up a steep slope to a summit and then have difficulty climbing back down, which tends to be more difficult than ascending. In icy conditions mountaineering skills and snowshoes designed for Alpine and glacial travel are required.

===Walking===
The method of walking is to lift the shoes slightly and, with wider snowshoes, slide their inner edges over each other, thus avoiding the unnatural and fatiguing &quot;straddle-gait&quot;.

====Turning====
Walking skills are easily transferable to straightforward snowshoe travel, but this is not always the case with turning around. While a snowshoer with space to do so can, and usually does, simply walk in a small semicircle, on a steep slope or in close quarters such as a boreal forest this may be impractical or impossible. It is thus necessary in such circumstances to execute a &quot;kick turn&quot; similar to the one employed on skis: lifting one foot high enough to keep the entire snowshoe in the air while keeping the other planted, putting the foot at a right angle to the other (or as close as possible for the situation and the snowshoer&#x27;s physical comfort), then planting it on the snow and quickly repeating the action with the other foot. This is much easier to accomplish with poles.

====Ascending====

While the cleating and traction improvements to modern snowshoes have greatly enhanced snowshoers&#x27; climbing abilities, on very steep slopes it is still beneficial to make &quot;kick steps,&quot; kicking the toes of the shoes into the snow to create a kind of snow stairs for the next traveler to use.

Alternatively, snowshoers can use two techniques borrowed from skis: the herringbone (walking uphill with the shoes spread outward at an angle to increase their support) and the sidestep.

For those snowshoers who use poles, it can be easier to rely on the poles to &#x27;pull&#x27; oneself with regular stride, up the slope.

====Descending====

Once a trail has been broken up a mountain or hill, snowshoers often find a way to speed up the return trip that manages to also be fun and rests the leg muscles: &quot;glissading&quot; the trail, or sliding down on their buttocks. This does not damage the trail, and in fact helps pack the snow better for later users.

In situations where they must break trail downhill and thus cannot glissade, snowshoers sometimes run downhill in exaggerated steps, sliding slightly on the snow as they do, an option sometimes called &quot;step sliding&quot;. Also effective, are poles placed in front as you descend in a regular stride. If carrying poles and properly experienced, they can also employ skiing techniques such as telemarking.

====Breaking trail====

On newly fallen snow it is necessary for a snowshoer to &quot;break&quot; a trail. This is tiring (it may require up to 50% more energy than simply following behind) even on level terrain, and frequently in groups this work is shared among all participants.

A trail breaker can improve the quality of the ensuing route by using a technique, similar to the hiking rest step, called &quot;stamping&quot;: pausing momentarily after each step before putting full weight on the foot. This helps smooth the snow underneath and compacts it even better for the next user.

A well-broken trail is usually a rut in the snow about deep and wide. While it may appear after heavy use as if it is possible to &quot;bareboot&quot; or walk it without benefit of snowshoes, this practice is frowned upon by serious snowshoers as it leads to &quot;postholing,&quot; or roughening of the trail from places where boots have fallen through (initial appearances to the contrary, the snow in a broken trail is not sufficiently packed to support the more concentrated weight of a foot).

In soft conditions, following trails broken by backcountry skiers can be difficult on snowshoes. In addition, since snowshoes destroy ski tracks, many areas ask that snowshoers observe traditional backcountry courtesy and stay out of ski tracks. Ski trails are normally much narrower than a typical snowshoe trail, and less well packed because skis offer more flotation than snowshoes. If the snow is deep and soft, snowshoers may find themselves postholing right through the ski track. In most cases the ski track offers little advantage and putting in a separate snowshoe track allows both snowshoers and skiers to have a positive experience and avoids friction with skiers who often resent having their tracks obliterated and their skiing enjoyment greatly reduced.

===Benefits===

Snowshoeing expands the potential for exercise available in the wintertime. , at least 500 American schools, mostly but not exclusively in the Northeast have started offering snowshoe programs in their physical education classes to help combat obesity. It had the added benefit of being gentler on the feet than walking or running the equivalent routes, since snow cushions the foot&#x27;s impact.

For the same reason, it is less detrimental to the environment, since the snow likewise buffers the earth against the impact of so many hikers and campers, cutting back on trail erosion and other effects of heavy use.

Snowshoeing makes even familiar hikes different and new. It allows people to explore hard-to-reach places in snowy frontiers, and if the snow is deep enough, obstacles such as large boulders and fallen logs can be more easily bypassed.

===Adverse effects===
Immoderate snowshoeing may lead to serious lameness of the feet and ankles due to the abnormal gait required to lift the snowshoe over the surface of the snow. Canadian &quot;voyageurs&quot; called this phenomenon &quot;mal de raquette&quot;, or &quot;snowshoe sickness&quot;. This can potentially be very dangerous for a snowshoer stricken in a remote area. Although modern snowshoes are much lighter and more comfortable, making &quot;mal de raquette&quot; rarer, it is still a danger for those who use snowshoes extensively. In the past, snowshoers have carried pain relief medications such as tramadol to allow for easier movement of the legs in such an emergency situation.

Nonetheless, many snowshoers find that their legs, particularly their calf muscles, take some time to get used to snowshoeing again at the start of each winter. Frequently the first serious trip leaves them sore for several days afterwards.

In rotten snow, bridging traditional snowshoes (placing them so that they are supported only at the ends) can cause them to break. A lack of snowshoes can be life-threatening if it unexpectedly strands the snowshoer far from help.

=== Winter recreation ===

The resurgence of interest in snowshoeing in the late 20th century was in some part due to snowboarders, who took to them as a way to reach backcountry powder bowls and other areas while they were still banned from most ski areas. Their similarities to snowboards, in shape and binding, led many of them to continue use even after snowboarders were allowed to use most ski slopes. Despite most ski areas now allowing snowboarders, there is a growing interest in backcountry and sidecountry snowboarding in the search for fresh powder. The recent development of splitboards has enabled snowboarders to access backcountry without the need for snowshoes.

Downhill skiers, too, found snowshoes useful in reaching the same areas.

Another popular expedition, particularly among hikers, is the &quot;ski-shoe&quot; trip combining a cross-country ski portion on a level, wide trail with a snowshoe up a less skiable section.

===Competition===
Runners have found that using light snowshoes allows them to continue exercising and racing during winter. Like their warm-weather counterparts, events cover all distances, from sprints of 100 m to the 100 km &quot;Iditashoe&quot;. There are even hurdle events.

Snowshoe segments have become common in many multi-sport events and adventure races, including a required snowshoe segment in the winter quadrathlon. Some competitors in those events like Sally Edwards and Tom Sobal have emerged as stars.

While snowshoe racing has probably been around as long as there have been snowshoes, as an organized sport it is relatively new. The United States Snowshoe Association was founded in 1977 to serve as a governing body for competitive snowshoeing. It is headquartered in Corinth, New York, which considers itself the &quot;Snowshoe Capital of the World&quot; as a result. Similar organizations, such as the European Snowshoe Committee and Japan&#x27;s Chikyu Network, exist in other countries and there is an international competitive level as well.

Snowshoe races are part of the Arctic Winter Games and the winter Special Olympics. However, they are not yet an Olympic event.

==Maintenance and repair==

The rawhide webbing of traditional snowshoes, as noted above, needs regular waterproofing. Spar varnish is the preferred waterproofing for traditional snowshoes. A light sanding is preferred before 3 coats of spar varnish is applied. Modern snowshoes need no regular maintenance save a sharpening of cleats if desired.

Both kinds of snowshoe, however, can and do break. The most common damage suffered is to the frame, which can be splinted with a stick or piece of wood if necessary. Decking rarely gets broken, but if it is punctured and the hole looks as if it might continue to grow, the best solution is the patching kits made for tents.

Cable ties can serve many purposes in repairing snowshoes. They can splint frames in a pinch, replace a broken rivet, secure a tie or lace, and repair winter clothing as well.

==See also==

* Winter sports
* &quot;Les raquetteurs&quot;

==References==
* &quot;Associated Press&quot;, February 13, 2006; Snowshoes are alternatives in winter gym class.
* 
* Heilman, Carl; If You Can Walk... You Can Snowshoe at carlheilman.com date unknown, retrieved January 10, 2006.
* Kreps, E; &quot;Camp and Trail Methods&quot;, A.R. Harding Co, Columbus Ohio
* Olmsted, Larry; &quot;Snowshoeing: A Trailside Guide&quot;, W.W. Norton, New York. 1997. .
* 
* Prosek, James; February 6, 2004; &quot;Journeys: Making Tracks in a World Gone Silent&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Tucker, Jim; History of Snowshoeing , at snowshoeracing.com, retrieved January 18, 2006.
* Woodward, Angela; Snowshoe, at madehow.com, retrieved January 22, 2006.

==External links==

* History of the Snowshoe in Canada
* University of Maine Hudson Museum online exhibit &quot;Snowshoes: A Gift from Gluskabe&quot; information includes Maine Indian, northeastern, Franco-American, and contemporary native snowshoes
* First Timer&#x27;s Guide to Snowshoeing
* GuideDolomiti Learn more about snowshoeing
* Snowshoe University
* How traditional snowshoes are made (video).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214724" start="0" end="9" title="Snowshoe" label="Snowshoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="56" end="60" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448003" start="313" end="320" title="rawhide (material)" label="rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368562" start="321" end="332" title="latticework" label="latticework"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="541" end="553" title="Animal trapping" label="fur trappers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="1078" end="1091" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="1097" end="1104" title="evolution" label="evolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1351" end="1363" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1365" end="1372" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1373" end="1386" title="archaeology" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121055" start="1387" end="1398" title="Jacqui Wood" label="Jacqui Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="1480" end="1492" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="1493" end="1498" title="mummy" label="mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171291" start="1499" end="1503" title="Ötzi" label="Ötzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="1537" end="1543" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="1578" end="1586" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="1892" end="1911" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2754" end="2788" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="2889" end="2894" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="3229" end="3235" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="3385" end="3389" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339732" start="3600" end="3608" title="dog sled" label="dog sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="3701" end="3707" title="Ojibwa" label="Ojibwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="4238" end="4246" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="4316" end="4322" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="4391" end="4397" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="4402" end="4410" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="4451" end="4465" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="4504" end="4509" title="American Bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="4523" end="4528" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="4709" end="4722" title="the Dolomites" label="the Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q926" start="5126" end="5140" title="Roald Amundsen" label="Roald Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="5503" end="5509" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812669" start="5516" end="5525" title="voyageurs" label="voyageurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q511878" start="5536" end="5553" title="Coureur des bois" label="coureurs des bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="5841" end="5866" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q331380" start="6049" end="6070" title="Schenectady, New York" label="Schenectady, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q681416" start="6255" end="6277" title="French and Indian Wars" label="French and Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873072" start="6310" end="6329" title="Battle on Snowshoes" label="Battle on Snowshoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="6632" end="6638" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q240502" start="6639" end="6646" title="racquet" label="racquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906332" start="6916" end="6939" title="Montreal Snow Shoe Club" label="Montreal Snow Shoe Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193369" start="7809" end="7818" title="Fraxinus americana" label="white ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="7986" end="7993" title="caribou" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q252484" start="8091" end="8101" title="Moccasin (footwear)" label="moccasined"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="8145" end="8152" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135567" start="8174" end="8180" title="buckle" label="buckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495164" start="8585" end="8604" title="Arctic Winter Games" label="Arctic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327778" start="8828" end="8835" title="Fireplace mantel" label="mantels"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9169" end="9175" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="9519" end="9526" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q41507" start="9559" end="9573" title="Green Mountains" label="Green Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9685" end="9698" title="#refPospisil1979" label="Pospisil 1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="9841" end="9851" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="9859" end="9876" title="Cascade Mountains" label="Cascade Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="9950" end="9958" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q143937" start="9993" end="10001" title="neoprene" label="neoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="10006" end="10011" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="10051" end="10065" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250711" start="10116" end="10122" title="cleat (shoe)" label="cleats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="10213" end="10220" title="Western United States" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="10263" end="10270" title="Eastern United States" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="10435" end="10448" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q572801" start="10456" end="10472" title="Mount Washington (New Hampshire)" label="Mount Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="10488" end="10496" title="aluminum" label="aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="10500" end="10515" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="10566" end="10573" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q260606" start="10579" end="10596" title="injection moulding" label="injection molding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124273" start="10706" end="10713" title="crampon" label="crampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10589790" start="10768" end="10792" title="Mountain Safety Research" label="Mountain Safety Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11454" end="11466" title="Spar varnish#Spar varnish" label="spar varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="11578" end="11591" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q772580" start="11695" end="11702" title="cordura" label="cordura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783228" start="11707" end="11739" title="Thermoplastic polyurethane" label="thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q130003" start="11971" end="11981" title="ski resort" label="ski resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="12466" end="12470" title="Renting" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="12859" end="12870" title="rectangle" label="rectangular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217573" start="13996" end="14001" title="strap" label="strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q174647" start="14337" end="14341" title="heel" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124273" start="14809" end="14816" title="crampon" label="crampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="15482" end="15491" title="frostbite" label="frostbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371996" start="15945" end="15959" title="trekking poles" label="trekking poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292640" start="16146" end="16155" title="ski poles" label="ski poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756271" start="16303" end="16314" title="hiking boot" label="hiking boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929383" start="16398" end="16411" title="Athletic shoe" label="running shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661777" start="16414" end="16422" title="Ski boot" label="Ski boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526862" start="16658" end="16664" title="gaiter" label="gaiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843" start="16933" end="16941" title="backpack" label="backpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639207" start="16995" end="17007" title="Daisy chain (climbing)" label="daisy chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490558" start="17038" end="17045" title="webbing" label="webbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447985" start="17144" end="17152" title="tote bag" label="tote bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124273" start="17730" end="17738" title="crampons" label="crampons"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="17990" end="18004" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133242" start="18512" end="18522" title="semicircle" label="semicircle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="18572" end="18585" title="boreal forest" label="boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q210" start="18863" end="18874" title="right angle" label="right angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569936" start="19947" end="19957" title="glissade (climbing)" label="glissading"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="20000" end="20008" title="buttocks" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q50620" start="20495" end="20506" title="Telemark skiing" label="telemarking"/>
<link wikidata="Q827331" start="20897" end="20906" title="rest step" label="rest step"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446589" start="21645" end="21663" title="ski touring" label="backcountry skiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="22475" end="22491" title="Education in the United States" label="American schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="22527" end="22536" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="22586" end="22604" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="22628" end="22635" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="22961" end="22968" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909116" start="23304" end="23312" title="lameness" label="lameness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370000" start="23356" end="23360" title="gait" label="gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q511878" start="23436" end="23445" title="coureur de bois" label="voyageurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q407592" start="23858" end="23866" title="tramadol" label="tramadol"/>
<link wikidata="Q431282" start="24011" end="24022" title="calf muscle" label="calf muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q574415" start="24148" end="24180" title="Delayed onset muscle soreness" label="sore for several days afterwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000617" start="24533" end="24542" title="snowboard" label="snowboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161849" start="25003" end="25013" title="splitboard" label="splitboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="25095" end="25110" title="Alpine skiing" label="Downhill skiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="25269" end="25286" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q628179" start="25312" end="25317" title="trail" label="trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="25558" end="25565" title="Sprint (running)" label="sprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q537769" start="25627" end="25633" title="Hurdling" label="hurdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q167170" start="25688" end="25705" title="multi-sport event" label="multi-sport event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145338" start="25711" end="25726" title="adventure racing" label="adventure races"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479040" start="25780" end="25791" title="quadrathlon" label="quadrathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970730" start="25831" end="25844" title="Sally Edwards" label="Sally Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25849" end="25858" title="Tom Sobal" label="Tom Sobal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26016" end="26050" title="United States Snowshoe Association" label="United States Snowshoe Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q953048" start="26152" end="26159" title="Corinth (village), New York" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26288" end="26315" title="European Snowshoe Committee" label="European Snowshoe Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26333" end="26347" title="Chikyu Network" label="Chikyu Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495164" start="26463" end="26482" title="Arctic Winter Games" label="Arctic Winter Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="26498" end="26514" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="26545" end="26552" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326110" start="26665" end="26678" title="waterproofing" label="waterproofing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26680" end="26692" title="Spar varnish#Spar varnish" label="Spar varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="27203" end="27211" title="repair" label="patching"/>
<link wikidata="Q170544" start="27226" end="27230" title="tent" label="tent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500589" start="27234" end="27243" title="Cable tie" label="Cable tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q204686" start="27427" end="27439" title="Winter sport" label="Winter sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235080" start="27449" end="27464" title="Les raquetteurs" label="Les raquetteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="27495" end="27511" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="27979" end="27997" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87494" wikidata="Q518044" url="?curid=87494" title="Hordeum">
<text>Hordeum is a genus of annual and perennial plants in the grass family. The species are native throughout the temperate regions of Africa, Eurasia, and the Americas.

== Taxonomy ==

=== Species ===
Species include:

* &quot;Hordeum aegiceras&quot; – Mongolia, China including Tibet
* &quot;Hordeum arizonicum&quot; US (CA AZ NV NM), Mexico (Baja California, Sonora, Durango)
* &quot;Hordeum bogdanii&quot; – from Turkey and European Russia to Mongolia
* &quot;Hordeum brachyantherum&quot; – Russia (Kuril, Kamchatka), Alaska, Canada including Yukon, US (mostly in the West but also scattered locales in the East), Baja California
* &quot;Hordeum brachyatherum&quot; – Chile
* &quot;Hordeum brevisubulatum&quot; – European Russia; temperate and subarctic Asia from Turkey and the Urals to China and Magadan
* &quot;Hordeum bulbosum&quot; – Mediterranean, Central Asia 
* &quot;Hordeum californicum&quot; – US (CA; OR; NV)
* &quot;Hordeum capense&quot; – South Africa, Lesotho
* &quot;Hordeum chilense&quot; – Argentina, Chile (including Juan Fernández Is)
* &quot;Hordeum comosum&quot; – Argentina, Chile
* &quot;Hordeum cordobense&quot; – northern Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum depressum&quot; – US (CA; OR; WA; ID; NV), British Columbia, Baja California
* &quot;Hordeum distichon&quot; – Iraq
* &quot;Hordeum erectifolium&quot; – northern Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum euclaston&quot; – Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum flexuosum&quot; – Uruguay, Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum fuegianum&quot; – Tierra del Fuego
* &quot;Hordeum guatemalense&quot; – Guatemala
* &quot;Hordeum halophilum&quot; – Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, Peru
* &quot;Hordeum intercedens&quot; (bobtail barley) – California, Baja California
* &quot;Hordeum jubatum&quot; (foxtail barley) – widespread in US and Canada; Asiatic Russia, Inner Mongolia, Central Asia, Caucasus
* &quot;Hordeum × lagunculciforme&quot; – Iraq, Turkmenistan, Himalayas, western China
* &quot;Hordeum lechleri&quot; – Argentina, Chile
* &quot;Hordeum marinum&quot; (sea barley) – Europe, North Africa, southwestern and central Asia
* &quot;Hordeum murinum&quot; (wall barley) – Canary Islands, Europe, North Africa, southwestern and central Asia
* &quot;Hordeum muticum&quot; – Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, Peru
* &quot;Hordeum parodii&quot; – Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum patagonicum&quot; – Argentina, Chile
* &quot;Hordeum × pavisii&quot; – France
* &quot;Hordeum procerum&quot; – Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum pubiflorum&quot; – Argentina, Chile
* &quot;Hordeum pusillum&quot; (little barley) – widespread in Canada and US; northern Mexico, Bermuda, Argentina
* &quot;Hordeum roshevitzii&quot; – China, Korea, Primorye, Mongolia, Siberia, Kazakhstan
* &quot;Hordeum secalinum&quot; – Europe, Mediterranean, Caucasus
* &quot;Hordeum spontaneum&quot; – from Greece and Egypt to central China
* &quot;Hordeum stenostachys&quot; – Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay, South Africa
* &quot;Hordeum tetraploidum&quot; – Argentina, Chile
* &quot;Hordeum vulgare&quot; (barley) – native to the Middle East, now cultivated in many countries
==== Formerly included species ====
Botanists now regard many species as better suited to other genera: &quot;Arrhenatherum&quot;, &quot;Crithopsis&quot;, &quot;Dasypyrum&quot;, &quot;Elymus&quot;, &quot;Eremopyrum&quot;, &quot;Hordelymus&quot;, &quot;Leymus&quot;, &quot;Psathyrostachys&quot;, and &quot;Taeniatherum&quot;.

=== Etymology ===
The name &quot;&quot; comes from the Latin word for &quot;to bristle&quot; (&quot;horreō&quot;, &quot;horrēre&quot;), and is akin to the word &quot;&quot;.

==Distribution==
The species are native throughout the temperate regions of Africa, Eurasia, and the Americas.

==Ecology==
&quot;Hordeum&quot; species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including the flame, rustic shoulder-knot and setaceous Hebrew character.

Some species have become weeds introduced worldwide by human activities, others have become endangered due to habitat loss.

==Uses==
One species, &quot;H. vulgare&quot; (barley), has become of major commercial importance as a cereal grain, used as fodder crop and for malting in the production of beer and whiskey.

==References==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* species of Hordeum in &quot;Wildflowers of Israel&quot;: Spntaneous Barley, Bulbous Barley, Wall Barley, Hordeum marinum,
* Hordeum hystrix, Hordeum vulgare</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="22" end="28" title="Annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="33" end="42" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="57" end="69" title="Poaceae" label="grass family"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="130" end="136" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="138" end="145" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="155" end="163" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218915" start="224" end="241" title="Hordeum aegiceras" label="Hordeum aegiceras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115416" start="290" end="308" title="Hordeum arizonicum" label="Hordeum arizonicum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="383" end="399" title="Hordeum bogdanii" label="Hordeum bogdanii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903002" start="460" end="482" title="Hordeum brachyantherum" label="Hordeum brachyantherum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="638" end="659" title="Hordeum brachyatherum" label="Hordeum brachyatherum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218925" start="682" end="704" title="Hordeum brevisubulatum" label="Hordeum brevisubulatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218900" start="814" end="830" title="Hordeum bulbosum" label="Hordeum bulbosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="876" end="896" title="Hordeum californicum" label="Hordeum californicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218904" start="929" end="944" title="Hordeum capense" label="Hordeum capense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902067" start="983" end="999" title="Hordeum chilense" label="Hordeum chilense"/>
<link wikidata="Q15518162" start="1063" end="1078" title="Hordeum comosum" label="Hordeum comosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218914" start="1112" end="1130" title="Hordeum cordobense" label="Hordeum cordobense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903007" start="1166" end="1183" title="Hordeum depressum" label="Hordeum depressum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111291" start="1259" end="1276" title="Hordeum distichon" label="Hordeum distichon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1298" end="1318" title="Hordeum erectifolium" label="Hordeum erectifolium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1354" end="1371" title="Hordeum euclaston" label="Hordeum euclaston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1415" end="1432" title="Hordeum flexuosum" label="Hordeum flexuosum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1468" end="1485" title="Hordeum fuegianum" label="Hordeum fuegianum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1519" end="1539" title="Hordeum guatemalense" label="Hordeum guatemalense"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1566" end="1584" title="Hordeum halophilum" label="Hordeum halophilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10955576" start="1633" end="1652" title="Hordeum intercedens" label="Hordeum intercedens"/>
<link wikidata="Q161883" start="1714" end="1729" title="Hordeum jubatum" label="Hordeum jubatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1847" end="1872" title="Hordeum × lagunculciforme" label="Hordeum × lagunculciforme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15518977" start="1934" end="1950" title="Hordeum lechleri" label="Hordeum lechleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q160217" start="1984" end="1999" title="Hordeum marinum" label="Hordeum marinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161674" start="2081" end="2096" title="Hordeum murinum" label="Hordeum murinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218918" start="2195" end="2210" title="Hordeum muticum" label="Hordeum muticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15519664" start="2259" end="2274" title="Hordeum parodii" label="Hordeum parodii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622518" start="2301" end="2320" title="Hordeum patagonicum" label="Hordeum patagonicum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2354" end="2371" title="Hordeum × pavisii" label="Hordeum × pavisii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2395" end="2411" title="Hordeum procerum" label="Hordeum procerum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15518249" start="2438" end="2456" title="Hordeum pubiflorum" label="Hordeum pubiflorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117447" start="2490" end="2506" title="Hordeum pusillum" label="Hordeum pusillum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2604" end="2623" title="Hordeum roshevitzii" label="Hordeum roshevitzii"/>
<link wikidata="Q160898" start="2694" end="2711" title="Hordeum secalinum" label="Hordeum secalinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218911" start="2760" end="2778" title="Hordeum spontaneum" label="Hordeum spontaneum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2834" end="2854" title="Hordeum stenostachys" label="Hordeum stenostachys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2912" end="2932" title="Hordeum tetraploidum" label="Hordeum tetraploidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="2966" end="2981" title="Hordeum vulgare" label="Hordeum vulgare"/>
<link wikidata="Q157689" start="3169" end="3182" title="Arrhenatherum" label="Arrhenatherum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219815" start="3196" end="3206" title="Crithopsis" label="Crithopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309939" start="3220" end="3229" title="Dasypyrum" label="Dasypyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072892" start="3243" end="3249" title="Elymus (plant)" label="Elymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q580600" start="3263" end="3273" title="Eremopyrum" label="Eremopyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976454" start="3287" end="3297" title="Hordelymus" label="Hordelymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542804" start="3311" end="3317" title="Leymus" label="Leymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680883" start="3331" end="3346" title="Psathyrostachys" label="Psathyrostachys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953182" start="3364" end="3376" title="Taeniatherum" label="Taeniatherum"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3440" end="3445" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="3636" end="3642" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="3644" end="3651" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3661" end="3669" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="3743" end="3748" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="3758" end="3769" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q301172" start="3789" end="3798" title="Flame (moth)" label="the flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989340" start="3800" end="3820" title="rustic shoulder-knot" label="rustic shoulder-knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094340" start="3825" end="3851" title="Setaceous Hebrew Character" label="setaceous Hebrew character"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="3879" end="3883" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="4025" end="4031" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="4081" end="4087" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="4103" end="4109" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395224" start="4123" end="4130" title="malting" label="malting"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="4152" end="4156" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="4161" end="4168" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87495" wikidata="Q379474" url="?curid=87495" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Kusilvak Census Area, formerly known as Wade Hampton Census Area, is a census area located in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 8,368, up from 7,459 in 2010. It is part of the Unorganized Borough and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest community is the city of Hooper Bay, on the Bering Sea coast.

The census area&#x27;s per capita income makes it the fourth-poorest county-equivalent in the United States. In 2014, it had the highest percentage of unemployed people of any county or census area in the United States, at 23.7 percent.

==History==
The census area was originally named for Wade Hampton III, a South Carolina politician whose son-in-law, John Randolph Tucker, a territorial judge in Nome, posthumously named a mining district in western Alaska for him in 1913. The district eventually became the census area, retaining its name. Over the next century, the name became increasingly controversial, with Native residents and others arguing Hampton&#x27;s name did not represent Alaska and that his personal history as a slave-holding Civil War general was a blemish on the region. In July 2015, Alaska Governor Bill Walker formally notified the U.S. Census Bureau that the census area was being renamed after the Kusilvak Mountains, its highest range.
==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has a total area of , of which is land and (13.2%) is water.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===
* Nome Census Area, Alaska – north
* Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska – east
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska – south

===National protected area===
* Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Andreafsky Wilderness (part)

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 7,028 people, 1,602 households, and 1,296 families residing in the census area. The population density was . There were 2,063 housing units at an average density of /sq mi (0/km2). The racial makeup of the census area was 92.53% Native American, 4.74% White, 0.06% Black or African American, 0.10% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.03% from other races, and 2.52% from two or more races. 0.33% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 50.00% of the population reported speaking English at home, while 49.75% spoke Central Alaskan Yup&#x27;ik.

In the 2006 American community survey, the Kusilvak Census Area had the largest increase in Hispanic population since 2000 with a 1572.73% increase.

There were 1,602 households, out of which 59.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.40% were married couples living together, 20.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.10% were non-families. Sixteen percent of all households were made up of individuals, and 1.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.38 and the average family size was 4.95.

In the census area 46.60% of the population was under the age of 18 (the highest such percentage among county equivalents in the United States), 9.70% was from 18 to 24, 25.60% from 25 to 44, 13.10% from 45 to 64, and 5.00% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 20 years, making the Census Area the youngest county in the United States. For every 100 females, there were 109.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.70 males.

The census area&#x27;s per capita income makes it one of the poorest places in the United States.

===2020 Census===

==Communities==
===Cities===

*Alakanuk
*Chevak
*Emmonak
*Hooper Bay
*Kotlik
*Marshall
*Mountain Village
*Nunam Iqua (formerly Sheldon Point)
*Pilot Station
*Russian Mission
*Scammon Bay
*St. Mary&#x27;s
===Census-designated place===
*Pitkas Point

===Unincorporated Communities===
*Bill Moore&#x27;s Slough
*Chuloonawick
*Hamilton
*Ohogamiut

==Politics==





Kusilvak Census Area has only backed a Republican for president four times since it was created in 1980.

==See also==
*List of mountain peaks of Alaska

==References==
==External links==

* Census Area map: Alaska Department of Labor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379474" start="0" end="20" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska" label="Kusilvak Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q379474" start="40" end="64" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska" label="Wade Hampton Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="71" end="82" title="census area" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="98" end="108" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="112" end="118" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="130" end="141" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="210" end="229" title="Unorganized Borough, Alaska" label="Unorganized Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="251" end="263" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80144" start="302" end="312" title="Hooper Bay, Alaska" label="Hooper Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="321" end="331" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="363" end="380" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865326" start="394" end="447" title="List of United States counties by per capita income" label="fourth-poorest county-equivalent in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q881227" start="631" end="647" title="Wade Hampton III" label="Wade Hampton III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="651" end="665" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016774" start="695" end="715" title="John Randolph Tucker (judge)" label="John Randolph Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q79996" start="740" end="744" title="Nome, Alaska" label="Nome"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="958" end="964" title="Alaska Native" label="Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="1074" end="1087" title="slavery in the United States" label="slave-holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1088" end="1097" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159074" start="1165" end="1176" title="Bill Walker (American politician)" label="Bill Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1199" end="1217" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448112" start="1267" end="1285" title="Kusilvak Mountains" label="Kusilvak Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1337" end="1355" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q503023" start="1478" end="1502" title="Nome Census Area, Alaska" label="Nome Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="1513" end="1546" title="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="1556" end="1582" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q168074" start="1624" end="1660" title="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge" label="Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q168074" start="1671" end="1692" title="Andreafsky Wilderness" label="Andreafsky Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1728" end="1734" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1839" end="1857" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1984" end="1999" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2007" end="2012" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2020" end="2025" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2029" end="2045" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2053" end="2058" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2066" end="2082" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2095" end="2106" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2171" end="2179" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2183" end="2189" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2246" end="2253" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21117" start="2282" end="2309" title="Central Alaskan Yup&amp;#x27;ik language" label="Central Alaskan Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2574" end="2589" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3385" end="3402" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643199" start="3423" end="3458" title="poorest places in the United States" label="poorest places in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79334" start="3511" end="3519" title="Alakanuk, Alaska" label="Alakanuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79343" start="3521" end="3527" title="Chevak, Alaska" label="Chevak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79553" start="3529" end="3536" title="Emmonak, Alaska" label="Emmonak"/>
<link wikidata="Q80144" start="3538" end="3548" title="Hooper Bay, Alaska" label="Hooper Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79561" start="3550" end="3556" title="Kotlik, Alaska" label="Kotlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79550" start="3558" end="3566" title="Marshall, Alaska" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q79558" start="3568" end="3584" title="Mountain Village, Alaska" label="Mountain Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q79545" start="3586" end="3596" title="Nunam Iqua, Alaska" label="Nunam Iqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q79921" start="3623" end="3636" title="Pilot Station, Alaska" label="Pilot Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q79337" start="3638" end="3653" title="Russian Mission, Alaska" label="Russian Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q80094" start="3655" end="3666" title="Scammon Bay, Alaska" label="Scammon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80087" start="3668" end="3683" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s, Alaska" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071503" start="3715" end="3727" title="Pitkas Point, Alaska" label="Pitkas Point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3763" end="3787" title="Bill Moore&amp;#x27;s Slough, Alaska" label="Bill Moore&amp;#x27;s Slough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3789" end="3801" title="Chuloonawick, Alaska" label="Chuloonawick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3803" end="3811" title="Hamilton, Alaska" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3813" end="3822" title="Ohogamiut, Alaska" label="Ohogamiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863142" start="3962" end="3994" title="List of mountain peaks of Alaska" label="List of mountain peaks of Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87496" wikidata="Q146760" url="?curid=87496" title="Avena">
<text>Avena is a genus of Eurasian and African plants in the grass family. Collectively known as the oats, they include some species which have been cultivated for thousands of years as a food source for humans and livestock. They are widespread throughout Europe, Asia and northwest Africa. Several species have become naturalized in many parts of the world, and are regarded as invasive weeds where they compete with crop production. All oats have edible seeds, though they are small and hard to harvest in most species.

== Ecology ==
&quot;Avena&quot; species, including cultivated oats, are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species, including rustic shoulder-knot and setaceous Hebrew character.

For diseases of oats, see List of oat diseases.

== Species ==
===Cultivated oats===
One species is of major commercial importance as a cereal grain. Four other species are grown as crops of minor or regional importance.

* &quot;Avena sativa&quot; – the common oat, a cereal crop of global importance and the species commonly referred to as &quot;oats&quot;
* &quot;Avena abyssinica&quot; – the Ethiopian oat, native to Ethiopia, Eritrea, + Djibouti; naturalized in Yemen + Saudi Arabia
* &quot;Avena byzantina&quot;, a minor crop in Greece and Middle East; introduced in Spain, Algeria, India, New Zealand, South America, etc.
* &quot;Avena nuda&quot; – the naked oat or hulless oat, which plays much the same role in Europe as does &quot;A. abyssinica&quot; in Ethiopia. It is sometimes included in &quot;A. sativa&quot; and was widely grown in Europe before the latter replaced it. As its nutrient content is somewhat better than that of the common oat, &quot;A. nuda&quot; has increased in significance in recent years, especially in organic farming.
* &quot;Avena strigosa&quot; – the lopsided oat, bristle oat, or black oat, grown for fodder in parts of Western Europe and Brazil

===Wild oats===
Several species of &quot;Avena&quot; occur in the wild, sometimes as weeds in agricultural fields. They are known as wild oats or oat-grasses. Those growing alongside cultivated oats in agricultural fields are considered nuisance weeds, as, being grasses like the crop, they are difficult to remove chemically; any standard herbicide that would kill them would also damage the crop. A specific herbicide must be used. The costs of this herbicide and the length of time it must be used to reduce the weed are significant, with seeds able to lie dormant for up to 10 years.
* &quot;Avena aemulans&quot; – European Russia
* &quot;Avena barbata&quot; – slender wild oat – from Portugal + Morocco to Tajikistan
* &quot;Avena brevis&quot; – short oat – central + southern Europe
* &quot;Avena chinensis&quot; – Germany, Austria; introduced in China, Belarus
* &quot;Avena clauda&quot; – Balkans, Middle East, Central Asia
* &quot;Avena eriantha&quot; – North Africa, Middle East, Central Asia, Caucasus
* &quot;Avena fatua&quot; – common wild oat – Europe, Asia, North Africa; naturalized in Australia, the Americas, various islands
* &quot;Avena longiglumis&quot; – North Africa, Israel, Spain, Portugal, Sardinia
* &quot;Avena maroccana&quot; – Moroccan oat – Morocco
* &quot;Avena murphyi&quot; – Morocco, Spain
* &quot;Avena prostrata&quot; – Morocco, Spain
* &quot;Avena saxatilis&quot; – Sicily and small nearby islands
* &quot;Avena sterilis&quot; – winter wild oat – Mediterranean, East Africa; temperate Asia; introduced in northern Europe, Australia, New Zealand, the Americas 
* &quot;Avena strigosa&quot; – Spain, France, Portugal; introduced in other parts of Europe as well as in scattered locations in Australia, New Zealand, the Americas
* &quot;Avena vaviloviana&quot; – Eritrea, Ethiopia
* &quot;Avena ventricosa&quot; – North Africa, Middle East
* &quot;Avena volgensis&quot; – European Russia

===Species formerly included===
Hundreds of taxa have been included in &quot;Avena&quot; at one time in the past but are now considered better suited to other genera: &quot;Agrostis&quot;, &quot;Aira&quot;, &quot;Ampelodesmos&quot;, &quot;Anisopogon&quot;, &quot;Arrhenatherum&quot;, &quot;Avenula&quot;, &quot;Bromus&quot;, &quot;Calamagrostis&quot;, &quot;Capeochloa&quot;, &quot;Centropodia&quot;, &quot;Corynephorus&quot;, &quot;Danthonia&quot;, &quot;Danthoniastrum&quot;, &quot;Deschampsia&quot;, &quot;Festuca&quot;, &quot;Gaudinia&quot;, &quot;Helictochloa&quot;, &quot;Helictotrichon&quot;, &quot;Hierochloe&quot;, &quot;Lachnagrostis&quot;, &quot;Lolium&quot;, &quot;Parapholis&quot;, &quot;Pentameris&quot;, &quot;Periballia&quot;, &quot;Peyritschia&quot;, &quot;Rytidosperma&quot;, &quot;Schizachne&quot;, &quot;Sphenopholis&quot;, &quot;Stipa&quot;, &quot;Stipagrostis&quot;, &quot;Tenaxia&quot;, &quot;Tricholemma&quot;, &quot;Triraphis&quot;, &quot;Trisetaria&quot;, &quot;Trisetum&quot;, &quot;Tristachya&quot; and &quot;Ventenata&quot;.

==Sociolinguistics==
&quot;Sowing wild oats&quot; is a phrase used since at least the 16th century; it appears in a 1542 tract by Thomas Beccon, a Protestant clergyman from Norfolk. Apparently, a similar expression was used in Roman Republican times, possibly by Plautus. The origin of the expression is the fact that wild oats, notably &quot;A. fatua&quot;, are a major weed in oat farming. Among European cereal grains, oats are hardest to tell apart from their weedy relatives, which look almost alike but yield little grain. The life cycle of &quot;A. fatua&quot; is nearly synchronous with that of common oat, and their relationship is an example of Vavilovian mimicry. Historically, growers could control the weed only by checking the crop plants one by one and hand-weeding. Consequently, &quot;sowing wild oats&quot; became a phrase to describe unprofitable activities. Given the reputation of oat grain to have invigorating properties and the obvious connection between plant seeds and human &quot;seed&quot;, it is not surprising that the meaning of the phrase became a reference to the liaisons of an unmarried young male, which result in unwanted children born out of wedlock.

==See also==
* List of Poaceae genera

==References==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="11" end="16" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="55" end="67" title="Poaceae" label="grass family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="95" end="99" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="451" end="455" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="617" end="622" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="632" end="643" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989340" start="663" end="683" title="rustic shoulder-knot" label="rustic shoulder-knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094340" start="688" end="714" title="setaceous Hebrew character" label="setaceous Hebrew character"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631538" start="743" end="763" title="List of oat diseases" label="List of oat diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="853" end="859" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="947" end="959" title="Avena sativa" label="Avena sativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838002" start="1084" end="1100" title="Avena abyssinica" label="Avena abyssinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507675" start="1213" end="1228" title="Avena byzantina" label="Avena byzantina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="1263" end="1274" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q159777" start="1354" end="1364" title="Avena nuda" label="Avena nuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="1610" end="1618" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="1756" end="1771" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q164857" start="1781" end="1795" title="Avena strigosa" label="Avena strigosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="1859" end="1865" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1897" end="1903" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="2151" end="2155" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="2245" end="2254" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2501" end="2515" title="Avena aemulans" label="Avena aemulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828032" start="2548" end="2561" title="Avena barbata" label="Avena barbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828034" start="2635" end="2647" title="Avena brevis" label="Avena brevis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2702" end="2717" title="Avena chinensis" label="Avena chinensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2781" end="2793" title="Avena clauda" label="Avena clauda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2845" end="2859" title="Avena eriantha" label="Avena eriantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q158634" start="2926" end="2937" title="Avena fatua" label="Avena fatua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3056" end="3073" title="Avena longiglumis" label="Avena longiglumis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3138" end="3153" title="Avena maroccana" label="Avena maroccana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3193" end="3206" title="Avena murphyi" label="Avena murphyi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3238" end="3253" title="Avena prostrata" label="Avena prostrata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3285" end="3300" title="Avena saxatilis" label="Avena saxatilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668559" start="3349" end="3363" title="Avena sterilis" label="Avena sterilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q164857" start="3511" end="3525" title="Avena strigosa" label="Avena strigosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3677" end="3694" title="Avena vaviloviana" label="Avena vaviloviana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3729" end="3745" title="Avena ventricosa" label="Avena ventricosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3788" end="3803" title="Avena volgensis" label="Avena volgensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161137" start="4002" end="4010" title="Agrostis" label="Agrostis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158022" start="4024" end="4028" title="Aira" label="Aira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092575" start="4042" end="4054" title="Ampelodesmos" label="Ampelodesmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441005" start="4068" end="4078" title="Anisopogon" label="Anisopogon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157689" start="4092" end="4105" title="Arrhenatherum" label="Arrhenatherum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15268601" start="4119" end="4126" title="Avenula" label="Avenula"/>
<link wikidata="Q147621" start="4140" end="4146" title="Bromus" label="Bromus"/>
<link wikidata="Q161134" start="4160" end="4173" title="Calamagrostis" label="Calamagrostis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19820223" start="4187" end="4197" title="Capeochloa" label="Capeochloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676184" start="4211" end="4222" title="Centropodia" label="Centropodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697235" start="4236" end="4248" title="Corynephorus" label="Corynephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631087" start="4262" end="4271" title="Danthonia" label="Danthonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733478" start="4285" end="4299" title="Danthoniastrum" label="Danthoniastrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157536" start="4313" end="4324" title="Deschampsia" label="Deschampsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="4338" end="4345" title="Festuca" label="Festuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q163217" start="4359" end="4367" title="Gaudinia" label="Gaudinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574321" start="4381" end="4393" title="Helictochloa" label="Helictochloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162863" start="4407" end="4421" title="Helictotrichon" label="Helictotrichon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158906" start="4435" end="4445" title="Hierochloe" label="Hierochloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468484" start="4459" end="4472" title="Lachnagrostis" label="Lachnagrostis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158509" start="4486" end="4492" title="Lolium" label="Lolium"/>
<link wikidata="Q159458" start="4506" end="4516" title="Parapholis" label="Parapholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283834" start="4530" end="4540" title="Pentameris" label="Pentameris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994804" start="4554" end="4564" title="Periballia" label="Periballia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859541" start="4578" end="4589" title="Peyritschia" label="Peyritschia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142972" start="4603" end="4615" title="Rytidosperma" label="Rytidosperma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521180" start="4629" end="4639" title="Schizachne" label="Schizachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457174" start="4653" end="4665" title="Sphenopholis" label="Sphenopholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161274" start="4679" end="4684" title="Stipa" label="Stipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375857" start="4698" end="4710" title="Stipagrostis" label="Stipagrostis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19820420" start="4724" end="4731" title="Tenaxia" label="Tenaxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720557" start="4745" end="4756" title="Tricholemma" label="Tricholemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377398" start="4770" end="4779" title="Triraphis" label="Triraphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769421" start="4793" end="4803" title="Trisetaria" label="Trisetaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q162943" start="4817" end="4825" title="Trisetum" label="Trisetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534411" start="4839" end="4849" title="Tristachya" label="Tristachya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879377" start="4866" end="4875" title="Ventenata" label="Ventenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250561" start="5005" end="5010" title="tract (literature)" label="tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787508" start="5014" end="5027" title="Thomas Beccon" label="Thomas Beccon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5031" end="5041" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="5057" end="5064" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5111" end="5125" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="5147" end="5154" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917503" start="5539" end="5557" title="Vavilovian mimicry" label="Vavilovian mimicry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5804" end="5827" title="Oat#Health" label="invigorating properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="5891" end="5895" title="semen" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="6057" end="6071" title="out of wedlock" label="out of wedlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939268" start="6089" end="6111" title="List of Poaceae genera" label="List of Poaceae genera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87497" wikidata="Q311331" url="?curid=87497" title="Bambusa">
<text>Bambusa is a large genus of clumping bamboos. Most species of &quot;Bambusa&quot; are rather large, with numerous branches emerging from the nodes, and one or two much larger than the rest. The branches can be as long as 11 m (35 ft).

They are native to Southeast Asia, South Asia, China, Taiwan, the Himalayas, New Guinea, Melanesia, and the Northern Territory of Australia. They are also reportedly naturalized in other regions, e.g. Africa, Americas, and various oceanic islands.

==Species==
&quot;Plants of the World Online&quot; includes:
#&quot;Bambusa affinis&quot; Munro – Laos, Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa albolineata&quot; L.C.Chia – Fujian, Guangdong, Jiangxi, Zhejiang
#&quot;Bambusa alemtemshii&quot; H.B.Naithani – Nagaland
#&quot;Bambusa amplexicaulis&quot; W.T.Lin &amp; Z.M.Wu – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa angustiaurita&quot; W.T.Lin – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa angustissima&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa arnhemica&quot; F.Muell. – Northern Territory of Australia
#&quot;Bambusa assamica&quot; Barooah &amp; Borthakur – Assam
#&quot;Bambusa aurinuda&quot; McClure – Guangxi, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa australis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa balcooa&quot; Roxb. – India, Nepal, Assam, Bangladesh, Indo-China; naturalized in South Africa and the islands of the Gulf of Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa bambos&quot; (L.) Voss – India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Assam, Indochina; naturalized in Seychelles, Central America, West Indies, Java, Malaysia, Maluku, Philippines
#&quot;Bambusa barpatharica&quot; Borthakur &amp; Barooah – Arunachal Pradesh, Assam
#&quot;Bambusa basihirsuta&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Zhejiang
#&quot;Bambusa basihirsutoides&quot; N.H.Xia – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa basisolida&quot; W.T.Lin – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa beecheyana&quot; Munro – Taiwan, Myanmar, Vietnam, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan; naturalized in Colombia, Brazil
#&quot;Bambusa bicicatricata&quot; (W.T.Lin) L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa binghamii&quot; Gamble – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa boniopsis&quot; McClure – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa brevispicula&quot; Holttum – New Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa brunneoaciculia&quot; G.A.Fu – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa burmanica&quot; Gamble – Bangladesh, Yunnan, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Peninsular Malaysia
#&quot;Bambusa cacharensis&quot; R.B.Majumdar – Bangladesh, Assam
#&quot;Bambusa cerosissima&quot; McClure – Guangdong. Guangxi, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa chungii&quot; McClure – Vietnam, Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hunan, Yunnan
#&quot;Bambusa chunii&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Laos; cultivated in Hong Kong
#&quot;Bambusa clavata&quot; Stapleton – Bhutan
#&quot;Bambusa comillensis&quot; Alam – india
#&quot;Bambusa concava&quot; W.T.Lin – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa contracta&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong, Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa copelandii&quot; Gamble – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa corniculata&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa cornigera&quot; McClure – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa crispiaurita&quot; W.T.Lin &amp; Z.M.Wu – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa dahuazhu&quot; T.P.Yi &amp; B.X.Li
#&quot;Bambusa dampaeana&quot; H.B.Naithani, Garbyal &amp; N.S.Bisht – Mizoram
#&quot;Bambusa daporijoeana&quot; H.B.Naithani &amp; Kandwal
#&quot;Bambusa deformis&quot; T.P.Yi &amp; Lin Yang
#&quot;Bambusa diaoluoshanensis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa dissimulator&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Vietnam; naturalized in Brazil, Puerto Rico
#&quot;Bambusa distegia&quot; (Keng &amp; Keng f.) L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa dolichoclada&quot; Hayata – Fujian, Taiwan; naturalized in Ryukyu Islands
#&quot;Bambusa duriuscula&quot; W.T.Lin – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa emeiensis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guizhou, Hunan, Sichuan, Yunnan
#&quot;Bambusa eutuldoides&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Guangxi; naturalized in Colombia
#&quot;Bambusa excurrensa&quot; G.A.Fu
#&quot;Bambusa farinacea&quot; K.M.Wong – Thailand, Peninsular Malaysia
#&quot;Bambusa fimbriligulata&quot; McClure – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa flexuosa&quot; Munro – Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Guangdong, Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa fruticosa&quot; Holttum – Papua New Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa funghomii&quot; McClure – Henan, Guangdong, Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa garuchokua&quot; Barooah &amp; Borthakur – Assam
#&quot;Bambusa gibba&quot; McClure – Vietnam, Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, Jiangxi; naturalized in Ecuador
#&quot;Bambusa gibboides&quot; W.T.Lin – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa glabrovagina&quot; G.A.Fu – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa glaucophylla&quot; Widjaja – Java
#&quot;Bambusa grandis&quot; (Q.H.Dai &amp; X.L.Tao) Ohrnb. – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa griffithiana&quot; Munro – Manipur, Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa guangxiensis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa gurgandii&quot; K.M.Wong &amp; Diep
#&quot;Bambusa hainanensis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa heterostachya&quot; (Munro) Holttum – Peninsular Malaysia
#&quot;Bambusa horsfieldii&quot; Munro – Java, Philippines
#&quot;Bambusa indigena&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa insularis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa intermedia&quot; Hsueh f. &amp; T.P.Yi – Guizhou, Sichuan, Yunnan
#&quot;Bambusa jacobsii&quot; Widjaja – Java
#&quot;Bambusa jaintiana&quot; R.B.Majumdar – Nepal, Bhutan, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa khasiana&quot; Munro – Assam
#&quot;Bambusa kingiana&quot; Gamble – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa kyathaungtu&quot; E.G.Camus
#&quot;Bambusa lako&quot; Widjaja – Timor
#&quot;Bambusa lapidea&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Guangxi, Sichuan, Yunnan
#&quot;Bambusa latideltata&quot; W.T.Lin – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa laxa&quot; K.M.Wong – Peninsular Malaysia
#&quot;Bambusa lenta&quot; L.C.Chia – Fujian
#&quot;Bambusa lituiformis&quot; W.Arthan, Teerawat. &amp; Sungkaew
#&quot;Bambusa longipalea&quot; W.T.Lin – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa longispiculata&quot; Gamble – Bangladesh, Myanmar; naturalized in Vietnam, Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua, Colombia, Ecuador, Puerto Rico
#†&quot;Bambusa lugdunensis&quot; Saporta – Neogene deposits of Europe
#&quot;Bambusa macrolemma&quot; Holttum – New Britain
#&quot;Bambusa macrotis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa maculata&quot; Widjaja – Maluku
#&quot;Bambusa majumdarii&quot; P.Kumari &amp; P.Singh – Meghalaya
#&quot;Bambusa malingensis&quot; McClure – Hainan; naturalized in Cuba
#&quot;Bambusa manipureana&quot; H.B.Naithani &amp; N.S.Bisht – Manipur
#&quot;Bambusa marginata&quot; Munro – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa merrillii&quot; Gamble – Luzon
#&quot;Bambusa microcephala&quot; (Pilg.) Holttum – New Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa mizorameana&quot; H.B.Naithani – Mizoram
#&quot;Bambusa mohanramii&quot; P.Kumari &amp; P.Singh – Meghalaya
#&quot;Bambusa mollis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa multiplex&quot; (Lour.) Raeusch. ex Schult.f. – Nepal, Bhutan, Assam, Laos, Myanmar, Vietnam, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, Hunan, Jiangxi, Sichuan, Taiwan, Yunnan; naturalized in Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles, Iraq, Bismarck Archipelago, New Zealand, Chiapas, Central America, West Indies, Colombia, Ecuador, eastern Brazil, Florida, Georgia, Alabama 
#&quot;Bambusa mutabilis&quot; McClure – Hainan; naturalized in Puerto Rico
#&quot;Bambusa nagalandiana&quot; H.B.Naithani – Nagaland
#&quot;Bambusa nairiana&quot; P.Kumari &amp; P.Singh – Meghalaya
#&quot;Bambusa nepalensis&quot; Stapleton – Nepal
#&quot;Bambusa nghiana&quot; V.T.Tran - Vietnam, Thailand
#&quot;Bambusa nutans&quot; Wall. ex Munro – Himalayas of eastern + northern India; Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh, Laos, Thailand, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa odashimae&quot; Hatus. ex D.Z.Li &amp; Stapleton – Taiwan; naturalized in Ryukyu Islands
#&quot;Bambusa oldhamii&quot; Munro – Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan, Taiwan, Zhejiang; naturalized in Taiwan, Ryukyu Islands, New Zealand, Chiapas, Honduras, Puerto Rico, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru
#&quot;Bambusa oliveriana&quot; Gamble – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa ooh&quot; Widjaja &amp; Astuti – Bali
#&quot;Bambusa pachinensis&quot; Hayata – Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Jiangxi, Taiwan, Zhejiang
#&quot;Bambusa pallida&quot; Munro – Sikkim, Yunnan, Assam, Bangladesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Indochina
#&quot;Bambusa papillata&quot; (Q.H.Dai) K.M.Lan – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa papillatoides&quot; Q.H.Dai &amp; D.Y.Huang – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa pervariabilis&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Guangxi; naturalized in Puerto Rico
#&quot;Bambusa pierreana&quot; E.G.Camus – Thailand, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa piscatorum&quot; McClure – Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa polymorpha&quot; Munro – Bangladesh, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand; naturalized in Assam, Sri Lanka, Java, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Ecuador
#&quot;Bambusa procera&quot; A.Chev. &amp; A.Camus – Vietnam, Cambodia
#&quot;Bambusa prominens&quot; H.L.Fung &amp; C.Y.Sia – Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa purpurovagian&quot; G.A.Fu
#&quot;Bambusa ramispinosa&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa rangaensis&quot; Borthakur &amp; Barooah – Arunachal Pradesh, Assam
#&quot;Bambusa rectocuneata&quot; (W.T.Lin) N.H.Xia, R.S.Lin &amp; R.H.Wang – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa remotiflora&quot; (Kuntze) L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong, Guangxi, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa riauensis&quot; Widjaja – Sumatra
#&quot;Bambusa rigida&quot; Keng &amp; Keng f. – Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa riparia&quot; Holttum – Papua New Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa rongchengensis&quot; (T.P.Yi &amp; C.Y.Sia) D.Z.Li – Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa rugata&quot; (W.T.Lin) Ohrnb. – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa rutila&quot; McClure – Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa salarkhanii&quot; Alam – Nepal, Bangladesh
#&quot;Bambusa semitecta&quot; W.T.Lin &amp; Z.M.Wu – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa sesquiflora&quot; (McClure) L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Thailand, Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa sinospinosa&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan
#&quot;Bambusa solida&quot; Munro ex Becc. – Borneo
#&quot;Bambusa solomonensis&quot; Holttum – Solomon Islands
#&quot;Bambusa spinosa&quot; Roxb. – Indonesia, Philippines; naturalized in southern China, Ryukyu Islands, Indochina, Malaysia, Puerto Rico (synonym &quot;B. blumeana&quot; )
#&quot;Bambusa stenoaurita&quot; (W.T.Lin) T.H.Wen – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa subaequalis&quot; H.L.Fung &amp; C.Y.Sia – Sichuan
#&quot;Bambusa subtruncata&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa surrecta&quot; (Q.H.Dai) Q.H.Dai – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa tabacaria&quot; (Lour.) Steud. – Vietnam, Java, Maluku
#&quot;Bambusa teres&quot; Munro – Tibet, Guangdong, Guangxi, Nepal, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Assam, Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa textilis&quot; McClure – Anhui, Guangdong, Guangxi, Vietnam; naturalized in Colombia, Puerto Rico
#&quot;Bambusa transvenula&quot; (W.T.Lin &amp; Z.J.Feng) N.H.Xia – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa truncata&quot; B.M.Yang – Hunan
#&quot;Bambusa tsangii&quot; McClure – Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa tulda&quot; Roxb – Tibet, Yunnan, Himalayas, Nepal, Bhutan, Assam, India, Bangladesh, northern Indochina; naturalized in Iraq, Ecuador, Brazil, Colombia, Puerto Rico
#&quot;Bambusa tuldoides&quot; Munro – Guangdong, Guangxi, Indochina; naturalized in Ryukyu Islands, Bangladesh, Chiapas, El Salvador, Cuba, Puerto Rico, Hispaniola, Trinidad, Ecuador, Brazil, Colombia
#&quot;Bambusa utilis&quot; W.C.Lin – Taiwan
#&quot;Bambusa valida&quot; (Q.H.Dai) W.T.Lin – Guangxi
#&quot;Bambusa variostriata&quot; (W.T.Lin) L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa ventricosa&quot; McClure – Guangdong, Vietnam; naturalized in Brazil, Malaysia
#&quot;Bambusa villosula&quot; Kurz – Myanmar
#&quot;Bambusa vinhphuensis&quot; T.Q.Nguyen – Vietnam
#&quot;Bambusa viridis&quot; Widjaja – western New Guinea
#&quot;Bambusa vulgaris&quot; Schrad. – Yunnan, Indochina; naturalized in parts of Africa, Madagascar, Malaysia, Indonesia, New Guinea, Indian Subcontinent, Latin America, West Indies, United States (Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Florida, Arizona, South Carolina, Maryland, New Jersey)
#&quot;Bambusa wenchouensis&quot; (T.H.Wen) Keng f. ex Q.F.Zheng, Y.M.Lin – Fujian, Zhejiang
#&quot;Bambusa xiashanensis&quot; L.C.Chia &amp; H.L.Fung – Guangdong
#&quot;Bambusa xueana&quot; Ohrnb. – Yunnan
#&quot;Bambusa xueliniana&quot; R.S.Lin &amp; C.H.Zheng

Note: now placed in &quot;Pseudobambusa&quot;:
*&quot;B. schizostachyoides&quot; Kurz ex Gamble – Myanmar, Vietnam, Andaman Islands

==Fossil record==
Fossil leaves of †Bambusa ilinskiae are described from the Miocene deposits of the Carpathians. The fossil leaves of †Bambusa lugdunensis are known mainly from the Miocene of the Massif du Coiron in Ardèche, France, Miocene of Bełchatów in Poland, Middle Miocene of Austria, the Neogene of the Transcarpathians and the Pliocene of southern France. Findings of fossil &quot;Bambusa&quot; leaf impressions of Messinian age (ca. 5.7 Ma) from Monte Tondo in the Romagna Apennines in northern Italy, are similar to fossil †&quot;Bambusa lugdunensis&quot; leaves.

==See also==
*Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="37" end="43" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="255" end="269" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="271" end="281" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="283" end="288" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="290" end="296" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="302" end="311" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="313" end="323" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37394" start="325" end="334" title="Melanesia" label="Melanesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="344" end="362" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="366" end="375" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="437" end="443" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="445" end="453" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="503" end="529" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507830" start="553" end="568" title="Bambusa affinis" label="Bambusa affinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15234595" start="604" end="623" title="Bambusa albolineata" label="Bambusa albolineata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="685" end="704" title="Bambusa alemtemshii" label="Bambusa alemtemshii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508009" start="742" end="763" title="Bambusa amplexicaulis" label="Bambusa amplexicaulis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15252087" start="810" end="831" title="Bambusa angustiaurita" label="Bambusa angustiaurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240051" start="865" end="885" title="Bambusa angustissima" label="Bambusa angustissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q768898" start="935" end="952" title="Bambusa arnhemica" label="Bambusa arnhemica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="970" end="988" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="992" end="1001" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1009" end="1025" title="Bambusa assamica" label="Bambusa assamica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240052" start="1071" end="1087" title="Bambusa aurinuda" label="Bambusa aurinuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508274" start="1128" end="1145" title="Bambusa australis" label="Bambusa australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q648271" start="1193" end="1208" title="Bambusa balcooa" label="Bambusa balcooa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="1256" end="1266" title="Indo-China" label="Indo-China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15509516" start="1341" end="1355" title="Bambusa bambos" label="Bambusa bambos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1363" end="1365" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="L."/>
<link wikidata="Q17360273" start="1522" end="1542" title="Bambusa barpatharica" label="Bambusa barpatharica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508368" start="1607" end="1626" title="Bambusa basihirsuta" label="Bambusa basihirsuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q24700123" start="1670" end="1693" title="Bambusa basihirsutoides" label="Bambusa basihirsutoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508433" start="1727" end="1745" title="Bambusa basisolida" label="Bambusa basisolida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508512" start="1779" end="1797" title="Bambusa beecheyana" label="Bambusa beecheyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507753" start="1905" end="1926" title="Bambusa bicicatricata" label="Bambusa bicicatricata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507787" start="1983" end="2000" title="Bambusa binghamii" label="Bambusa binghamii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10943005" start="2031" end="2048" title="Bambusa boniopsis" label="Bambusa boniopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507926" start="2079" end="2099" title="Bambusa brevispicula" label="Bambusa brevispicula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15507989" start="2134" end="2157" title="Bambusa brunneoaciculia" label="Bambusa brunneoaciculia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684496" start="2187" end="2204" title="Bambusa burmanica" label="Bambusa burmanica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2292" end="2311" title="Bambusa cacharensis" label="Bambusa cacharensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10906328" start="2358" end="2377" title="Bambusa cerosissima" label="Bambusa cerosissima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853464" start="2429" end="2444" title="Bambusa chungii" label="Bambusa chungii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2519" end="2533" title="Bambusa chunii" label="Bambusa chunii"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508288" start="2603" end="2618" title="Bambusa clavata" label="Bambusa clavata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508364" start="2651" end="2670" title="Bambusa comillensis" label="Bambusa comillensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508468" start="2697" end="2712" title="Bambusa concava" label="Bambusa concava"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2743" end="2760" title="Bambusa contracta" label="Bambusa contracta"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508596" start="2819" end="2837" title="Bambusa copelandii" label="Bambusa copelandii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2868" end="2887" title="Bambusa corniculata" label="Bambusa corniculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2935" end="2952" title="Bambusa cornigera" label="Bambusa cornigera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2984" end="3004" title="Bambusa crispiaurita" label="Bambusa crispiaurita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3051" end="3067" title="Bambusa dahuazhu" label="Bambusa dahuazhu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3101" end="3118" title="Bambusa dampaeana" label="Bambusa dampaeana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3180" end="3200" title="Bambusa daporijoeana" label="Bambusa daporijoeana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3241" end="3257" title="Bambusa deformis" label="Bambusa deformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3293" end="3317" title="Bambusa diaoluoshanensis" label="Bambusa diaoluoshanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928918" start="3364" end="3384" title="Bambusa dissimulator" label="Bambusa dissimulator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3463" end="3479" title="Bambusa distegia" label="Bambusa distegia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3548" end="3568" title="Bambusa dolichoclada" label="Bambusa dolichoclada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3637" end="3655" title="Bambusa duriuscula" label="Bambusa duriuscula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3686" end="3703" title="Bambusa emeiensis" label="Bambusa emeiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3775" end="3794" title="Bambusa eutuldoides" label="Bambusa eutuldoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3862" end="3880" title="Bambusa excurrensa" label="Bambusa excurrensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508339" start="3901" end="3918" title="Bambusa farinacea" label="Bambusa farinacea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3973" end="3995" title="Bambusa fimbriligulata" label="Bambusa fimbriligulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223983" start="4027" end="4043" title="Bambusa flexuosa" label="Bambusa flexuosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4108" end="4125" title="Bambusa fruticosa" label="Bambusa fruticosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11174261" start="4166" end="4183" title="Bambusa funghomii" label="Bambusa funghomii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4233" end="4251" title="Bambusa garuchokua" label="Bambusa garuchokua"/>
<link wikidata="Q10928917" start="4297" end="4310" title="Bambusa gibba" label="Bambusa gibba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4411" end="4428" title="Bambusa gibboides" label="Bambusa gibboides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4462" end="4482" title="Bambusa glabrovagina" label="Bambusa glabrovagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508755" start="4512" end="4532" title="Bambusa glaucophylla" label="Bambusa glaucophylla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4561" end="4576" title="Bambusa grandis" label="Bambusa grandis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4631" end="4651" title="Bambusa griffithiana" label="Bambusa griffithiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4690" end="4710" title="Bambusa guangxiensis" label="Bambusa guangxiensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4758" end="4775" title="Bambusa gurgandii" label="Bambusa gurgandii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4809" end="4828" title="Bambusa hainanensis" label="Bambusa hainanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4875" end="4896" title="Bambusa heterostachya" label="Bambusa heterostachya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4948" end="4967" title="Bambusa horsfieldii" label="Bambusa horsfieldii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5007" end="5023" title="Bambusa indigena" label="Bambusa indigena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5073" end="5090" title="Bambusa insularis" label="Bambusa insularis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5137" end="5155" title="Bambusa intermedia" label="Bambusa intermedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5218" end="5234" title="Bambusa jacobsii" label="Bambusa jacobsii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5263" end="5280" title="Bambusa jaintiana" label="Bambusa jaintiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5358" end="5374" title="Bambusa khasiana" label="Bambusa khasiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5402" end="5418" title="Bambusa kingiana" label="Bambusa kingiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5449" end="5468" title="Bambusa kyathaungtu" label="Bambusa kyathaungtu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853465" start="5492" end="5504" title="Bambusa lako" label="Bambusa lako"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5534" end="5549" title="Bambusa lapidea" label="Bambusa lapidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15508583" start="5609" end="5628" title="Bambusa latideltata" label="Bambusa latideltata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5662" end="5674" title="Bambusa laxa" label="Bambusa laxa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5719" end="5732" title="Bambusa lenta" label="Bambusa lenta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5764" end="5783" title="Bambusa lituiformis" label="Bambusa lituiformis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5832" end="5850" title="Bambusa longipalea" label="Bambusa longipalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q671114" start="5884" end="5906" title="Bambusa longispiculata" label="Bambusa longispiculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6039" end="6058" title="Bambusa lugdunensis" label="Bambusa lugdunensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="6075" end="6082" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6095" end="6101" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6109" end="6127" title="Bambusa macrolemma" label="Bambusa macrolemma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6163" end="6179" title="Bambusa macrotis" label="Bambusa macrotis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6229" end="6245" title="Bambusa maculata" label="Bambusa maculata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6276" end="6294" title="Bambusa majumdarii" label="Bambusa majumdarii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6343" end="6362" title="Bambusa malingensis" label="Bambusa malingensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6414" end="6433" title="Bambusa manipureana" label="Bambusa manipureana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6486" end="6503" title="Bambusa marginata" label="Bambusa marginata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6533" end="6550" title="Bambusa merrillii" label="Bambusa merrillii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6579" end="6599" title="Bambusa microcephala" label="Bambusa microcephala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6642" end="6661" title="Bambusa mizorameana" label="Bambusa mizorameana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6698" end="6716" title="Bambusa mohanramii" label="Bambusa mohanramii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6765" end="6779" title="Bambusa mollis" label="Bambusa mollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339098" start="6827" end="6844" title="Bambusa multiplex" label="Bambusa multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7197" end="7214" title="Bambusa mutabilis" label="Bambusa mutabilis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7273" end="7293" title="Bambusa nagalandiana" label="Bambusa nagalandiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7331" end="7347" title="Bambusa nairiana" label="Bambusa nairiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7396" end="7414" title="Bambusa nepalensis" label="Bambusa nepalensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7446" end="7461" title="Bambusa nghiana" label="Bambusa nghiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7504" end="7518" title="Bambusa nutans" label="Bambusa nutans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7639" end="7656" title="Bambusa odashimae" label="Bambusa odashimae"/>
<link wikidata="Q309923" start="7743" end="7759" title="Bambusa oldhamii" label="Bambusa oldhamii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7943" end="7961" title="Bambusa oliveriana" label="Bambusa oliveriana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7992" end="8003" title="Bambusa ooh" label="Bambusa ooh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8045" end="8064" title="Bambusa pachinensis" label="Bambusa pachinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937908" start="8141" end="8156" title="Bambusa pallida" label="Bambusa pallida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8242" end="8259" title="Bambusa papillata" label="Bambusa papillata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8301" end="8322" title="Bambusa papillatoides" label="Bambusa papillatoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8370" end="8391" title="Bambusa pervariabilis" label="Bambusa pervariabilis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8462" end="8479" title="Bambusa pierreana" label="Bambusa pierreana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8523" end="8541" title="Bambusa piscatorum" label="Bambusa piscatorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15235084" start="8572" end="8590" title="Bambusa polymorpha" label="Bambusa polymorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15511656" start="8715" end="8730" title="Bambusa procera" label="Bambusa procera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8786" end="8803" title="Bambusa prominens" label="Bambusa prominens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8850" end="8871" title="Bambusa purpurovagian" label="Bambusa purpurovagian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8892" end="8911" title="Bambusa ramispinosa" label="Bambusa ramispinosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8959" end="8977" title="Bambusa rangaensis" label="Bambusa rangaensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9042" end="9062" title="Bambusa rectocuneata" label="Bambusa rectocuneata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9130" end="9149" title="Bambusa remotiflora" label="Bambusa remotiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9226" end="9243" title="Bambusa riauensis" label="Bambusa riauensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9275" end="9289" title="Bambusa rigida" label="Bambusa rigida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9332" end="9347" title="Bambusa riparia" label="Bambusa riparia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9388" end="9410" title="Bambusa rongchengensis" label="Bambusa rongchengensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9464" end="9478" title="Bambusa rugata" label="Bambusa rugata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9521" end="9535" title="Bambusa rutila" label="Bambusa rutila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9595" end="9614" title="Bambusa salarkhanii" label="Bambusa salarkhanii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9653" end="9670" title="Bambusa semitecta" label="Bambusa semitecta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9717" end="9736" title="Bambusa sesquiflora" label="Bambusa sesquiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9804" end="9823" title="Bambusa sinospinosa" label="Bambusa sinospinosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9874" end="9888" title="Bambusa solida" label="Bambusa solida"/>
<link wikidata="Q361037" start="9904" end="9909" title="Odoardo Beccari" label="Becc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9926" end="9946" title="Bambusa solomonensis" label="Bambusa solomonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853466" start="9986" end="10001" title="Bambusa spinosa" label="Bambusa spinosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10162" end="10181" title="Bambusa stenoaurita" label="Bambusa stenoaurita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10225" end="10244" title="Bambusa subaequalis" label="Bambusa subaequalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10291" end="10310" title="Bambusa subtruncata" label="Bambusa subtruncata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10360" end="10376" title="Bambusa surrecta" label="Bambusa surrecta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10418" end="10435" title="Bambusa tabacaria" label="Bambusa tabacaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10488" end="10501" title="Bambusa teres" label="Bambusa teres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666255" start="10592" end="10608" title="Bambusa textilis" label="Bambusa textilis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10705" end="10724" title="Bambusa transvenula" label="Bambusa transvenula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10783" end="10799" title="Bambusa truncata" label="Bambusa truncata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10830" end="10845" title="Bambusa tsangii" label="Bambusa tsangii"/>
<link wikidata="Q657289" start="10877" end="10890" title="Bambusa tulda" label="Bambusa tulda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11058" end="11075" title="Bambusa tuldoides" label="Bambusa tuldoides"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11260" end="11274" title="Bambusa utilis" label="Bambusa utilis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11305" end="11319" title="Bambusa valida" label="Bambusa valida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11361" end="11381" title="Bambusa variostriata" label="Bambusa variostriata"/>
<link wikidata="Q135731" start="11441" end="11459" title="Bambusa ventricosa" label="Bambusa ventricosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11535" end="11552" title="Bambusa villosula" label="Bambusa villosula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11581" end="11601" title="Bambusa vinhphuensis" label="Bambusa vinhphuensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11636" end="11651" title="Bambusa viridis" label="Bambusa viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219428" start="11694" end="11710" title="Bambusa vulgaris" label="Bambusa vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11971" end="11991" title="Bambusa wenchouensis" label="Bambusa wenchouensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12064" end="12084" title="Bambusa xiashanensis" label="Bambusa xiashanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12134" end="12148" title="Bambusa xueana" label="Bambusa xueana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12178" end="12196" title="Bambusa xueliniana" label="Bambusa xueliniana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17361113" start="12254" end="12267" title="Pseudobambusa" label="Pseudobambusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="12379" end="12385" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="12438" end="12445" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="12462" end="12473" title="Carpathians" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="12543" end="12550" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148" start="12578" end="12585" title="Ardèche" label="Ardèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12587" end="12593" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157992" start="12606" end="12615" title="Bełchatów" label="Bełchatów"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="12619" end="12625" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841498" start="12627" end="12641" title="Middle Miocene" label="Middle Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="12645" end="12652" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="12658" end="12665" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="12678" end="12689" title="carpathians" label="carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="12698" end="12706" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="12710" end="12725" title="southern France" label="southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="12739" end="12745" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q508465" start="12786" end="12795" title="Messinian" label="Messinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="12837" end="12844" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="12845" end="12854" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="12867" end="12872" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60771146" start="12952" end="12998" title="Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia" label="Domesticated plants and animals of Austronesia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87498" wikidata="Q25408755" url="?curid=87498" title="Petersburg Borough, Alaska">
<text>Petersburg Borough is a borough in the U.S. state of Alaska. According to the 2020 census, the population was 3,398. The borough seat is Petersburg.

==History==
When the borough was incorporated in 2013, it took area from the Hoonah-Angoon Census Area and the former Petersburg Census Area. The remaining portion of Petersburg Census Area (including Kake) was added to Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area. Petersburg Census Area was created in 2008 from the remaining portion of Wrangell-Petersburg Census Area upon the incorporation of the City and Borough of Wrangell.

==Geography==
Located in central Southeast Alaska, the Petersburg Borough encompasses approximately 3,829 square miles (2,921 square miles of land, 908 square miles of water).

===Adjacent boroughs and census area===
* Juneau Borough, Alaska - northwest (quadripoint)
* Wrangell Borough, Alaska - southeast
* Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area, Alaska - southwest
* Hoonah–Angoon Census Area - north and west
* Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine, British Columbia, Canada - east

==Politics==
Petersburg is strongly Republican, having last been carried by a Democrat in 1968. 







==Demographics==
As of the 2020 census, there were 3,398 people living in the borough. The population density was . There were 1,718 housing units. The racial makeup of the borough was 2,870 White, 92 Black or African American, 483 Native American, 209 Asian, 58 Pacific Islander, and 206 from other races. 164 of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

==Communities==
===City===
* Kupreanof

===Census-designated places===
* Hobart Bay
* Petersburg (borough seat)

==See also==

* List of boroughs in Alaska

==References==
==External links==
* Petersburg Chamber of Commerce 
* Petersburg Public Access Atlas (Alaska DNR)
* Map of the former census area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25408755" start="0" end="18" title="Petersburg Borough, Alaska" label="Petersburg Borough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24" end="31" title="Borough (United States)#Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="39" end="49" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="53" end="59" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="78" end="89" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="121" end="133" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q80027" start="137" end="147" title="Petersburg, Alaska" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="227" end="252" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79533" start="351" end="355" title="Kake, Alaska" label="Kake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="370" end="403" title="Prince of Wales–Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="560" end="568" title="Wrangell, Alaska" label="Wrangell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="790" end="812" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q15664" start="826" end="837" title="quadripoint" label="quadripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q43983" start="841" end="865" title="Wrangell, Alaska" label="Wrangell Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q18120072" start="880" end="921" title="Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area, Alaska" label="Prince of Wales-Hyder Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="936" end="961" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138250" start="981" end="1017" title="Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine" label="Regional District of Kitimat-Stikine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="1019" end="1035" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80084" start="1552" end="1561" title="Kupreanof, Alaska" label="Kupreanof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621551" start="1596" end="1606" title="Hobart Bay, Alaska" label="Hobart Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80027" start="1609" end="1619" title="Petersburg, Alaska" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="1652" end="1678" title="List of boroughs in Alaska" label="List of boroughs in Alaska"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87499" wikidata="Q487681" url="?curid=87499" title="Yakutat, Alaska">
<text>The City and Borough of Yakutat (, ; Tlingit: &quot;Yaakwdáat&quot;; ) is a borough in the state of Alaska. Yakutat was also the name of a former city within the borough. The name in Tlingit is &quot;Yaakwdáat&quot; (meaning &quot;the place where canoes rest&quot;). It is derived from an Eyak name, &quot;diyaʼqudaʼt&quot;, and was influenced by the Tlingit word &quot;yaakw&quot; (&quot;canoe, boat&quot;).

The borough covers an area about six times the size of the state of Rhode Island, making it one of the nation&#x27;s largest counties or county equivalents. As of the 2020 census the population was 657. As of 2010, it was Alaska&#x27;s least populous borough or census area, and the ninth-least populous county nationwide. The population declined from 680 in 2000.

The Borough of Yakutat was incorporated as a non-unified Home Rule Borough on September 22, 1992. Yakutat was previously a city in the Skagway–Yakutat–Angoon Census Area (later renamed the Skagway–Hoonah–Angoon Census Area).

The United States Census Bureau has defined the former City of Yakutat as a census-designated place within the borough. The borough&#x27;s only other significant population center is the community of Icy Bay, the site of the Icy Bay Airport which is in the west-central part of the borough.

==History==
The original settlers in the Yakutat area are believed to have been Eyak-speaking people from the Copper River area. Tlingit people migrated into the region and the Eyak were assimilated into the tribe before the arrival of Europeans in Alaska. Yakutat was only one of a number of Tlingit and mixed Tlingit-Eyak settlements in the region. The others have been depopulated or abandoned.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, English, French, Spanish, and Russian explorers came to the region. The Shelikhov-Golikov Company, a precursor of the Russian-American Company, built a fort in Yakutat in 1795 to facilitate trade with the Alaska Natives in sea-otter pelts. The settlement became known as New Russia, Yakutat Colony, or &quot;Slavorossiya&quot;. After the Russians cut off access to the fisheries nearby, a Tlingit war party attacked and destroyed the fort in 1805.

By 1886, after the 1867 Alaska Purchase by the United States from the Russian Empire, the area&#x27;s black sand beaches were being mined for gold. In 1889 the Swedish Free Mission Church opened a school and sawmill in the area.

About 1903 the Stimson Lumber Company constructed a cannery, another sawmill, a store, and a railroad. Many people moved to the current site of Yakutat to be closer to work at the Stimson cannery, which operated through 1970. During World War II, the USAAF stationed a large aviation garrison near Yakutat and built a paved runway. The troops were withdrawn after the war. The runway is still in use as Yakutat Airport, which offers scheduled airline service.

Fishing is the largest economic activity in Yakutat.

In 2004 the Yakutat Tlingit Tribe (YTT) received a Language Preservation Grant from the Administration for Native Americans. With this, they have reinvigorated their efforts to teach the Tlingit language to middle-aged and young people. YTT received another ANA grant in 2007 and is expanding its role in the schools. All the YTT Tlingit language revitalization work focuses on using communicative approaches to second-language teaching, such as TPR and American Sign Language (ASLA).

While working at a local cannery from 1912 to 1941, Seiki Kayamori extensively photographed Yakutat and its area; Yakutat City Hall holds a large set of prints of his work.

Yakutat and Southern Railway was a rail operation in the area. It served several canneries south of Yakutat and primarily hauled fish to the harbor. Service ended in the mid-1960s.

==Politics==






Historically a swing borough, Yakutat has consistently voted Democratic since 2004.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has an area of , of which is land and is water. The 2010 census also defines a smaller census-designated place named Yakutat, which has an area of , of which is land and is water.

Yakutat&#x27;s population center is located at , at the mouth of Yakutat Bay. It lies in an isolated location in lowlands along the Gulf of Alaska, ) northwest of Juneau.

Yakutat borders the Gulf of Alaska to the west, Valdez-Cordova Census Area, Alaska to the northwest, Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska to the southeast, Stikine Region, British Columbia to the northeast-east, and Yukon Territory to the north.

The borough contains part of the protected areas of Chugach National Forest, Glacier Bay National Park, Glacier Bay Wilderness, Tongass National Forest, Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve, Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness, and the Russell Fjord Wilderness.

A unique feature in the borough is Hubbard Glacier, North America&#x27;s largest tidewater glacier. In 1986 and 2002, the glacier blocked the entrance to Russell Fjord. The resulting Russell Lake rose and until the glacial dam failed. If Russell Lake rises to , the water will spill over a pass and flow into the Situk River. That would have a major impact on a world-class fishery. Yakutat would not be affected unless the glacier advances to the townsite, which could take a thousand years. The area&#x27;s vegetation indicates that water was flowing over the pass until about 1860.

===Climate===
Yakutat has a subarctic climate (&quot;Dfc&quot;) or a subpolar oceanic climate (&quot;Cfc&quot;) with characteristics such as high precipitation, absence of permafrost, and temperate rainforest vegetation of the climate zone of the Pacific Coast. It rivals Ketchikan as the wettest &quot;city&quot; in the United States, with an annual precipitation (1991−2020 normals) of , which falls on 240 days of the year, including of snow. Almost all of it falls from November through April and it occurs on 64 days annually. (However, with an annual precipitation of , the city of Whittier receives significantly more annual precipitation than both Yakutat and Ketchikan, which makes it the wettest city in Alaska and the United States, and Yakutat and Ketchikan the second- and third-wettest cities in Alaska, respectively.) September and October represent, on average, the year&#x27;s primary &quot;rainy season&quot; with an average of over of precipitation for both months. On average, the year&#x27;s driest period is late April through July, though no month qualifies as a true &quot;dry season.&quot; The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in July. Extreme temperatures have ranged from on December 30, 1964, up to on August 15, 2004, though on average, there are typically 3.9 days of minima reaching to or below and only 5.8 days of maxima at or above + highs annually. Unlike in South Central Alaska, a day with a high temperature under has never been recorded.
;Notes:
==Demographics==
Yakutat first appeared on the 1880 U.S. Census as an unincorporated Tlingit-Yakutat village. All 300 residents were listed as Tlingit. In 1890, it reported 308 residents including the populations of the native villages at Dry Bay &amp; Lituya (Bay); 300 were listed as Native, 7 Whites and 1 Creole (Mixed Russian &amp; Native). Yakutat formally incorporated in 1948. In 1992, it broke away from the Skagway-Yakutat-Angoon Census Area to form its own borough of Yakutat. It disincorporated at its formation and became a census-designated place (CDP).

===2010 Census===
At the census of 2010, there were 662 people, 502 households, and 201 families residing in Yakutat. The racial makeup was 50.37% White, 0.12% Black or African American, 39.60% Native American, 1.24% Asian, 0.74% Pacific Islander, and 7.92% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.74% of the population.

It is reported that 5.78% of the population spoke Tlingit at home.

Of the 265 households, 32.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.5% were married couples living together, 12.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.0% were non-families. 32.1% of households were one person, and 4.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 3.30.

The population was spread out with 28.1% under the age of 18, 5.3% from 18 to 24, 32.5% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 5.3% 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 145.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 161.7 males.

The median household income was in Yakutat was $46,786, and the median family income was $51,875. Males had a median income of $41,635 versus $25,938 for females. The per capita income was $22,579. About 11.8% of families and 13.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.5% of those under age 18 and 8.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 Census===
At the census of 2000, central Yakutat was treated as a census-designated place (CDP), even though census-designated places &quot;are not legally incorporated under the laws of the state in which they are located.&quot; The area consisting of about , contained the vast majority of the population of the entire city-borough.

At the 2000 census, there were 680 people, 261 households, and 157 families in the CDP. The population density was . There were 385 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 41.47% White, 0.15% Black or African American, 47.06% Native American, 1.47% Asian, 0.88% Pacific Islander, and 8.97% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.88% of the population.

Of the 261 households, 33.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.7% were married couples living together, 12.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.5% were non-families. 31.4% of households were one person, and 5.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.30.

The age distribution was 31.0% under the age of 18, 6.2% from 18 to 24, 31.3% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 5.7% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 117.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 123.3 males.

The median household income was $47,054 and the median family income was $51,875. Males had a median income of $42,404 versus $26,875 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $21,330. About 11.8% of families and 15.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.5% of those under age 18 and 10.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Alexander Andreyevich Baranov, (1747-1819), founded a Russian settlement at Yakutat Bay
* Alison Bremner, Tlingit contemporary artist born in Yakutat
* Byron Mallott, (1943-2020), mayor of Yakutat
* Martin Sensmeier, (born 1985), actor
* X&#x27;unéi, (late 18th-century), chief of the Tlingit

==See also==

* Yakutat Airport
* 1899 Yakutat Bay earthquakes

==References==
==External links==

* City and Borough of Yakutat website
* Yakutat Alaska Chamber of Commerce
* Summary of the 2006 Yakutat area commercial salmon fisheries / by Gordon F. Woods. Hosted by the Alaska State Publications Program.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q487681" start="4" end="31" title="Yakutat, Alaska" label="City and Borough of Yakutat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="37" end="44" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="76" end="83" title="Boroughs of Alaska" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="100" end="106" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="183" end="190" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27480" start="289" end="293" title="Eyak language" label="Eyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="478" end="490" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178260" start="527" end="543" title="List of the largest counties in the United States by area" label="largest counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="577" end="588" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="965" end="998" title="Hoonah–Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Skagway–Hoonah–Angoon Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1006" end="1033" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="1078" end="1101" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q771013" start="1202" end="1209" title="Icy Bay (Alaska)" label="Icy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085668" start="1227" end="1242" title="Icy Bay Airport" label="Icy Bay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385649" start="1374" end="1378" title="Eyak" label="Eyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131444" start="1404" end="1416" title="Copper River (Alaska)" label="Copper River"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="1423" end="1430" title="Tlingit" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="1481" end="1492" title="Cultural assimilation" label="assimilated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217238" start="1797" end="1822" title="Shelikhov-Golikov Company" label="Shelikhov-Golikov Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="1843" end="1867" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="1948" end="1957" title="Sea otter" label="sea-otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4325144" start="1996" end="2006" title="New Russia (trading post)" label="New Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="2198" end="2213" title="Alaska Purchase" label="Alaska Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2221" end="2234" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2244" end="2258" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415672" start="2334" end="2361" title="Evangelical Covenant Church" label="Swedish Free Mission Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q113171658" start="2419" end="2441" title="Stimson Lumber Company" label="Stimson Lumber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2637" end="2649" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="2655" end="2660" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q953843" start="2807" end="2822" title="Yakutat Airport" label="Yakutat Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="3106" end="3122" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566750" start="3303" end="3327" title="Communicative language teaching" label="communicative approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q428862" start="3365" end="3368" title="Total Physical Response" label="TPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="3373" end="3395" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446764" start="3457" end="3471" title="Seiki Kayamori" label="Seiki Kayamori"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3896" end="3923" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="4024" end="4047" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476323" start="4183" end="4194" title="Yakutat Bay" label="Yakutat Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="4250" end="4264" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="4281" end="4287" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q180531" start="4310" end="4324" title="Gulf of Alaska" label="Gulf of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q508618" start="4338" end="4372" title="Valdez-Cordova Census Area, Alaska" label="Valdez-Cordova Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500827" start="4391" end="4424" title="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska" label="Hoonah-Angoon Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430348" start="4443" end="4475" title="Stikine Region, British Columbia" label="Stikine Region, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="4503" end="4518" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089340" start="4586" end="4609" title="Chugach National Forest" label="Chugach National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="4611" end="4636" title="Glacier Bay National Park" label="Glacier Bay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q261577" start="4638" end="4660" title="Glacier Bay Wilderness" label="Glacier Bay Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502633" start="4662" end="4685" title="Tongass National Forest" label="Tongass National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="4687" end="4732" title="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve" label="Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q748597" start="4734" end="4765" title="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness" label="Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677189" start="4775" end="4788" title="Russell Fjord" label="Russell Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632936" start="4837" end="4852" title="Hubbard Glacier" label="Hubbard Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277996" start="5115" end="5126" title="Situk River" label="Situk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="5416" end="5433" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5441" end="5444" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Dfc"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="5457" end="5481" title="subpolar oceanic climate" label="subpolar oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5489" end="5492" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Cfc"/>
<link wikidata="Q179918" start="5560" end="5570" title="permafrost" label="permafrost"/>
<link wikidata="Q845725" start="5576" end="5596" title="temperate rainforest" label="temperate rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43981" start="5660" end="5669" title="Ketchikan, Alaska" label="Ketchikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79716" start="5976" end="5984" title="Whittier, Alaska" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7494" end="7508" title="2010 United States census" label="census of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7616" end="7621" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7629" end="7634" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7638" end="7654" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7663" end="7678" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7686" end="7691" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7699" end="7715" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7751" end="7759" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7763" end="7769" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27792" start="7863" end="7870" title="Tlingit language" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8795" end="8807" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="8907" end="8921" title="2000 United States census" label="census of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="8956" end="8979" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="9233" end="9244" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9403" end="9416" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9439" end="9444" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9452" end="9457" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9461" end="9477" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9486" end="9501" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9509" end="9514" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9522" end="9538" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9574" end="9582" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9586" end="9592" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="10537" end="10549" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q440782" start="10646" end="10675" title="Alexander Andreyevich Baranov" label="Alexander Andreyevich Baranov"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301246" start="10736" end="10750" title="Alison Bremner" label="Alison Bremner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004419" start="10798" end="10811" title="Byron Mallott" label="Byron Mallott"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923578" start="10845" end="10861" title="Martin Sensmeier" label="Martin Sensmeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047609" start="10884" end="10895" title="X&amp;#x27;unéi" label="X&amp;#x27;unéi"/>
<link wikidata="Q953843" start="10956" end="10971" title="Yakutat Airport" label="Yakutat Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786781" start="10974" end="11002" title="1899 Yakutat Bay earthquakes" label="1899 Yakutat Bay earthquakes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87500" wikidata="Q7215110" url="?curid=87500" title="Secale">
<text>Secale is a genus of the grass tribe Triticeae, which is related to barley (&quot;Hordeum&quot;) and wheat (&quot;Triticum&quot;). The genus includes cultivated species such as rye (&quot;Secale cereale&quot;) as well as weedy and wild rye species. The best-known species of the genus is the cultivated rye, &quot;S. cereale&quot;, which is grown as a grain and forage crop. Wild and weedy rye species help provide a huge gene pool that can be used for improvement of the cultivated rye.

The genus &quot;Secale&quot; includes the cultivated rye and four to eleven wild species depending on the species criteria used. Commonly recognized species of the genus are the annuals, &quot;S. cereale&quot;, &quot;S. vavilovii&quot; Grouch, and &quot;S. sylvestre&quot; and perennial &quot;S. strictum&quot; (syn. &quot;S. montanum&quot;). &quot;Secale cereale&quot; includes cultivated rye and other weedy rye types. &quot;Secale strictum&quot; is a group that includes distinct geographical isolates. &quot;Secale vavilovii&quot; is the most different of the genus as it separated early from the other species in the genus.

== Evolutionary history ==

&quot;Secale strictum&quot; subsp. &quot;africanum&quot;, &quot;Secale strictum anatolicum&quot;, &quot;Secale sylvestre&quot;, and &quot;Secale strictum&quot; subsp. &quot;strictum&quot; evolved in succession from a common ancestor of &quot;Secale&quot; after geographic separation and genetic differentiation. The annual weedy rye evolved from &quot;S. strictum&quot; subspecies &quot;strictum&quot; was domesticated to cultivated rye. Data suggests division of the genus into three species: the annual wild species &quot;S. sylvestre&quot;, the perennial wild species &quot;S. strictum&quot; including many subspecies, and &quot;S. cereale&quot; with cultivated and weedy rye subspecies.

&quot;Secale sylvestre&quot; is believed to be the most distant relative of &quot;S. cereale&quot; and most closely related to other outgroups. This is seen through lower rates of rye simple sequence repeat (SSR) sequences compared to other members of the genus &quot;Secale&quot;. &quot;Secale sylvestre&quot; is, therefore, the most ancient &quot;Secale&quot; species. Following separation of &quot;S. sylvestre&quot; from other taxa of the genus, perennial taxa also separated. &quot;Secale montanum&quot; descended directly from &quot;S. sylvestre&quot; and other perennial taxa originated from &quot;S. montanum&quot;. Perennial taxa are the progenitors of annual taxa. All annual taxa are most closely related and form a monophyletic group.

== Crop development ==

Understanding wild plant species is becoming important in the development of new crops. The wild perennial rye (&quot;Secale montanum&quot;) is the ancestor of the cultivated rye (&quot;Secale cereale&quot;). Many forms of perennial rye are found in Turkey including &quot;Secale montatum&quot; Guss var. &quot;anatolicum&quot; Boiss and &quot;Secale montanum&quot; Guss var. &quot;vavilovi&quot; Grossh. These perennial species usually have large stature, high frost resistance, strong tillering ability, and tolerance to poor soils and drought. Faults of the ryes that need to be overcome include small and sparse leaves and breaking peduncles.

ACE-1 perennial cereal (PC) rye has been developed in Canada as a new crop for silage and green-feed production. The rye was developed by first crossing &quot;Secale cereale&quot; L. (rye) and &quot;Secale montanum&quot; (perennial wild rye), then backcrossing the produced F1 generation with &quot;Secale cereale&quot; L., and selecting for the perennial types. Beneficial characteristics of the crop include early growth in spring, competing well with weeds, and producing significant regrowth for silage or pasture. PC rye also has an extensive root system that can be used to improve soil tilth and prevent soil erosion during the fall and winter months. The newly developed crop has not shown significant susceptibility to disease. The new cultivar is currently being further evaluated to test for adaptation and yield potential. These characteristics could make this species an attractive crop to be used in the future.

; Species
* &quot;Secale africanum&quot; – Cape Province of South Africa
* &quot;Secale anatolicum&quot; – Greece, Bulgaria, Turkey, Caucasus, Iraq, Iran
* &quot;Secale cereale&quot; – Turkey; widely cultivated and naturalized in many places
* &quot;Secale ciliatiglume&quot; – Turkey, Iraq, Iran
* &quot;Secale iranicum&quot; – Iran
* &quot;Secale montanum&quot; – from Spain + Morocco to Pakistan
* &quot;Secale segetale&quot; – Central Asia, Xinjiang, Kashmir, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Caucasus
* &quot;Secale sylvestre&quot; – Balkans, Hungary, Ukraine, European Russia, Caucasus, Central Asia
* &quot;Secale vavilovii&quot; – Turkey, Caucasus, Iraq, Iran

; formerly included
see &quot;Agropyron Brachypodium Dasypyrum Eremopyrum&quot; 
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="25" end="30" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q148694" start="37" end="46" title="Triticeae" label="Triticeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="177" end="180" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4204" end="4220" title="Secale africanum" label="Secale africanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4267" end="4284" title="Secale anatolicum" label="Secale anatolicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="4348" end="4362" title="Secale cereale" label="Secale cereale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4436" end="4455" title="Secale ciliatiglume" label="Secale ciliatiglume"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4491" end="4506" title="Secale iranicum" label="Secale iranicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838679" start="4528" end="4543" title="Secale montanum" label="Secale montanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4593" end="4608" title="Secale segetale" label="Secale segetale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15239708" start="4702" end="4718" title="Secale sylvestre" label="Secale sylvestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522281" start="4802" end="4818" title="Secale vavilovii" label="Secale vavilovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q162731" start="4887" end="4896" title="Agropyron" label="Agropyron"/>
<link wikidata="Q157770" start="4897" end="4909" title="Brachypodium" label="Brachypodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309939" start="4910" end="4919" title="Dasypyrum" label="Dasypyrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q580600" start="4920" end="4930" title="Eremopyrum" label="Eremopyrum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87505" wikidata="Q500818" url="?curid=87505" title="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska">
<text>Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area ( ) is a census area in the U.S. state of Alaska. As of the 2020 census, the population was 5,343, down from 5,588 in 2010. With an area of , it is the largest of any county or county-equivalent in the United States, or slightly larger than the entire state of Montana. It is part of the unorganized borough of Alaska and therefore has no borough seat. Its largest communities are the cities of Galena, in the west, and Fort Yukon, in the northeast.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the census area has , of which is land and (1.6%) is water. The area is slightly larger than the entire U.S. state of Montana, itself the fourth largest state, or the country of Japan, and makes up slightly more than 1/5 of the state of Alaska. The area is bigger than 47 of the other 49 states, with only California and Texas being bigger. Its population density, at , is the lowest in the United States.

===Adjacent boroughs and census areas===

* North Slope Borough, Alaska – north
* Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska – southeast
* Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Denali Borough, Alaska – southeast
* Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska – south
* Bethel Census Area, Alaska – south
* Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska – west
* Nome Census Area, Alaska – west
* Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska – northwest
* Yukon Territory, Canada – east
===National protected areas===

* Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Mollie Beattie Wilderness (part)
* Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve (part)
** Gates of the Arctic Wilderness (part)
* Innoko National Wildlife Refuge
** Innoko Wilderness
* Kanuti National Wildlife Refuge
* Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Koyukuk Wilderness (part)
* Noatak National Preserve
* Nowitna National Wildlife Refuge
* Selawik National Wildlife Refuge (part)
** Selawik Wilderness (part)
* Steese National Conservation Area
* White Mountains National Recreation Area
* Yukon–Charley Rivers National Preserve (part)
* Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 6,551 people, 2,309 households, and 1,480 families residing in the census area. The population density was square miles (km2) per person. It is the least densely populated county-equivalent of all 3,141 county-equivalents of the United States. There were 3,917 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the census area was 24.27% White, 0.09% Black or African American, 70.89% Native American, 0.37% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.43% from other races, and 3.91% from two or more races. 1.19% were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 12.95% reported speaking an Athabaskan language at home; of these 35.26% spoke Gwich&#x27;in and 10.94% Koyukon.

Of the 2,309 households 38.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.90% were married couples living together, 16.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.90% were non-families. 30.50% of households were one person and 6.20% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.81 and the average family size was 3.53.

The age distribution was 35.00% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 26.90% from 25 to 44, 22.10% from 45 to 64, and 7.30% 65 or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 118.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 122.60 males.

===2020 Census===

==Communities==
===Cities===

* Allakaket
* Anvik
* Bettles
* Fort Yukon
* Galena
* Grayling
* Holy Cross
* Hughes
* Huslia
* Kaltag
* Koyukuk
* McGrath
* Nenana
* Nikolai
* Nulato
* Ruby
* Shageluk
* Tanana
===Census-designated places===

* Alatna
* Arctic Village
* Beaver
* Birch Creek
* Central
* Chalkyitsik
* Circle
* Coldfoot
* Evansville
* Flat
* Four Mile Road
* Holy Cross
* Lake Minchumina
* Livengood
* Manley Hot Springs
* Minto
* New Allakaket
* Rampart
* Stevens Village
* Takotna
* Venetie
* Wiseman
==Education==
School districts include:
* Alaska Gateway School District
* Galena City School District
* Iditarod Area School District
* Nenana City School District
* Tanana City School District
* Yukon Flats School District
* Yukon–Koyukuk School District

==Politics==
Like other areas of the sparse Alaskan Bush with large Alaska Native majorities, the Yukon-Koyukuk Census Area often favors the Democratic Party relative to the state as a whole. Though it voted Republican in all presidential elections in the 2000s, it has supported the Democrats more recently by nearly 30-point margins.







==See also==
* List of airports in Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area
* Crow Lake (Alaska)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q500818" start="0" end="25" title="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, Alaska" label="Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q47184" start="35" end="46" title="List of boroughs and census areas in Alaska" label="census area"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="54" end="64" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="68" end="74" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="86" end="97" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="193" end="220" title="county-equivalent" label="county or county-equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="287" end="294" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474662" start="314" end="333" title="unorganized borough" label="unorganized borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="365" end="377" title="borough seat" label="borough seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79737" start="421" end="427" title="Galena, Alaska" label="Galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q79408" start="446" end="456" title="Fort Yukon, Alaska" label="Fort Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="508" end="526" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="646" end="653" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="706" end="711" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="834" end="844" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="849" end="854" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q511806" start="979" end="1006" title="North Slope Borough, Alaska" label="North Slope Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500845" start="1017" end="1056" title="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska" label="Southeast Fairbanks Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512901" start="1071" end="1107" title="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska" label="Fairbanks North Star Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q179950" start="1122" end="1144" title="Denali Borough, Alaska" label="Denali Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q512925" start="1159" end="1192" title="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska" label="Matanuska-Susitna Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q500312" start="1203" end="1229" title="Bethel Census Area, Alaska" label="Bethel Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q379474" start="1240" end="1268" title="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska" label="Kusilvak Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q503023" start="1278" end="1302" title="Nome Census Area, Alaska" label="Nome Census Area, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q511723" start="1312" end="1344" title="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska" label="Northwest Arctic Borough, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="1359" end="1374" title="Yukon Territory" label="Yukon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q638097" start="1424" end="1455" title="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge" label="Arctic National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348827" start="1466" end="1491" title="Mollie Beattie Wilderness" label="Mollie Beattie Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1501" end="1547" title="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve" label="Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q605657" start="1558" end="1588" title="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness" label="Gates of the Arctic Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664156" start="1598" end="1629" title="Innoko National Wildlife Refuge" label="Innoko National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036112" start="1633" end="1650" title="Innoko Wilderness" label="Innoko Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728213" start="1653" end="1684" title="Kanuti National Wildlife Refuge" label="Kanuti National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423292" start="1687" end="1719" title="Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge" label="Koyukuk National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423292" start="1730" end="1748" title="Koyukuk Wilderness" label="Koyukuk Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q662726" start="1758" end="1782" title="Noatak National Preserve" label="Noatak National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423281" start="1785" end="1817" title="Nowitna National Wildlife Refuge" label="Nowitna National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267504" start="1820" end="1852" title="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge" label="Selawik National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267504" start="1863" end="1881" title="Selawik Wilderness" label="Selawik Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680209" start="1891" end="1924" title="Steese National Conservation Area" label="Steese National Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995092" start="1927" end="1967" title="White Mountains National Recreation Area" label="White Mountains National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q388928" start="1970" end="2008" title="Yukon–Charley Rivers National Preserve" label="Yukon–Charley Rivers National Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q774882" start="2018" end="2054" title="Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge" label="Yukon Flats National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2080" end="2091" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="2275" end="2292" title="county-equivalent" label="county-equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2409" end="2422" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2453" end="2458" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2466" end="2471" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2475" end="2491" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2500" end="2515" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2523" end="2528" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2536" end="2552" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2623" end="2631" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2635" end="2641" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="2683" end="2702" title="Athabaskan language" label="Athabaskan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q21057" start="2734" end="2747" title="Gwich&amp;#x27;in language" label="Gwich&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q28304" start="2759" end="2766" title="Koyukon language" label="Koyukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79350" start="3473" end="3482" title="Allakaket, Alaska" label="Allakaket"/>
<link wikidata="Q79573" start="3485" end="3490" title="Anvik, Alaska" label="Anvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79943" start="3493" end="3500" title="Bettles, Alaska" label="Bettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79408" start="3503" end="3513" title="Fort Yukon, Alaska" label="Fort Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79737" start="3516" end="3522" title="Galena, Alaska" label="Galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q79551" start="3525" end="3533" title="Grayling, Alaska" label="Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q79507" start="3536" end="3546" title="Holy Cross, Alaska" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q79705" start="3549" end="3555" title="Hughes, Alaska" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80086" start="3558" end="3564" title="Huslia, Alaska" label="Huslia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79345" start="3567" end="3573" title="Kaltag, Alaska" label="Kaltag"/>
<link wikidata="Q79685" start="3576" end="3583" title="Koyukuk, Alaska" label="Koyukuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79574" start="3586" end="3593" title="McGrath, Alaska" label="McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q80058" start="3596" end="3602" title="Nenana, Alaska" label="Nenana"/>
<link wikidata="Q79586" start="3605" end="3612" title="Nikolai, Alaska" label="Nikolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q79392" start="3615" end="3621" title="Nulato, Alaska" label="Nulato"/>
<link wikidata="Q79807" start="3624" end="3628" title="Ruby, Alaska" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q80081" start="3631" end="3639" title="Shageluk, Alaska" label="Shageluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79614" start="3642" end="3648" title="Tanana, Alaska" label="Tanana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837416" start="3683" end="3689" title="Alatna, Alaska" label="Alatna"/>
<link wikidata="Q638197" start="3692" end="3706" title="Arctic Village, Alaska" label="Arctic Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313950" start="3709" end="3715" title="Beaver, Alaska" label="Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837588" start="3718" end="3729" title="Birch Creek, Alaska" label="Birch Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718229" start="3732" end="3739" title="Central, Alaska" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059889" start="3742" end="3753" title="Chalkyitsik, Alaska" label="Chalkyitsik"/>
<link wikidata="Q974350" start="3756" end="3762" title="Circle, Alaska" label="Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q138385" start="3765" end="3773" title="Coldfoot, Alaska" label="Coldfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837653" start="3776" end="3786" title="Evansville, Alaska" label="Evansville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837548" start="3789" end="3793" title="Flat, Alaska" label="Flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836015" start="3796" end="3810" title="Four Mile Road, Alaska" label="Four Mile Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q79507" start="3813" end="3823" title="Holy Cross, Alaska" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837435" start="3826" end="3841" title="Lake Minchumina, Alaska" label="Lake Minchumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836544" start="3844" end="3853" title="Livengood, Alaska" label="Livengood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738327" start="3856" end="3874" title="Manley Hot Springs, Alaska" label="Manley Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684726" start="3877" end="3882" title="Minto, Alaska" label="Minto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836919" start="3885" end="3898" title="New Allakaket, Alaska" label="New Allakaket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046960" start="3901" end="3908" title="Rampart, Alaska" label="Rampart"/>
<link wikidata="Q661370" start="3911" end="3926" title="Stevens Village, Alaska" label="Stevens Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297507" start="3929" end="3936" title="Takotna, Alaska" label="Takotna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738314" start="3939" end="3946" title="Venetie, Alaska" label="Venetie"/>
<link wikidata="Q924763" start="3949" end="3956" title="Wiseman, Alaska" label="Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708548" start="3999" end="4029" title="Alaska Gateway School District" label="Alaska Gateway School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454456" start="4032" end="4059" title="Galena City School District" label="Galena City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q30680565" start="4062" end="4091" title="Iditarod Area School District" label="Iditarod Area School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892301" start="4094" end="4121" title="Nenana City School District" label="Nenana City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041350" start="4124" end="4151" title="Tanana City School District" label="Tanana City School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456418" start="4154" end="4181" title="Yukon Flats School District" label="Yukon Flats School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892329" start="4184" end="4213" title="Yukon–Koyukuk School District" label="Yukon–Koyukuk School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054962" start="4259" end="4271" title="The Bush (Alaska)" label="Alaskan Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="4283" end="4296" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4356" end="4372" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4423" end="4433" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913853" start="4573" end="4618" title="List of airports in Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area" label="List of airports in Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189100" start="4621" end="4639" title="Crow Lake (Alaska)" label="Crow Lake (Alaska)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87508" wikidata="Q1473866" url="?curid=87508" title="Inuit religion">
<text>Inuit religion is the shared spiritual beliefs and practices of the Inuit, an indigenous people from Alaska, northern Canada, parts of Siberia, and Greenland. Their religion shares many similarities with some Alaska Native religions. Traditional Inuit religious practices include animism and shamanism, in which spiritual healers mediate with spirits.
Today many Inuit follow Christianity (with 71 percent of Canadian Inuit identifying as Christian ); however, traditional Inuit spirituality continues as part of a living, oral tradition and part of contemporary Inuit society. Inuit who balance indigenous and Christian theology practice religious syncretism.

Inuit cosmology provides a narrative about the world and the place of people within it. Rachel Qitsualik-Tinsley writes:
Traditional stories, rituals, and taboos of the Inuit are often precautions against dangers posed by their harsh Arctic environment. Knud Rasmussen asked his guide and friend Aua, an &quot;angakkuq&quot; (spiritual healer), about Inuit religious beliefs among the Iglulingmiut (people of Igloolik) and was told: &quot;We don&#x27;t believe. We fear.&quot; Authors Inge Kleivan and Birgitte Sonne debate possible conclusions of Aua&#x27;s words, because the angakkuq was under the influence of Christian missionaries, and later converted to Christianity. Their study also analyses beliefs of several Inuit groups, concluding (among others) that fear was not diffuse.


==Inuit cultural beliefs==
=== &quot;Angakkuq&quot; ===
Among Canadian Inuit, a spiritual healer is known as an &quot;angakkuq&quot; (plural: &quot;angakkuit&quot;, Inuktitut syllabics &quot;ᐊᖓᑦᑯᖅ&quot; or &quot;ᐊᖓᒃᑯᖅ&quot;) in Inuktitut or &quot;angatkuq&quot; in Inuvialuktun. The duties of an &quot;angakkuq&quot; include helping the community when marine animals, kept by Takanaluk-arnaluk or Sea Woman in a pit in her house, become scarce, according to Aua, an informant and friend of the anthropologist Knud Rasmussen. Aua described the ability of an apprentice &quot;angakkuq&quot; to see himself as a skeleton, naming each part using the specific shaman language.

=== Inuit at Amitsoq Lake ===
The Inuit at Amitsoq Lake (a rich fishing ground) on King William Island had seasonal and other prohibitions for sewing certain items. Boot soles, for example, could only be sewn far away from settlements in designated places. Children at Amitsoq once had a game called &quot;tunangusartut&quot; in which they imitated the adults&#x27; behaviour towards the spirits, even reciting the same verbal formulae as &quot;angakkuit&quot;. According to Rasmussen, this game was not considered offensive because a &quot;spirit can understand the joke.&quot;

=== Netsilik Inuit ===
The homelands of the Netsilik Inuit (&quot;Netsilingmiut&quot; meaning &quot;People of the Seal&quot;) have extremely long winters and stormy springs. Starvation was a common danger.

While other Inuit cultures feature protective guardian powers, the Netsilik have traditional beliefs that life&#x27;s hardships stemmed from the extensive use of such measures. Unlike the Iglulik Inuit, the Netsilik used a large number of amulets. Even dogs could have amulets. In one recorded instance, a young boy had 80 amulets, so many that he could hardly play. One particular man had 17 names taken from his ancestors and intended to protect him.

Tattooing among Netsilik women provided power and could affect which world they went to after their deaths.

Nuliajuk, the Sea Woman, was described as &quot;the lubricous one&quot;. If the people breached certain taboos, she held marine animals in the basin of her &quot;qulliq&quot; (an oil lamp that burns seal fat). When this happened, the &quot;angakkuq&quot; had to visit her to beg for game. In Netsilik oral history, she was originally an orphan girl mistreated by her community.

Moon Man, another cosmic being, is benevolent towards humans and their souls as they arrived in celestial places. This belief differs from that of the Greenlandic Inuit, in which the Moon&#x27;s wrath could be invoked by breaking taboos.

Sila or Silap Inua, often associated with weather, is conceived of as a power contained within people. Among the Netsilik, Sila was imagined as a male. The Netsilik (and Copper Inuit) believed Sila was originally a giant baby whose parents died fighting giants.

=== Caribou Inuit ===
Caribou Inuit is a collective name for several groups of inland Inuit (the Krenermiut, Aonarktormiut, Harvaktormiut, Padlermiut, and Ahearmiut) living in an area bordered by the tree line and the west shore of Hudson Bay. They do not form a political unit and maintain only loose contact, but they share an inland lifestyle and some cultural unity. In the recent past, the Padlermiut took part in seal hunts in the ocean.

The Caribou have a dualistic concept of the soul. The soul associated with respiration is called &quot;umaffia&quot; (place of life) and the personal soul of a child is called &quot;tarneq&quot; (corresponding to the &quot;nappan&quot; of the Copper Inuit). The tarneq is considered so weak that it needs the guardianship of a name-soul of a dead relative. The presence of the ancestor in the body of the child was felt to contribute to a more gentle behavior, especially among boys. This belief amounted to a form of reincarnation.

Because of their inland lifestyle, the Caribou have no belief concerning a Sea Woman. Other cosmic beings, named Sila or Pinga, control the caribou, as opposed to marine animals. Some groups have made a distinction between the two figures, while others have considered them the same. Sacrificial offerings to them could promote luck in hunting.

Caribou angakkuit performed fortune-telling through &quot;qilaneq&quot;, a technique of asking questions to a &quot;qila&quot; (spirit). The angakkuq placed his glove on the ground and raised his staff and belt over it. The qila then entered the glove and drew the staff to itself. Qilaneq was practiced among several other Alaskan Native groups and provided &quot;yes&quot; or &quot;no&quot; answers to questions.

=== Copper Inuit ===

Spiritual beliefs and practices among Inuit are diverse, just like the cultures themselves. Similar remarks apply for other beliefs: term &quot;silap inua&quot; / &quot;sila&quot;, &quot;hillap inua&quot; / &quot;hilla&quot; (among Inuit), &quot;ellam yua&quot; / &quot;ella&quot; (among Yup&#x27;ik) has been used with some diversity among the groups. In many instances it refers to &quot;outer space&quot;, &quot;intellect&quot;, &quot;weather&quot;, &quot;sky&quot;, &quot;universe&quot;: there may be some correspondence with the presocratic concept of logos. In some other groups, this concept was more personified ( among Siberian Yupik).

Among Copper Inuit, this &quot;Wind Indweller&quot; concept is related to spiritual practice: &quot;angakkuit&quot; were believed to obtain their power from this indweller, moreover, even their helping spirits were termed as &quot;silap inue&quot;.

=== Greenland Inuit ===
Greenlandic Inuit believed that spirits inhabited every human joint, even knucklebones.

==Anirniit==
The Inuit believed that all things have a form of spirit or soul ( meaning &quot;breath&quot;; plural ), just like humans. These spirits are held to persist after death—a common belief present in most human societies. However, the belief in the pervasiveness of spirits—the root of Inuit worldview—has consequences. According to a customary Inuit saying, &quot;The great peril of our existence lies in the fact that our diet consists entirely of souls.&quot; Since all beings possess souls like those of humans, killing an animal is little different from killing a person. Once the of the dead animal or human is liberated, it is free to take revenge. The spirit of the dead can only be placated by obedience to custom, avoiding taboos, and performing the right rituals.

The harshness and randomness of life in the Arctic ensured that Inuit lived constantly in fear of unseen forces. A run of bad luck could end an entire community and begging potentially angry and vengeful but unseen powers for the necessities of day-to-day survival is a common consequence of a precarious existence. For the Inuit, to offend an was to risk extinction. The principal role of the angakkuq in Inuit culture and society was to advise and remind people of the rituals and taboos they needed to obey to placate the spirits, since he was held to be able to see and contact them.

The anirniit are seen to be a part of the —the sky or air around them—and are merely borrowed from it. Although each person&#x27;s is individual, shaped by the life and body it inhabits, at the same time it is part of a larger whole. This enabled Inuit to borrow the powers or characteristics of an by taking its name. Furthermore, the spirits of a single class of thing—be it sea mammals, polar bears, or plants—are in some sense held to be the same and can be invoked through a keeper or master who is connected with that class of thing. In some cases, it is the of a human or animal who becomes a figure of respect or influence over animals things through some action, recounted in a traditional tale. In other cases, it is a , as described below.

Since the arrival of Christianity among the Inuit, has become the accepted word for &#x27;soul&#x27; in the Christian sense. This is the root word for other Christian terms: means &quot;angel&quot; and &quot;God&quot; is rendered as , the great spirit.

Some spirits have never been connected to physical bodies. These are called &#x27; (also , , , singular &#x27;, , tornrak, ) and &quot;are often described as a shaman&#x27;s helping spirits, whose nature depends on the respective &quot;. Helpful spirits can be called upon in times of need and &quot;are there to help people&quot;, as explained by Inuit elder Victor Tungilik. Some are evil, monstrous, and responsible for bad hunts and broken tools. They can possess humans, as recounted in the story of . An with good intentions can use them to heal sickness and find animals to hunt and feed the community. They can fight or exorcise bad , or they can be held at bay by rituals; However, an with harmful intentions can also use for their own personal gain, or to attack other people and their .

Though once simply meant &quot;killing spirit&quot;, it has, with Christianisation, taken on the meaning of a demon in the Christian belief system.

== Inuit shamanism ==

Shamans (&quot;anatquq&quot; or &quot;angakkuq&quot; in the Inuit languages of northern parts of Alaska and Canada) played an important role in the religion of Inuit acting as religious leaders, tradesmen, healers, and characters in cultural stories holding mysterious, powerful, and sometimes superhuman abilities. The idea of calling shamans &quot;medicine men&quot; is an outdated concept born from the accounts of early explorers and trappers who grouped all shamans together into this bubble. The term &quot;medicine man&quot; does not give the shamans justice and causes misconceptions about their dealings and actions. Despite the fact they are almost always considered healers, this is not the complete extent of their duties and abilities and detaches them from their role as a mediator between normal humans and the world of spirits, animals, and souls for the traditional Inuit.

There is no strict definition of shaman and there is no strict role they have in society. Despite this, their ability to heal is nearly universal in their description. It has been described as &quot;breathing or blowing away&quot; the sickness but there is not set method any one shaman or groups of shamans perform their deeds. Even though their methods are varied, a few key elements remain in virtually all accounts and stories. In order to cure or remove an ailment from someone, the shaman must be skilled in their own right but must have the faith of those being helped.

In stories of shamans there is a time of crisis and they are expected to resolve, alleviate, or otherwise give resolution or meaning to the crisis. These crises often involve survival against the natural elements or disputes between people that could end in death. In one such story, a hunter kidnapped a man&#x27;s daughter and a shaman described in terms of belonging to the man. The shaman pulled the daughter back with a magic string. The shaman is also able to bestow gifts and extraordinary abilities to people and to items such as tools.

Some stories recount shamans as unpredictable, easily angered, and pleased in unusual ways. This could be shown as illustrating that despite their abilities and tune with nature and spirits, they are fickle and not without fault. There are stories of people attempting to impersonate shamans for their own gain by pretending to have fantastical abilities such as being able to fly only to be discovered and punished.

A handful of accounts imply shamans may be feared in some cases for their abilities as they specify that someone did not fear being approached and talked to by a shaman. This leads to further ideas that the shaman&#x27;s power was to be greatly respected and the idea that the shaman was not necessarily always a fair and good force for the people around them.

The Christianization of the Inuit by both willing conversion and being forcefully pressured into converting to Christianity has largely destroyed the tradition of the shaman. Priests, pastors, and other Christian religious authorities replaced the shamans as the connection between the human world and the other world.

==Deities==
Below is an incomplete list of Inuit deities believed to hold power over some specific part of the Inuit world:
* Agloolik: evil god of the sea who can flip boats over; spirit which lives under the ice and helps wanderers in hunting and fishing
* Akna: mother goddess of fertility
* Amaguq/Amarok: wolf god who takes those foolish enough to hunt alone at night
* Anguta: gatherer of the dead; he carries them into the underworld, where they must sleep for a year.
* Ignirtoq: a goddess of light and truth.
* Nanook: (&quot;Nanuq&quot; or &quot;Nanuk&quot; in the modern spelling) the master of polar bears
* Pinga: the goddess of strength, the hunt, fertility and medicine
* Qailertetang: weather spirit, guardian of animals, and matron of fishers and hunters. Qailertetang is the companion of Sedna.
* Sedna: the mistress of sea animals and mother of the sea. Sedna (&quot;Sanna&quot; in modern Inuktitut spelling) is known under many names, including Nerrivik, Arnapkapfaaluk, Arnakuagsak, and Nuliajuk.
* Silap Inua or Sila: personification of the air
* Tekkeitsertok: the master of caribou.
* Tarqiup Inua: lunar deity
* Pukkeenegak: Goddess of domestic life, including sewing and cooking.

==Creatures and spirits==
* Ahkiyyini: a skeleton spirit
* Aningaat: a boy who became the moon; brother to Siqiniq, the sun; sometimes equated to the lunar deity Tarqiup Inua
* Aumanil: a spirit which dwelled on the land and guided the seasonal movement of whales
* Qallupilluit: monstrous human-like creatures with that live in the sea and carry off disobedient children.
* Saumen Kar: also called Tornit or Tuniit are the Inuit version of the Sasquatch or Yeti myth. They may be the people of the Dorset culture who were said to be giants.
* Siqiniq: a girl who became the sun; sister to Aningaat, the moon
* Tizheruk: snake-like monsters.

==See also==
* Inuit group, a set of satellites that orbit Saturn, many named after figures from Inuit religion

== References ==
=== Footnotes ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* Hungarian translation of Rasmussen 1926.
* 
* Translation of Gabus 1944.
*
==Further reading==

* Asatchaq, and Tom Lowenstein. &quot;The Things That Were Said of Them Shaman Stories and Oral Histories of the Tikiġaq People&quot;. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992. 
* Blake, Dale. &quot;Inuit Life Writings and Oral Traditions Inuit Myths&quot;. St. John&#x27;s, Nfld: Educational Resource Development Co-operative, 2001. 
* Christopher, Neil, Louise Flaherty, and Larry MacDougall. &quot;Stories of the Amautalik Fantastic Beings from Inuit Myths and Legends&quot;. Iqaluit, Nunavut: Inhabit Media, 2007. 
* Fienup-Riordan, Ann. &quot;Boundaries and Passages Rule and Ritual in Yup&#x27;ik Eskimo Oral Tradition&quot;. The Civilization of the American Indian series, v. 212. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994. 
* Hall, Edwin S. &quot;The Eskimo Storyteller: Folktales from Noatak, Alaska&quot;. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1975.
* Himmelheber, Hans, and Ann Fienup-Riordan. &quot;Where the Echo Began And Other Oral Traditions from Southwestern Alaska&quot;. Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press, 2000. 
* Houston, James A. &quot;James Houston&#x27;s Treasury of Inuit Legends&quot;. Orlando, Fla: Harcourt, 2006. 
* MacDonald, John. &quot;The Arctic Sky Inuit Astronomy, Star Lore, and Legend&quot;. Toronto: Royal Ontario Museum/Nunavut Research Institute, 1998. 
* Millman, Lawrence, and Timothy White. &quot;A Kayak Full of Ghosts Eskimo Tales&quot;. Santa Barbara: Capra Press, 1987. 
* Norman, Howard A., Leo Dillon, and Diane Dillon. &quot;The Girl Who Dreamed Only Geese, and Other Tales of the Far North&quot;. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1997. 
* Spalding, Alex. &quot;Eight Inuit Myths = Inuit Unipkaaqtuat Pingasuniarvinilit&quot;. Ottawa: National Museums of Canada, 1979.
* Wolfson, Evelyn. &quot;Inuit Mythology&quot;. Berkeley Heights, NJ: Enslow Pub, 2001. 
===Fiction===

*&quot;Tornrak&quot;, the 1990 opera by John Metcalf features several spirits in the Arctic scenes.
*&quot;The Terror&quot;, Dan Simmons, Horror novel, 2007.
*Video game &quot;&quot; by Frictional Games. The Infected are the main enemies serving the hive mind Tuurngait.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1473866" start="0" end="14" title="Inuit religion" label="Inuit religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="68" end="73" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="78" end="95" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="101" end="107" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q764146" start="109" end="124" title="northern Canada" label="northern Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="135" end="142" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="148" end="157" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q991660" start="209" end="231" title="Alaska Native religion" label="Alaska Native religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="280" end="287" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="292" end="301" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="376" end="388" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="523" end="537" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q21652002" start="639" end="659" title="religious syncretism" label="religious syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="668" end="677" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279792" start="750" end="774" title="Rachel Qitsualik-Tinsley" label="Rachel Qitsualik-Tinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="804" end="810" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="817" end="822" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="896" end="902" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312769" start="916" end="930" title="Knud Rasmussen" label="Knud Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819001" start="958" end="961" title="Aua (angakkuq)" label="Aua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797763" start="972" end="980" title="angakkuq" label="angakkuq"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1047" end="1059" title="Igloolik#Culture" label="Iglulingmiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q999339" start="1071" end="1079" title="Igloolik" label="Igloolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="1276" end="1298" title="Missionary" label="Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797763" start="1569" end="1577" title="angakkuq" label="angakkuq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274646" start="1616" end="1635" title="Inuktitut syllabics" label="Inuktitut syllabics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29921" start="1679" end="1688" title="Inuktitut" label="Inuktitut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27990" start="1716" end="1728" title="Inuvialuktun" label="Inuvialuktun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819001" start="1909" end="1912" title="Aua (angakkuq)" label="Aua"/>
<link wikidata="Q312769" start="1960" end="1974" title="Knud Rasmussen" label="Knud Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q143246" start="2207" end="2226" title="King William Island" label="King William Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q646152" start="2748" end="2762" title="Netsilik Inuit" label="Netsilik Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="3365" end="3371" title="Tattoo" label="Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068929" start="3474" end="3482" title="Nuliajuk" label="Nuliajuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441728" start="3636" end="3642" title="qulliq" label="qulliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q821952" start="3653" end="3661" title="oil lamp" label="oil lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="3775" end="3787" title="oral tradition" label="oral history"/>
<link wikidata="Q887850" start="4004" end="4021" title="Greenlandic Inuit" label="Greenlandic Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381280" start="4100" end="4110" title="Silap Inua" label="Silap Inua"/>
<link wikidata="Q719361" start="4262" end="4274" title="Copper Inuit" label="Copper Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q642019" start="4377" end="4390" title="Caribou Inuit" label="Caribou Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="4555" end="4564" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="4587" end="4597" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q936170" start="4819" end="4848" title="soul dualism" label="dualistic concept of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="5318" end="5331" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="5474" end="5481" title="Reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="5708" end="5723" title="fortune-telling" label="fortune-telling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381280" start="6262" end="6272" title="Silap Inua" label="silap inua"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="6350" end="6355" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906610" start="6406" end="6417" title="Yup&amp;#x27;ik" label="Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="6652" end="6663" title="Pre-Socratic philosophy" label="presocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="6675" end="6680" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487243" start="6746" end="6760" title="Siberian Yupik" label="Siberian Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q719361" start="6770" end="6782" title="Copper Inuit" label="Copper Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q887850" start="7038" end="7055" title="Greenlandic Inuit" label="Greenlandic Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9644" start="7100" end="7105" title="joint" label="joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q794715" start="7112" end="7119" title="knuckle" label="knuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="7190" end="7196" title="Vitalism" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="7200" end="7204" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="7956" end="7962" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714194" start="8318" end="8331" title="Inuit culture" label="Inuit culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="8878" end="8889" title="Marine mammal" label="sea mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="8891" end="8901" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="9439" end="9444" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="9461" end="9464" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904824" start="9621" end="9628" title="tornrak" label="tornrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="10372" end="10388" title="Christianization" label="Christianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="10416" end="10421" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797763" start="10516" end="10524" title="angakkuq" label="angakkuq"/>
<link wikidata="Q27796" start="10538" end="10553" title="Inuit languages" label="Inuit languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="10828" end="10840" title="Medicine man" label="medicine men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390950" start="13719" end="13727" title="Agloolik" label="Agloolik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741877" start="13852" end="13856" title="Akna (Inuit mythology)" label="Akna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263679" start="13888" end="13894" title="Amaguq" label="Amaguq"/>
<link wikidata="Q455210" start="13895" end="13901" title="Amarok (wolf)" label="Amarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625482" start="13968" end="13974" title="Anguta" label="Anguta"/>
<link wikidata="Q982847" start="14113" end="14119" title="Nanook" label="Nanook"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="14199" end="14209" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911431" start="14213" end="14218" title="Pinga (goddess)" label="Pinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265854" start="14280" end="14292" title="Qailertetang" label="Qailertetang"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="14345" end="14352" title="Fisherman" label="fishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="14357" end="14364" title="hunters" label="hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q875507" start="14408" end="14413" title="Sedna (mythology)" label="Sedna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972147" start="14558" end="14566" title="Nerrivik" label="Nerrivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971615" start="14568" end="14582" title="Arnapkapfaaluk" label="Arnapkapfaaluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971830" start="14584" end="14595" title="Arnakuagsak" label="Arnakuagsak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068929" start="14601" end="14609" title="Nuliajuk" label="Nuliajuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381280" start="14613" end="14623" title="Silap Inua" label="Silap Inua"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="14691" end="14698" title="Reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145713" start="14702" end="14714" title="Tarqiup Inua" label="Tarqiup Inua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741903" start="14730" end="14741" title="Pukkeenegak" label="Pukkeenegak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827425" start="14828" end="14837" title="Ahkiyyini" label="Ahkiyyini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422008" start="14859" end="14867" title="Sun and Moon (Inuit myth)" label="Aningaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145713" start="14962" end="14974" title="Tarqiup Inua" label="Tarqiup Inua"/>
<link wikidata="Q98132239" start="15066" end="15078" title="Qallupilluit" label="Qallupilluit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="15245" end="15254" title="Bigfoot" label="Sasquatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q129628" start="15258" end="15262" title="Yeti" label="Yeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q603749" start="15299" end="15313" title="Dorset culture" label="Dorset culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422008" start="15344" end="15351" title="Sun and Moon (Inuit myth)" label="Siqiniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810518" start="15411" end="15419" title="Tizheruk" label="Tizheruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536110" start="15458" end="15469" title="Inuit group" label="Inuit group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15645" end="15659" title="#Ras26" label="Rasmussen 1926"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15681" end="15691" title="#Gab44" label="Gabus 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q649250" start="16969" end="16989" title="Royal Ontario Museum" label="Royal Ontario Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904824" start="17554" end="17561" title="Tornrak" label="Tornrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248571" start="17587" end="17599" title="John Metcalf (composer)" label="John Metcalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991597" start="17654" end="17664" title="The Terror (novel)" label="The Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q297538" start="17672" end="17683" title="Dan Simmons" label="Dan Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441169" start="17733" end="17749" title="Frictional Games" label="Frictional Games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87512" wikidata="Q111220" url="?curid=87512" title="Churchill County, Nevada">
<text>Churchill County is a county in the western U.S. state of Nevada. As of the 2020 census, the population was 25,516. Its county seat is Fallon. Named for Mexican–American War hero brevet Brigadier General Sylvester Churchill, the county was formed in 1861. Churchill County comprises the Fallon, NV Micropolitan Statistical Area. It is in northwestern Nevada. Churchill County is noteworthy in that it owns and operates the local telephone carrier, Churchill County Communications.

==History==
Churchill County was established in 1861, and was named for Fort Churchill (which is now in Lyon County), which was named for General Sylvester Churchill, a Mexican–American War hero who was Inspector General of the U.S. Army in 1861. Churchill County was not organized until 1864, and its first county seat was Bucklands (which is now in Lyon County). In 1864 the county seat was moved to La Plata; in 1868 it was moved to Stillwater; and in 1904 it was settled in its present position, Fallon. In the 19th century there were several attempts to eliminate Churchill County because of its small population, but Assemblyman Lemuel Allen stopped it on all occasions including convincing the Governor to veto an 1875 bill after it had been passed by both houses.

===Railroads===
The Eagle Salt Works Railroad ran for , primarily on the original Central Pacific grade from Luva ( east of Fernley) to Eagle Salt Works.

The Central Pacific portion of the nation&#x27;s first transcontinental railroad ran through Churchill County, although a portion of the original route has been shifted for a new route south of Wadsworth in favor of Fernley. The Central Pacific later became the Southern Pacific Railroad which was merged into Union Pacific in 1996.

==Geography==
The terrain of Churchill County consists of rugged mountainous ridges, dotted with lakes and ponds. The county&#x27;s east and west sides are higher than the intermediate valley; its highest point around the county periphery is a ridge on the lower east boundary line, at ASL. The county has an area of , of which is land and (1.9%) is water. The county&#x27;s highest point is Desatoya Peak at , while the most topographically prominent peak is Mount Augusta, at ASL.

===Major highways===

* Interstate 11 (Future)
* Interstate 80
* U.S. Route 50
* U.S. Route 50 Alternate
* U.S. Route 95
* U.S. Route 95 Alternate
* State Route 115
* State Route 116
* State Route 117
* State Route 118
* State Route 119
* State Route 120
* State Route 121
* State Route 361
* State Route 715
* State Route 718
* State Route 720
* State Route 722
* State Route 723
* State Route 726
* State Route 839
===Adjacent counties===

* Lyon County – west
* Washoe County – northwest
* Pershing County – north
* Lander County – east
* Nye County – southeast
* Mineral County – south
===Protected areas===

* Fallon National Wildlife Refuge
* Humboldt State Wildlife Management Area
* Lahontan State Game Refuge
* Lahontan State Recreation Area (partial)
* Sand Mountain Recreation Area
* Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge

===Lakes and reservoirs===

* Big Water
* Carson Lake
* Cattail Lake
* Division Lake
* Dog Head Pond
* Dry Lake
* Dutch Bill Lake
* East Alkali Lake Number One
* East Alkali Lake Number Two
* Foxtail Lake
* Goose Lake
* Humboldt Lake (partial)
* Lahontan Reservoir
* Little Soda Lake
* North Nutgrass Lake
* Pintail Bay
* Scheckler Reservoir
* Soda Lake
* Stillwater Point Reservoir
* Swan Check
* Swan Lake
* Tule Lake
* West Nutgrass
* Willow Lake

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
As of the 2000 United States Census, the county had 23,982 people, 8,912 households, and 6,461 families. The population density was . There were 9,732 housing units at an average density of .

The country&#x27;s racial makeup was 84.2% White, 1.6% Black or African American, 4.8% Native American, 2.7% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 3.2% from other races, and 3.3% from two or more races. 8.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 8,912 households, of which 37.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.7% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.5% were non-families. 22.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.09.

28.0% of the county&#x27;s population was under age 18, 8.1% was from age 18 to 24, 28.7% was from age 25 to 44, 22.3% was from age 45 to 64, and 11.9% was age 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.1 males.

The country&#x27;s median household income was $40,808 and the median family income was $46,624. Males had a median income of $36,478 versus $25,000 for females. The county&#x27;s per capita income was $19,264. About 6.2% of families and 8.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.8% of those under age 18 and 7.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the 2010 United States Census, the county had 24,877 people, 9,671 households, and 6,631 families. The population density was . There were 10,826 housing units at an average density of .

The county&#x27;s racial makeup was 82.0% white, 4.5% American Indian, 2.7% Asian, 1.6% black or African American, 0.2% Pacific islander, 4.8% from other races, and 4.2% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 12.1% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 19.2% were English, 18.8% were German, 13.6% were Irish, 6.5% were Italian, and 5.9% were American.

Of the 9,671 households, 33.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.0% were married couples living together, 11.3% had a female householder with no husband present, 31.4% were non-families, and 25.2% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.01. The median age was 39.0 years.

The county&#x27;s median household income was $51,597 and the median family income was $63,599. Males had a median income of $45,057 versus $32,550 for females. The county&#x27;s per capita income was $22,997. About 6.8% of families and 8.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.3% of those under age 18 and 10.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Communities==
===City===
* Fallon

===Census-designated place===
* Fallon Station

===Unincorporated communities===

* Cold Springs
* Dixie Valley
* Eastgate
* Hazen
* Middlegate
* Stillwater
==Education==
The school district is the Churchill County School District. Its public high school is Churchill County High School.

There is a charter school in Fallon, Oasis Academy.

==Politics==
Lying on the boundary between the northwest urban areas of Nevada and the conservative Mormon Great Basin, Churchill County has more in common with the latter region, being overwhelmingly Republican. It was one of three Nevada counties Barry Goldwater won in 1964, and since that time only Jimmy Carter in 1976 and Barack Obama in 2008 have passed so much as thirty percent of the county&#x27;s ballots. The last time Churchill County voted for a Democratic presidential candidate was when it supported Franklin D. Roosevelt against Wendell Willkie in 1940.












==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Churchill County, Nevada
* USS &quot;Churchill County&quot; (LST-583)

==Notes==
==Notable people==
* Luella Kirkbride Drumm, the only woman to serve in the Nevada State Legislature in 1939.
* Mary Daisy White, one of the first women elected to the Nevada Assembly.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111220" start="0" end="16" title="Churchill County, Nevada" label="Churchill County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="22" end="28" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="44" end="54" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="58" end="64" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="76" end="87" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="120" end="131" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q985524" start="135" end="141" title="Fallon, Nevada" label="Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="153" end="173" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="179" end="185" title="brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374085" start="204" end="223" title="Sylvester Churchill" label="Sylvester Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="298" end="327" title="Micropolitan Statistical Area" label="Micropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470925" start="554" end="568" title="Fort Churchill (Nevada)" label="Fort Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q835104" start="586" end="597" title="Lyon County, Nevada" label="Lyon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374085" start="628" end="647" title="Sylvester Churchill" label="Sylvester Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="651" end="671" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="710" end="719" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q835104" start="806" end="815" title="Bucklands, Nevada" label="Bucklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408465" start="918" end="928" title="Stillwater, Nevada" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q985524" start="982" end="988" title="Fallon, Nevada" label="Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325249" start="1275" end="1300" title="Eagle Salt Works Railroad" label="Eagle Salt Works Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053930" start="1414" end="1429" title="Central Pacific Railroad" label="Central Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="1672" end="1697" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="1720" end="1733" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263639" start="2136" end="2149" title="Desatoya Peak" label="Desatoya Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865039" start="2204" end="2217" title="Mount Augusta (Nevada)" label="Mount Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q807242" start="2252" end="2265" title="Interstate 11" label="Interstate 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q818979" start="2277" end="2290" title="Interstate 80 in Nevada" label="Interstate 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q453223" start="2293" end="2306" title="U.S. Route 50 in Nevada" label="U.S. Route 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q892726" start="2309" end="2332" title="U.S. Route 50 Alternate (Nevada)" label="U.S. Route 50 Alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q892793" start="2335" end="2348" title="U.S. Route 95 in Nevada" label="U.S. Route 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q892786" start="2351" end="2374" title="U.S. Route 95 Alternate (Schurz–Fernley, Nevada)" label="U.S. Route 95 Alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q886627" start="2377" end="2392" title="Nevada State Route 115" label="State Route 115"/>
<link wikidata="Q886635" start="2395" end="2410" title="Nevada State Route 116" label="State Route 116"/>
<link wikidata="Q886642" start="2413" end="2428" title="Nevada State Route 117" label="State Route 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q886655" start="2431" end="2446" title="Nevada State Route 118" label="State Route 118"/>
<link wikidata="Q886663" start="2449" end="2464" title="Nevada State Route 119" label="State Route 119"/>
<link wikidata="Q886670" start="2467" end="2482" title="Nevada State Route 120" label="State Route 120"/>
<link wikidata="Q369579" start="2485" end="2500" title="Nevada State Route 121" label="State Route 121"/>
<link wikidata="Q887263" start="2503" end="2518" title="Nevada State Route 361" label="State Route 361"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714992" start="2521" end="2536" title="Nevada State Route 715" label="State Route 715"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714995" start="2539" end="2554" title="Nevada State Route 718" label="State Route 718"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714997" start="2557" end="2572" title="Nevada State Route 720" label="State Route 720"/>
<link wikidata="Q892069" start="2575" end="2590" title="Nevada State Route 722" label="State Route 722"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714999" start="2593" end="2608" title="Nevada State Route 723" label="State Route 723"/>
<link wikidata="Q892075" start="2611" end="2626" title="Nevada State Route 726" label="State Route 726"/>
<link wikidata="Q892342" start="2629" end="2644" title="Nevada State Route 839" label="State Route 839"/>
<link wikidata="Q835104" start="2672" end="2683" title="Lyon County, Nevada" label="Lyon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484340" start="2693" end="2706" title="Washoe County, Nevada" label="Washoe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484342" start="2721" end="2736" title="Pershing County, Nevada" label="Pershing County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495349" start="2747" end="2760" title="Lander County, Nevada" label="Lander County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484418" start="2770" end="2780" title="Nye County, Nevada" label="Nye County"/>
<link wikidata="Q203022" start="2795" end="2809" title="Mineral County, Nevada" label="Mineral County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432415" start="2843" end="2874" title="Fallon National Wildlife Refuge" label="Fallon National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617298" start="3023" end="3058" title="Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge" label="Stillwater National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610041" start="3163" end="3171" title="Dry Lake (Churchill County, Nevada)" label="Dry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476241" start="3280" end="3293" title="Humboldt Lake" label="Humboldt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q613253" start="3306" end="3324" title="Lahontan Reservoir" label="Lahontan Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553175" start="3327" end="3343" title="Soda Lakes" label="Little Soda Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553175" start="3404" end="3413" title="Soda Lakes" label="Soda Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3556" end="3581" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3655" end="3673" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3782" end="3787" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3794" end="3799" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3803" end="3819" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3826" end="3841" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3848" end="3853" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3860" end="3876" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3888" end="3899" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3962" end="3970" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3974" end="3980" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4101" end="4116" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4906" end="4923" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5002" end="5014" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="5117" end="5142" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="5596" end="5603" title="English people" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5616" end="5622" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="5635" end="5640" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="5652" end="5659" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q846570" start="5675" end="5683" title="Americans" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6331" end="6343" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q985524" start="6447" end="6453" title="Fallon, Nevada" label="Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569233" start="6487" end="6501" title="Fallon Station, Nevada" label="Fallon Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q126956281" start="6539" end="6551" title="Cold Springs, Churchill County, Nevada" label="Cold Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472710" start="6554" end="6566" title="Dixie Valley, Nevada" label="Dixie Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330663" start="6569" end="6577" title="Eastgate, Nevada" label="Eastgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5688225" start="6580" end="6585" title="Hazen, Nevada" label="Hazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841800" start="6588" end="6598" title="Middlegate, Nevada" label="Middlegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408465" start="6601" end="6611" title="Stillwater, Nevada" label="Stillwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082435" start="6653" end="6685" title="Churchill County School District" label="Churchill County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118170" start="6713" end="6741" title="Churchill County High School" label="Churchill County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q118874970" start="6781" end="6794" title="Oasis Academy (Nevada)" label="Oasis Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="7046" end="7061" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="7100" end="7112" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="7125" end="7137" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="7313" end="7334" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q698714" start="7343" end="7358" title="Wendell Willkie" label="Wendell Willkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48768810" start="7395" end="7468" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Churchill County, Nevada" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Churchill County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868360" start="7471" end="7513" title="USS Churchill County (LST-583)" label="USS &amp;quot;Churchill County&amp;quot; (LST-583)"/>
<link wikidata="Q106918541" start="7546" end="7568" title="Luella Kirkbride Drumm" label="Luella Kirkbride Drumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555619" start="7601" end="7625" title="Nevada State Legislature" label="Nevada State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q106931694" start="7637" end="7653" title="Mary Daisy White" label="Mary Daisy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494527" start="7693" end="7708" title="Nevada Assembly" label="Nevada Assembly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87513" wikidata="Q150340" url="?curid=87513" title="List of U.S. states and territories by area">
<text>This is a complete list of all 50 U.S. states, its federal district (Washington, D.C.) and its major territories ordered by total area, land area and water area. The water area includes inland waters, coastal waters, the Great Lakes and territorial waters. Glaciers and intermittent bodies of water are counted as land area.

== Area by state, federal district or territory ==

== See also ==

* List of Canadian provinces and territories by area
* List of European countries by area
* List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area
* List of the largest country subdivisions by area
* List of U.S. cities by area
* List of U.S. states and territories by population

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="34" end="44" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="69" end="85" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="101" end="112" title="Territories of the United States" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663988" start="186" end="199" title="inland waters" label="inland waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="201" end="215" title="coastal waters" label="coastal waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="221" end="232" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="237" end="255" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="257" end="264" title="Glacier" label="Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="396" end="446" title="List of Canadian provinces and territories by area" label="List of Canadian provinces and territories by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q222938" start="449" end="483" title="List of European countries by area" label="List of European countries by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634109" start="486" end="545" title="List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area" label="List of political and geographic subdivisions by total area"/>
<link wikidata="Q468508" start="548" end="596" title="List of the largest country subdivisions by area" label="List of the largest country subdivisions by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="599" end="626" title="List of United States cities by area" label="List of U.S. cities by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="629" end="678" title="List of states and territories of the United States by population" label="List of U.S. states and territories by population"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87516" wikidata="Q525149" url="?curid=87516" title="Andvari">
<text>In Norse mythology, Andvari (12th c. Old Norse: ; &quot;careful one&quot;) is a dwarf who lives underneath a waterfall and has the power to change himself into a pike (gedda) at will. 

Andvari had a magical ring Andvaranaut, which helped him become wealthy. Using a net provided by Ran, Loki catches him as a pike and forces him to give up his gold and Andvaranaut. Andvari cursed the stolen gold which would destroy anyone who possessed it. After the deaths of Brynhild and Sigurd, Gunnar left Andvari&#x27;s gold in a cave. Years later, Andvari discovered the cave and his lost gold, although his ring was lost forever.

In Richard Wagner&#x27;s cycle of music dramas, &quot;Der Ring des Nibelungen&quot;, the character Alberich is a combination of Andvari and the character of Alberich from the Nibelungenlied.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q525149" start="20" end="27" title="Andvari" label="Andvari"/>
<link wikidata="Q648336" start="29" end="36" title="First Grammatical Treatise" label="12th c."/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="37" end="46" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="80" end="85" title="Norse dwarves" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="109" end="118" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191674" start="162" end="166" title="esox" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q525117" start="213" end="224" title="Andvaranaut" label="Andvaranaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q663348" start="283" end="286" title="Ran (mythology)" label="Ran"/>
<link wikidata="Q133147" start="288" end="292" title="Loki" label="Loki"/>
<link wikidata="Q191674" start="310" end="314" title="Pike (fish)" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="345" end="349" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="463" end="471" title="Brynhild" label="Brynhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="476" end="482" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q339094" start="484" end="490" title="Gunther" label="Gunnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="627" end="641" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q279272" start="658" end="669" title="music drama" label="music drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="678" end="701" title="Der Ring des Nibelungen" label="Der Ring des Nibelungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257886" start="723" end="731" title="Alberich" label="Alberich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="799" end="813" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="87521" wikidata="Q190580" url="?curid=87521" title="As">
<text>As, AS, A. S., A/S or similar may refer to:
==Art, entertainment, and media==
* A. S. Byatt (born 1936), English critic, novelist, poet and short story writer
* Adult Swim, a programming block on Cartoon Network
* , an academic male voice choir of Helsinki, Finland
* &quot;As&quot; (newspaper), a Spanish sports newspaper
* &quot;As&quot; (song), by Stevie Wonder
* &quot;As&quot;, a 1896 novel by Adolf Dygasiński
* As the Dog, a sculpture in Warsaw, Poland

== Business legal structures ==
* , a Czech form of joint-stock company
* , a Slovak form of joint-stock company
* or &quot;A/S&quot;, a type of Danish stock-based company
* or &quot;AS&quot;, a type of Norwegian stock-based company

== Businesses and organizations ==
* A.S. Roma, an Italian football club
* Alaska Airlines, IATA airline designator
* (Belgium), a World War II resistance organization
* KK AS Basket, a Serbian basketball club
* , a French resistance organization
* Athletics (baseball), an American baseball team referred to as the A&#x27;s
* Australian Standards, a standards organisation established in 1922
* Voiturettes Automobiles A.S., a French-based car manufacturer in 1920s
** AS Type A2, a sports car manufactured by Voiturettes Automobiles A.S.
* Towarzystwo Budowy Samochodów AS, a Poland-based car manufacturer in 1920s and 1930s
** AS S1 and AS S2, a passenger car manufactured by Towarzystwo Budowy Samochodów AS

== Education and research ==
* Academia Sinica, the national academy of Taiwan
* AS-level (disambiguation), any of several uses in education
* Associate of Science, an American academic degree

== Language ==
* As language, a language of West Papua, Indonesia
* as, ISO 639-1 code for the Assamese language of India
* As (cuneiform), a written character
* Aš (cuneiform), a written character

==Mathematics, science and technology==
=== Computing ===
* as (Unix), an assembler program
* .as, the Internet country code top-level domain for American Samoa
* ActionScript, for Flash and Flex applications
* Autonomous system (Internet), a collection of IP networks
* Application server, a computer running back-end applications
* the type conversion operator codice_1, used in C# and Rust

=== Health and medicine ===
* Angelman syndrome, a neuro-genetic disorder
* Ankylosing spondylitis, a type of arthritis
* Aortic stenosis, a valvular heart disease
* Asparagine synthase (glutamine-hydrolysing), an enzyme
* Asperger syndrome, an autism spectrum disorder
* Auricular splint, a custom-made medical device used as part of ear surgery

===Units of measurement===
* Arcsecond, arcminute, a unit of angular measurement
* Attosecond or as, 10−18 second, a subunit of time
* Attosiemens or aS, 10−18 siemens, a subunit of electric conductance

=== Other uses in mathematics and science ===
* &quot;Abramowitz and Stegun&quot;, a mathematical reference work
* Aggregate supply, in economics, the total supply of goods
* Almost surely or a.s., in probability theory
* Arsenic, symbol As, a chemical element
* &quot;As&quot; (beetle), a genus in family Cerylonidae
* Tropical savanna climate, labelled &quot;As&quot; or &quot;Aw&quot;

== Places==
=== Europe ===
* , a town in the Czech Republic
* , Norway
* As, Belgium, in Limburg
* , Norway
* , Swedish name for the quarter in Helsinki, Finland
* As, Ukraine (formerly known as Proletarka), a village in Ukraine

===Other places===
* (, &quot;New As&quot;), a village in East Azerbaijan Province, Iran
* (, &quot;Old As&quot;), a village in East Azerbaijan Province, Iran
* American Samoa (ISO 3166 code AS)
** .as, the Internet country code top-level domain for American Samoa
* Australia (obsolete NATO and FIPS country codes AS)
* Assam, a state of India

== Religion ==
* (singular: , , ), one of the pantheon of Norse gods
* &quot;&quot; (), Arabic for &quot;Peace be upon him&quot;, post-nominal posthumous Islamic honorific

== Other uses ==
* As (Roman coin), a coin and unit of weight
* A.S., , a calendrical system used in the Society for Creative Anachronism
* Anti-submarine warfare, A/S
* Amateurliga Saarland, highest football league in the state of Saarland (defunct)
* Old name for Ossetians, &quot;As&quot; or &quot;Asi&quot;
* A US Navy hull classification symbol: Submarine tender (AS)
* Altostratus, a cloud that is sometimes abbreviated as As.
* AS, Indonesian abbreviation for United States

== See also ==
* Aas (surname)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190580" start="0" end="2" title="As" label="As"/>
<link wikidata="Q190580" start="4" end="6" title="As" label="AS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190580" start="8" end="13" title="As" label="A. S."/>
<link wikidata="Q190580" start="15" end="18" title="As" label="A/S"/>
<link wikidata="Q232417" start="80" end="91" title="A. S. Byatt" label="A. S. Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="161" end="171" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q719880" start="268" end="294" title="As (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;As&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424441" start="325" end="346" title="As (song)" label="&amp;quot;As&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376615" start="399" end="415" title="Adolf Dygasiński" label="Adolf Dygasiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q106084196" start="418" end="428" title="As the Dog" label="As the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="732" end="741" title="A.S. Roma" label="A.S. Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q822614" start="770" end="785" title="Alaska Airlines" label="Alaska Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767767" start="813" end="822" title="Armée secrète (Belgium)" label="(Belgium)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16084473" start="865" end="877" title="KK AS Basket" label="KK AS Basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q504339" start="944" end="964" title="Athletics (baseball)" label="Athletics (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932907" start="1022" end="1042" title="Australian Standards" label="Australian Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q109121755" start="1091" end="1119" title="Voiturettes Automobiles A.S." label="Voiturettes Automobiles A.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q787521" start="1165" end="1175" title="AS Type A2" label="AS Type A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712601" start="1237" end="1269" title="Towarzystwo Budowy Samochodów AS" label="Towarzystwo Budowy Samochodów AS"/>
<link wikidata="Q163926" start="1325" end="1340" title="AS S1 and AS S2" label="AS S1 and AS S2"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="1439" end="1454" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654005" start="1489" end="1514" title="AS-level (disambiguation)" label="AS-level (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1551" end="1571" title="Associate of Science" label="Associate of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866218" start="1619" end="1630" title="As language" label="As language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29401" start="1697" end="1714" title="Assamese language" label="Assamese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q87556293" start="1726" end="1740" title="As (cuneiform)" label="As (cuneiform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q87555110" start="1764" end="1778" title="Aš (cuneiform)" label="Aš (cuneiform)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866220" start="1861" end="1870" title="as (Unix)" label="as (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41731" start="1895" end="1898" title=".as" label=".as"/>
<link wikidata="Q234657" start="1964" end="1976" title="ActionScript" label="ActionScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q749245" start="2012" end="2040" title="Autonomous system (Internet)" label="Autonomous system (Internet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q71550" start="2072" end="2090" title="Application server" label="Application server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333515" start="2139" end="2154" title="type conversion" label="type conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="2182" end="2184" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="2189" end="2193" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q535364" start="2225" end="2242" title="Angelman syndrome" label="Angelman syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q52849" start="2271" end="2293" title="Ankylosing spondylitis" label="Ankylosing spondylitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q531019" start="2317" end="2332" title="Aortic stenosis" label="Aortic stenosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13425045" start="2361" end="2404" title="Asparagine synthase (glutamine-hydrolysing)" label="Asparagine synthase (glutamine-hydrolysing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="2418" end="2435" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744165" start="2467" end="2483" title="Auricular splint" label="Auricular splint"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="2583" end="2592" title="minute of arc" label="arcminute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483628" start="2626" end="2636" title="Attosecond" label="Attosecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q169893" start="2678" end="2689" title="Attosiemens" label="Attosiemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24555" start="2801" end="2822" title="Abramowitz and Stegun" label="Abramowitz and Stegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474789" start="2862" end="2878" title="Aggregate supply" label="Aggregate supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434353" start="2922" end="2935" title="Almost surely" label="Almost surely"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="2969" end="2976" title="Arsenic" label="Arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040151" start="3053" end="3064" title="Cerylonidae" label="Cerylonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="3067" end="3091" title="Tropical savanna climate" label="Tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q696591" start="3209" end="3220" title="As, Belgium" label="As, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380477" start="3300" end="3311" title="As, Ukraine" label="As, Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="3527" end="3541" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41731" start="3564" end="3567" title=".as" label=".as"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="3633" end="3642" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="3687" end="3692" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171318" start="3817" end="3834" title="Peace be upon him" label="Peace be upon him"/>
<link wikidata="Q376895" start="3904" end="3919" title="As (Roman coin)" label="As (Roman coin)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3990" end="4022" title="Society for Creative Anachronism#History" label="Society for Creative Anachronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073579" start="4025" end="4047" title="Anti-submarine warfare" label="Anti-submarine warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q662254" start="4055" end="4075" title="Amateurliga Saarland" label="Amateurliga Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106974" start="4151" end="4160" title="Ossetians" label="Ossetians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4236" end="4257" title="List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy#Submarine tenders (AS)" label="Submarine tender (AS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202145" start="4260" end="4271" title="Altostratus" label="Altostratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4352" end="4365" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662678" start="4384" end="4397" title="Aas (surname)" label="Aas (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
