<doc id="91231" wikidata="Q8201" url="?curid=91231" title="Chinese characters">
<text>Chinese characters are logographs used to write the Chinese languages and others from regions historically influenced by Chinese culture. Of the four independently invented writing systems accepted by scholars, they represent the only one that has remained in continuous use. Over a documented history spanning more than three millennia, the function, style, and means of writing characters have changed greatly. Unlike letters in alphabets that reflect the sounds of speech, Chinese characters generally represent morphemes, the units of meaning in a language. Writing all of the frequently used vocabulary in a language requires roughly 2000–3000 characters; , nearly have been identified and included in &quot;The Unicode Standard&quot;. Characters are created according to several principles, where aspects of shape and pronunciation may be used to indicate the character&#x27;s meaning.

The first attested characters are oracle bone inscriptions made during the 13th century BCE in what is now Anyang, Henan, as part of divinations conducted by the Shang dynasty royal house. Character forms were originally highly pictographic in style, but evolved as writing spread across China. Numerous attempts have been made to reform the script, including the promotion of small seal script by the Qin dynasty (221–206 BCE). Clerical script, which had matured by the early Han dynasty (202 BCE220 CE), abstracted the forms of characters—obscuring their pictographic origins in favour of making them easier to write. Following the Han, regular script emerged as the result of cursive influence on clerical script, and has been the primary style used for characters since. Informed by a long tradition of lexicography, states using Chinese characters have standardized their forms: broadly, simplified characters are used to write Chinese in mainland China, Singapore, and Malaysia, while traditional characters are used in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau.

Where the use of characters spread beyond China, they were initially used to write Literary Chinese; they were then often adapted to write local languages spoken throughout the Sinosphere. In Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese, Chinese characters are known as &quot;kanji&quot;, &quot;hanja&quot;, and &quot;&quot; respectively. Writing traditions also emerged for some of the other languages of China, like the script used to write the Zhuang languages of Guangxi. Each of these written vernaculars used existing characters to write the language&#x27;s native vocabulary, as well as the loanwords it borrowed from Chinese. In addition, each invented characters for local use. In written Korean and Vietnamese, Chinese characters have largely been replaced with alphabets—leaving Japanese as the only major non-Chinese language still written using them, alongside the other elements of the Japanese writing system.

At the most basic level, characters are composed of strokes that are written in a fixed order. Historically, methods of writing characters have included inscribing stone, bone, or bronze; brushing ink onto silk, bamboo, or paper; and printing with woodblocks or moveable type. Technologies invented since the 19th century to facilitate the use of characters include telegraph codes and typewriters, as well as input methods and text encodings on computers.

== Development ==
Chinese characters are accepted as representing one of four independent inventions of writing in human history. In each instance, writing evolved from a system using two distinct types of ideographs—either pictographs visually depicting objects or concepts, or fixed signs representing concepts only by shared convention. These systems are classified as proto-writing, because the techniques they used were insufficient to carry the meaning of spoken language by themselves.

Various innovations were required for Chinese characters to emerge from proto-writing. Firstly, pictographs became distinct from simple pictures in use and appearance: for example, the pictograph , meaning &#x27;large&#x27;, was originally a picture of a large man, but one would need to be aware of its specific meaning in order to interpret the sequence as signifying &#x27;large deer&#x27;, rather than being a picture of a large man and a deer next to one another. Due to this process of abstraction, as well as to make characters easier to write, pictographs gradually became more simplified and regularized—often to the extent that the original objects represented are no longer obvious.

This proto-writing system was limited to representing a relatively narrow range of ideas with a comparatively small library of symbols. This compelled innovations that allowed for symbols which indicated elements of spoken language directly. In each historical case, this was accomplished by some form of the rebus technique, where the symbol for a word is used to indicate a different word with a similar pronunciation, depending on context. This allowed for words that lacked a plausible pictographic representation to be written down for the first time. This technique preempted more sophisticated methods of character creation that would further expand the lexicon. The process whereby writing emerged from proto-writing took place over a long period; when the purely pictorial use of symbols disappeared, leaving only those representing spoken words, the process was complete.

== Classification ==

Chinese characters have been used in several different writing systems throughout history. A writing system is most commonly defined to include the written symbols themselves, called &quot;graphemes&quot;—which may include characters, numerals, or punctuation—as well as the rules by which they are used to record language. Chinese characters are logographs, which are graphemes that represent units of meaning in a language. Specifically, characters represent a language&#x27;s morphemes, its most basic units of meaning. Morphemes in Chinese—and therefore the characters used to write them—are nearly always a single syllable in length. In some special cases, characters may denote non-morphemic syllables as well; due to this, written Chinese is often characterized as morphosyllabic. Logographs may be contrasted with letters in an alphabet, which generally represent phonemes, the distinct units of sound used by speakers of a language. Despite their origins in picture-writing, Chinese characters are no longer ideographs capable of representing ideas directly; their comprehension relies on the reader&#x27;s knowledge of the particular language being written.

The areas where Chinese characters were historically used—sometimes collectively termed the &quot;Sinosphere&quot;—have a long tradition of lexicography attempting to explain and refine their use; for most of history, analysis revolved around a model first popularized in the 2nd-century &quot;&quot; dictionary. More recent models have analysed the methods used to create characters, how characters are structured, and how they function in a given writing system.

=== Structural analysis ===
Most characters can be analysed structurally as compounds made of smaller components (), which are often independent characters in their own right, adjusted to occupy a given position in the compound. Components within a character may serve a specific function: phonetic components provide a hint for the character&#x27;s pronunciation, and semantic components indicate some element of the character&#x27;s meaning. Components that serve neither function may be classified as pure signs with no particular meaning, other than their presence distinguishing one character from another.

A straightforward structural classification scheme may consist of three pure classes of semantographs, phonographs, and signs—having only semantic, phonetic, and form components respectively—as well as classes corresponding to each combination of component types. Of the characters that are frequently used in Standard Chinese, pure semantographs are estimated to be the rarest, accounting for about 5% of the lexicon, followed by pure signs with 18%, and semantic–form and phonetic–form compounds together accounting for 19%. The remaining 58% are phono-semantic compounds.

The 20th-century Chinese palaeographer Qiu Xigui presents three principles of character function adapted from earlier proposals by and Chen Mengjia, with &quot;semantographs&quot; describing all characters with forms wholly related to their meaning, regardless of the method by which the meaning was originally depicted; &quot;phonographs&quot; that include a phonetic component; and &quot;loangraphs&quot; encompassing existing characters that have been borrowed to write other words. Qiu also acknowledges the existence of character classes that fall outside of these principles, such as pure signs.

=== Semantographs ===
==== Pictographs ====

Most of the oldest characters are pictographs (), representational pictures of physical objects. Examples include , , and . Over time, the forms of pictographs have been simplified in order to make them easier to write. As a result, modern readers generally cannot deduce what many pictographs were originally meant to resemble; without knowing the context of their origin in picture-writing, they may be interpreted instead as pure signs. However, if a pictograph&#x27;s use in compounds still reflects its original meaning, as with in , it can still be analysed as a semantic component.

Pictographs have often been extended from their original meanings to take on additional layers of metaphor and synecdoche, which sometimes displace the character&#x27;s original sense. When this process results in excessive ambiguity between distinct senses written with the same character, it is usually resolved by new compounds being derived to represent particular senses.

==== Indicatives ====
Indicatives (), also called &quot;simple ideographs&quot; or &quot;self-explanatory characters&quot;, are visual representations of abstract concepts that lack any tangible form. Examples include and —these characters were originally written as dots placed above and below a line, and later evolved into their present forms with less potential for graphical ambiguity in context. More complex indicatives include , , and .

==== Compound ideographs ====

Compound ideographs ()—also called &quot;logical aggregates&quot;, &quot;associative idea characters&quot;, or &quot;syssemantographs&quot;—combine other characters to convey a new, synthetic meaning. A canonical example is , interpreted as the juxtaposition of the two brightest objects in the sky: and , together expressing their shared quality of brightness. Other examples include , composed of pictographs and , and , composed of and .

Many traditional examples of compound ideographs are now believed to have actually originated as phono-semantic compounds, made obscure by subsequent changes in pronunciation. For example, the &quot;&quot; describes as an ideographic compound of and , but modern analyses instead identify it as a phono-semantic compound—though with disagreement as to which component is phonetic. Peter A. Boodberg and William G. Boltz go so far as to deny that any compound ideographs were devised in antiquity, maintaining that secondary readings that are now lost are responsible for the apparent absence of phonetic indicators, but their arguments have been rejected by other scholars.

=== Phonographs ===
==== Phono-semantic compounds ====
Phono-semantic compounds () are composed of at least one semantic component and one phonetic component. They may be formed by one of several methods, often by adding a phonetic component to disambiguate a loangraph, or by adding a semantic component to represent a specific extension of a character&#x27;s meaning. Examples of phono-semantic compounds include , , , , and . Each of these characters have three short strokes on their left-hand side: , a simplified combining form of (&#x27;water&#x27;). This component serves a semantic function in each example, indicating the character has some meaning related to water. The remainder of each character is its phonetic component: is pronounced identically to in Standard Chinese, is pronounced similarly to , and is pronounced similarly to .

The phonetic components of most compounds may only provide an approximate pronunciation, even before subsequent sound shifts in the spoken language. Some characters may only have the same initial or final sound of a syllable in common with phonetic components. A phonetic series comprises all the characters created using the same phonetic component, which may have diverged significantly in their pronunciations over time. For example, and are characters in the phonetic series using , a literary first-person pronoun. Their Old Chinese pronunciations were similar, but the phonetic component no longer serves as a useful hint for their pronunciation in modern varieties of Chinese due to subsequent sound shifts—demonstrated here in both their Mandarin and Cantonese readings.

=== Loangraphs ===
The phenomenon of existing characters being adapted to write other words with similar pronunciations was necessary in the initial development of Chinese writing, and has remained common throughout its subsequent history. Some loangraphs () are introduced to represent words previously lacking a written form—this is often the case with abstract grammatical particles such as and . The process of characters being borrowed as loangraphs should not be conflated with the distinct process of semantic extension, where a word acquires additional senses, which often remain written with the same character. As both processes often result in a single character form being used to write several distinct meanings, loangraphs are often misidentified as being the result of semantic extension, and vice versa.

Loangraphs are also used to write words borrowed from other languages, such as the Buddhist terminology introduced to China in antiquity, as well as contemporary non-Chinese words and names. For example, each character in the name is often used as a loangraph for its respective syllable. However, the barrier between a character&#x27;s pronunciation and meaning is never total: when transcribing into Chinese, loangraphs are often chosen deliberately as to create certain connotations. This is regularly done with corporate brand names: for example, Coca-Cola&#x27;s Chinese name is .

=== Signs ===
Some characters and components are pure signs, with meanings merely stemming from their having a fixed and distinct form. Basic examples of pure signs are found with the numerals beyond four, e.g. and , whose forms do not give visual hints to the quantities they represent.

=== Traditional &quot;Shuowen Jiezi&quot; classification ===
The &#x27; is a character dictionary authored by the scholar Xu Shen. In its postface, Xu analyses what he sees as all the methods by which characters are created. Later authors iterated upon Xu&#x27;s analysis, developing a categorization scheme known as the , which identifies every character with one of six categories that had previously been mentioned in the &#x27;. For nearly two millennia, this scheme was the primary framework for character analysis used throughout the Sinosphere. Xu based most of his analysis on examples of Qin seal script that were written down several centuries before his time—these were usually the oldest specimens available to him, though he stated he was aware of the existence of even older forms. The first five categories are pictographs, indicatives, compound ideographs, phono-semantic compounds, and loangraphs. The sixth category is given by Xu as ; however, its definition is unclear, and it is generally disregarded by modern scholars.

Modern scholars agree that the theory presented in the &#x27; is problematic, failing to fully capture the nature of Chinese writing, both in the present, as well as at the time Xu was writing. Traditional Chinese lexicography as embodied in the &#x27; has suggested implausible etymologies for some characters. Moreover, several categories are considered to be ill-defined: for example, it is unclear whether characters like should be classified as pictographs or indicatives. However, awareness of the &#x27;six writings&#x27; model has remained a common component of character literacy, and often serves as a tool for students memorizing characters.

== History ==
The broadest trend in the evolution of Chinese characters over their history has been simplification, both in graphical shape (), the &quot;external appearances of individual graphs&quot;, and in graphical form (), &quot;overall changes in the distinguishing features of graphic[al] shape and calligraphic style, ... in most cases refer[ring] to rather obvious and rather substantial changes&quot;. The traditional notion of an orderly procession of script styles, each suddenly appearing and displacing the one previous, has been disproven by later scholarship and archaeological work. Instead, scripts evolved gradually, with several distinct styles often coexisting within a given area.

=== Traditional invention narrative ===
Several of the Chinese classics indicate that knotted cords were used to keep records prior to the invention of writing. Works that reference the practice include chapter 80 of the &#x27; and the &quot; II&quot; commentary to the &#x27;. According to one tradition, Chinese characters were invented during the 3rd millennium BCE by Cangjie, a scribe of the legendary Yellow Emperor. Cangjie is said to have invented symbols called due to his frustration with the limitations of knotting, taking inspiration from his study of the tracks of animals, landscapes, and the stars in the sky. On the day that these first characters were created, grain rained down from the sky; that night, the people heard the wailing of ghosts and demons, lamenting that humans could no longer be cheated.

=== Neolithic precursors ===

Collections of graphs and pictures have been discovered at the sites of several Neolithic settlements throughout the Yellow River valley, including (), and (6th millennium BCE), and (5th millennium BCE). Symbols at each site were inscribed or drawn onto artefacts, appearing one at a time and without indicating any greater context. Qiu concludes, &quot;We simply possess no basis for saying that they were already being used to record language.&quot; A historical connection with the symbols used by the late Neolithic culture () in Shandong has been deemed possible by palaeographers, with Qiu concluding that they &quot;cannot be definitively treated as primitive writing, nevertheless they are symbols which resemble most the ancient pictographic script discovered thus far in China... They undoubtedly can be viewed as the forerunners of primitive writing.&quot;

=== Oracle bone script ===

The oldest attested Chinese writing comprises a body of inscriptions produced during the Late Shang period (1050 BCE), with the very earliest examples from the reign of Wu Ding dated between 1250 and 1200 BCE. Many of these inscriptions were made on oracle bones—usually either ox scapulae or turtle plastrons—and recorded official divinations carried out by the Shang royal house. Contemporaneous inscriptions in a related but distinct style were also made on ritual bronze vessels. This oracle bone script () was first documented in 1899, after specimens were discovered being sold as &quot;dragon bones&quot; for medicinal purposes, with the symbols carved into them identified as early character forms. By 1928, the source of the bones had been traced to a village near Anyang in Henan—discovered to be the site of Yin, the final Shang capital—which was excavated by a team led by Li Ji from the Academia Sinica between 1928 and 1937. To date, over oracle bone fragments have been found.

Oracle bone inscriptions recorded divinations undertaken to communicate with the spirits of royal ancestors. The inscriptions range from a few characters in length at their shortest, to several dozen at their longest. The Shang king would communicate with his ancestors by means of scapulimancy, inquiring about subjects such as the royal family, military success, and the weather. Inscriptions were made in the divination material itself before and after it had been cracked by exposure to heat; they generally include a record of the questions posed, as well as the answers as interpreted in the cracks. A minority of bones feature characters that were inked with a brush before their strokes were incised; the evidence of this also shows that the conventional stroke orders used by later calligraphers had already been established for many characters by this point.

Oracle bone script is the direct ancestor of later forms of written Chinese. The oldest known inscriptions already represent a well-developed writing system, which suggests an initial emergence predating the late 2nd millennium BCE. Although written Chinese is first attested in official divinations, it is widely believed that writing was also used for other purposes during the Shang, but that the media used in other contexts—likely bamboo and wooden slips—were less durable than bronzes or oracle bones, and have not been preserved.

=== Zhou scripts ===

As early as the Shang, the oracle bone script existed as a simplified form alongside another that was used in bamboo books, in addition to elaborate pictorial forms often used in clan emblems. These other forms have been preserved in bronze script (), where inscriptions were made using a stylus in a clay mould, which was then used to cast ritual bronzes. These differences in technique generally resulted in character forms that were less angular in appearance than their oracle bone script counterparts.

Study of these bronze inscriptions has revealed that the mainstream script underwent slow, gradual evolution during the late Shang, which continued during the Zhou dynasty (256 BCE) until assuming the form now known as &quot;small seal script&quot; () within the Zhou state of Qin. Other scripts in use during the late Zhou include the bird-worm seal script (), as well as the regional forms used in non-Qin states. Examples of these styles were preserved as variants in the &quot;&quot;. Historically, Zhou forms were collectively known as &quot;large seal script&quot; (), though Qiu refrains from using this term due to its lack of precision.

=== Qin unification and small seal script ===
Following Qin&#x27;s conquest of the other Chinese states that culminated in the founding of the imperial Qin dynasty in 221 BCE, the Qin small seal script was standardized for use throughout the entire country under the direction of Chancellor Li Si. It was traditionally believed that Qin scribes only used small seal script, and the later clerical script was a sudden invention during the early Han. However, more than one script was used by Qin scribes: a rectilinear vulgar style had also been in use in Qin for centuries prior to the wars of unification. The popularity of this form grew as writing became more widespread.

=== Clerical script ===
By the Warring States period (221 BCE), an immature form of clerical script () had emerged based on the vulgar form developed within Qin, often called &quot;early clerical&quot; or &quot;proto-clerical&quot;. The proto-clerical script evolved gradually; by the Han dynasty (202 BCE220 CE), it had arrived at a mature form, also called . Bamboo slips discovered during the late 20th century point to this maturation being completed during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han (). This process, called (), involved character forms being mutated and simplified, with many components being consolidated, substituted, or omitted. In turn, the components themselves were regularized to use fewer, straighter, and more well-defined strokes. As a result, clerical script largely lacks the pictorial qualities still evident in seal script.

Around the midpoint of the Eastern Han (25–220 CE), a simplified and easier form of clerical script appeared, which Qiu terms . By the end of the Han, this had become the dominant script used by scribes, though clerical script remained in use for formal works, such as engraved stelae. Qiu describes neo-clerical as a transitional form between clerical and regular script which remained in use through the Three Kingdoms period (220–280 CE) and beyond.

=== Cursive and semi-cursive ===

Cursive script () was in use as early as 24 BCE, synthesizing elements of the vulgar writing that had originated in Qin with flowing cursive brushwork. By the Jin dynasty (266–420), the Han cursive style became known as , sometimes known in English as &#x27;clerical cursive&#x27;, &#x27;ancient cursive&#x27;, or &#x27;draft cursive&#x27;. Some attribute this name to the fact that the style was considered more orderly than a later form referred to as , which had first emerged during the Jin and was influenced by semi-cursive and regular script. This later form was exemplified by the work of figures like Wang Xizhi (), who is often regarded as the most important calligrapher in Chinese history.
An early form of semi-cursive script () can be identified during the late Han, with its development stemming from a cursive form of neo-clerical script. Liu Desheng (; ) is traditionally recognized as the inventor of the semi-cursive style, though accreditations of this kind often indicate a given style&#x27;s early masters, rather than its earliest practitioners. Later analysis has suggested popular origins for semi-cursive, as opposed to it being an invention of Liu. It can be characterized partly as the result of clerical forms being written more quickly, without formal rules of technique or composition: what would be discrete strokes in clerical script frequently flow together instead. The semi-cursive style is commonly adopted in contemporary handwriting.

=== Regular script ===

Regular script (), based on clerical and semi-cursive forms, is the predominant form in which characters are written and printed. Its innovations have traditionally been credited to the calligrapher Zhong Yao, who lived in the state of Cao Wei (extant 220–266); he is often called the &quot;father of regular script&quot;. The earliest surviving writing in regular script comprises copies of Zhong Yao&#x27;s work, including at least one copy by Wang Xizhi. Characteristics of regular script include the technique used to end horizontal strokes, as well as heavy tails on diagonal strokes made going down and to the right. It developed further during the Eastern Jin (317–420) in the hands of Wang Xizhi and his son Wang Xianzhi. However, most Jin-era writers continued to use neo-clerical and semi-cursive styles in their daily writing. It was not until the Northern and Southern period (420–589) that regular script became the predominant form. The system of imperial examinations for the civil service established during the Sui dynasty (581–618) required test takers to write in Literary Chinese using regular script, which contributed to the prevalence of both throughout later Chinese history.

== Structure ==

Each character of a text is written within a uniform square allotted for it. As part of the evolution from seal script into clerical script, character components became regularized as discrete series of strokes (). Strokes can be considered both the basic unit of handwriting, as well as the writing system&#x27;s basic unit of graphemic organization. In clerical and regular script, individual strokes traditionally belong to one of eight categories according to their technique and graphemic function. In what is known as the &quot;Eight Principles of&quot;, calligraphers practice their technique using the character , which can be written with one stroke of each type. In ordinary writing, is now written with five strokes instead of eight, and a system of five basic stroke types is commonly employed in analysis—with certain compound strokes treated as sequences of basic strokes made in a single motion.

Characters are constructed according to predictable visual patterns. Some components have distinct combining forms when occupying specific positions within a character—for example, the (&#x27;knife&#x27;) component appears as on the right side of characters, but as at the top of characters. The order in which components are drawn within a character is fixed. The order in which the strokes of a component are drawn is also largely fixed, but may vary according to several different standards. This is summed up in practice with a few rules of thumb, including that characters are generally assembled from left to right, then from top to bottom, with &quot;enclosing&quot; components started before, then closed after, the components they enclose. For example, is drawn in the following order:

=== Variant characters ===
Over a character&#x27;s history, variant character forms () emerge via several processes. Variant forms have distinct structures, but represent the same morpheme; as such, they can be considered instances of the same underlying character. This is comparable to visually distinct double-storey and single-storey forms both representing the Latin letter . Variants also emerge for aesthetic reasons, to make handwriting easier, or to correct what the writer perceives to be errors in a character&#x27;s form. Individual components may be replaced with visually, phonetically, or semantically similar alternatives. The boundary between character structure and style—and thus whether forms represent different characters, or are merely variants of the same character—is often non-trivial or unclear.

For example, prior to the Qin dynasty the character meaning &#x27;bright&#x27; was written as either or —with either (&#x27;Sun&#x27;) or (&#x27;window&#x27;) on the left, and (&#x27;Moon&#x27;) on the right. As part of the Qin programme to standardize small seal script across China, the form was promoted. Some scribes ignored this, and continued to write the character as . However, the increased usage of was followed by the proliferation of a third variant: , with (&#x27;eye&#x27;) on the left—likely derived as a contraction of . Ultimately, became the character&#x27;s standard form.

=== Layout ===
From the earliest inscriptions until the 20th century, texts were generally laid out vertically—with characters written from top to bottom in columns, arranged from right to left. Word boundaries are generally not indicated with spaces. A horizontal writing direction—with characters written from left to right in rows, arranged from top to bottom—only became predominant in the Sinosphere during the 20th century as a result of Western influence. Many publications outside mainland China continue to use the traditional vertical writing direction. Western influence also resulted in the generalized use of punctuation being widely adopted in print during the 19th and 20th centuries. Prior to this, the context of a passage was considered adequate to guide readers; this was enabled by characters being easier to read than alphabets when written without spaces or punctuation due to their more discretized shapes.

== Methods of writing ==

The earliest attested Chinese characters were carved into bone, or marked using a stylus in clay moulds used to cast ritual bronzes. Characters have also been incised into stone, or written in ink onto slips of silk, wood, and bamboo. The invention of paper for use as a writing medium occurred during the 1st century CE, and is traditionally credited to Cai Lun. There are numerous styles, or &quot;scripts&quot; () in which characters can be written, including the historical forms like seal script and clerical script. Most styles used throughout the Sinosphere originated within China, though they may display regional variation. Styles that have been created outside of China tend to remain localized in their use: these include the Japanese and Vietnamese scripts.

=== Calligraphy ===
Calligraphy was traditionally one of the four arts to be mastered by Chinese scholars, considered to be an artful means of expressing thoughts and teachings. Chinese calligraphy typically makes use of an ink brush to write characters. Strict regularity is not required, and character forms may be accentuated to evoke a variety of aesthetic effects. Traditional ideals of calligraphic beauty often tie into broader philosophical concepts native to East Asia. For example, aesthetics can be conceptualized using the framework of yin and yang, where the extremes of any number of mutually reinforcing dualities are balanced by the calligrapher—such as the duality between strokes made quickly or slowly, between applying ink heavily or lightly, between characters written with symmetrical or asymmetrical forms, and between characters representing concrete or abstract concepts.

=== Printing and typefaces ===
Woodblock printing was invented in China between the 6th and 9th centuries, followed by the invention of moveable type by Bi Sheng during the 11th century. The increasing use of print during the Ming (1368–1644) and Qing dynasties (1644–1912) led to considerable standardization in character forms, which prefigured later script reforms during the 20th century. This print orthography, exemplified by the 1716 &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot;, was later dubbed the &quot;&quot; (&#x27;old character shapes&#x27;).
Printed Chinese characters may use different typefaces, of which there are four broad classes in use:
* Song () or Ming () typefaces—with &quot;Song&quot; generally used with simplified Chinese typefaces, and &quot;Ming&quot; with others—broadly correspond to Western serif styles. Song typefaces are broadly within the tradition of historical Chinese print; both names for the style refer to eras regarded as high points for printing in the Sinosphere. While type during the Song dynasty (960–1279) generally resembled the regular script style of a particular calligrapher, most modern Song typefaces are intended for general purpose use and emphasize neutrality in their design.
* Sans-serif typefaces are called in Chinese and &#x27;Gothic&#x27; () in Japanese. Sans-serif strokes are rendered as simple lines of even thickness.
* &quot;Kai&quot; typefaces () imitate handwritten regular script.
* Fangsong typefaces (), called &quot;Song&quot; in Japan, correspond to semi-script styles in the Western paradigm.

=== Use with computers ===

Before computers became ubiquitous, earlier electro-mechanical communications devices like telegraphs and typewriters were originally designed for use with alphabets, often by means of alphabetic text encodings like Morse code and ASCII. Adapting these technologies for a writing system that uses thousands of distinct characters was non-trivial.

==== Input methods ====
Chinese characters are predominantly input on computers using a standard keyboard. Many input methods (IMEs) are phonetic, where typists enter characters according to schemes like pinyin or bopomofo for Mandarin, Jyutping for Cantonese, or Hepburn for Japanese. For example, could be input as using pinyin, or as using Jyutping.

Character input methods may also be based on form, using the shape of characters and existing rules of handwriting to assign unique codes to each character, potentially increasing the speed of typing. Popular form-based input methods include Wubi on the mainland, and Cangjie—named after the mythological inventor of writing—in Taiwan and Hong Kong. Often, unnecessary parts are omitted from the encoding according to predictable rules. For example, is encoded using the Cangjie method as , which corresponds to the components .

Contextual constraints may be used to improve candidate character selection. When ignoring tones, and are both transcribed as ; the system may prioritize which candidate appears first based on context.

==== Encoding and interchange ====
While special text encodings for Chinese characters were introduced prior to its popularization, &quot;The Unicode Standard&quot; is the predominant text encoding worldwide. According to the philosophy of the Unicode Consortium, each distinct graph is assigned a number in the standard, but specifying its appearance or the particular allograph used is a choice made by the engine rendering the text. Unicode&#x27;s Basic Multilingual Plane (BMP) represents the standard&#x27;s 216 smallest code points. Of these, (or %) are assigned to CJK Unified Ideographs, a designation comprising characters used in each of the Chinese family of scripts. As of version , published in 2024, Unicode defines a total of Chinese characters.

== Vocabulary and adaptation ==

Writing first emerged during the historical stage of the Chinese language known as &quot;Old Chinese&quot;. Most characters correspond to morphemes that originally functioned as stand-alone Old Chinese words. Classical Chinese is the form of written Chinese used in the classic works of Chinese literature from roughly the 5th century BCE until the 2nd century CE. This form of the language was imitated by later authors, even as it began to diverge from the language they spoke. This later form, referred to as &quot;Literary Chinese&quot;, remained the predominant written language in China until the 20th century. Its use in the Sinosphere was loosely analogous to that of Latin in pre-modern Europe. While it was not static over time, Literary Chinese retained many properties of spoken Old Chinese. Informed by the local spoken vernaculars, texts were read aloud using literary and colloquial readings that varied by region. Over time, sound mergers created ambiguities in vernacular speech as more words became homophonic. This ambiguity was often reduced through the introduction of multi-syllable compound words, which comprise much of the vocabulary in modern varieties of Chinese.

Over time, use of Literary Chinese spread to neighbouring countries, including Vietnam, Korea, and Japan. Alongside other aspects of Chinese culture, local elites adopted writing for record-keeping, histories, and official communications. Excepting hypotheses by some linguists of the latter two sharing a common ancestor, Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, and Japanese each belong to different language families, and tend to function differently from one another. Reading systems were devised to enable non-Chinese speakers to interpret Literary Chinese texts in terms of their native language, a phenomenon that has been variously described as either a form of diglossia, as &quot;reading by gloss&quot;, or as a process of translation into and out of Chinese. Compared to other traditions that wrote using alphabets or syllabaries, the literary culture that developed in this context was less directly tied to a specific spoken language. This is exemplified by the cross-linguistic phenomenon of brushtalk, where mutual literacy allowed speakers of different languages to engage in face-to-face conversations.

Following the introduction of Literary Chinese, characters were later adapted to write many non-Chinese languages spoken throughout the Sinosphere. These new writing systems used characters to write both native vocabulary and the numerous loanwords each language had borrowed from Chinese, collectively termed &quot;Sino-Xenic vocabulary&quot;. Characters may have native readings, Sino-Xenic readings, or both. Comparison of Sino-Xenic vocabulary across the Sinosphere has been useful in the reconstruction of Middle Chinese phonology. Literary Chinese was used in Vietnam during the millennium of Chinese rule that began in 111 BCE. By the 15th century, a system that adapted characters to write Vietnamese called &quot;&quot; had fully matured. The 2nd century BCE is the earliest possible period for the introduction of writing to Korea; the oldest surviving manuscripts in the country date to the early 5th century CE. Also during the 5th century, writing spread from Korea to Japan. Characters were being used to write both Korean and Japanese by the 6th century. By the late 20th century, characters had largely been replaced with alphabets designed to write Vietnamese and Korean. This leaves Japanese as the only major non-Sinitic language typically written using Chinese characters.

=== Literary and vernacular Chinese ===
Words in Classical Chinese were generally a single character in length. An estimated 25–30% of the vocabulary used in Classical Chinese texts consists of two-character words. Over time, the introduction of multi-syllable vocabulary into vernacular varieties of Chinese was encouraged by phonetic shifts that increased the number of homophones. The most common process of Chinese word formation after the Classical period has been to create compounds of existing words. Words have also been created by appending affixes to words, by reduplication, and by borrowing words from other languages. While multi-syllable words are generally written with one character per syllable, abbreviations are occasionally used. For example, may be written as the contracted form .

Sometimes, different morphemes come to be represented by characters with identical shapes. For example, may represent either or the extended sense of : these morphemes are ultimately cognates that diverged in pronunciation but remained written with the same character. However, Qiu reserves the term &quot;homograph&quot; to describe identically shaped characters with different meanings that emerge via processes other than semantic extension. An example homograph is ; , which originally meant . In the 20th century, this character was created again with the meaning . Both of these characters are phono-semantic compounds with (&#x27;gold&#x27;) as the semantic component and as the phonetic component, but the words represented by each are not related.

There are a number of that are not used in standard written vernacular Chinese, but reflect the vocabulary of other spoken varieties. The most complete example of an orthography based on a variety other than Standard Chinese is Written Cantonese. A common Cantonese character is , derived by removing two strokes from . It is common to use standard characters to transcribe previously unwritten words in Chinese dialects when obvious cognates exist. When no obvious cognate exists due to factors like irregular sound changes, semantic drift, or an origin in a non-Chinese language, characters are often borrowed or invented to transcribe the word—either ad hoc, or according to existing principles. These new characters are generally phono-semantic compounds.

=== Japanese ===
In Japanese, Chinese characters are referred to as . During the Nara period (710–794), readers and writers of —the Japanese term for Literary Chinese writing—began utilizing a system of reading techniques and annotations called . When reading, Japanese speakers would adapt the syntax and vocabulary of Literary Chinese texts to reflect their Japanese-language equivalents. Writing essentially involved the inverse of this process, and resulted in ordinary Literary Chinese. When adapted to write Japanese, characters were used to represent both Sino-Japanese vocabulary loaned from Chinese, as well as the corresponding native synonyms. Most kanji were subject to both borrowing processes, and as a result have both Sino-Japanese and native readings, known as and respectively. Moreover, kanji may have multiple readings of either kind. Distinct classes of were borrowed into Japanese at different points in time from different varieties of Chinese.

The Japanese writing system is a mixed script, and has also incorporated syllabaries called to represent phonetic units called &quot;moras&quot;, rather than morphemes. Prior to the Meiji era (1868–1912), writers used certain kanji to represent their sound values instead, in a system known as . Starting in the 9th century, specific were graphically simplified to create two distinct syllabaries called and , which slowly replaced the earlier convention. Modern Japanese retains the use of kanji to represent most word stems, while syllabograms are generally used for grammatical affixes, particles, and loanwords. The forms of and are visually distinct from one another, owing in large part to different methods of simplification: were derived from smaller components of each , while were derived from the cursive forms of in their entirety. In addition, the and for some moras were derived from different . Characters invented for Japanese-language use are called . The methods employed to create are equivalent to those used by Chinese-original characters, though most are ideographic compounds. For example, (; &#x27;mountain pass&#x27;) is a compound composed of (&#x27;mountain&#x27;), (&#x27;above&#x27;), and (&#x27;below&#x27;).

While characters used to write Chinese are monosyllabic, many kanji have multi-syllable readings. For example, the kanji has a native reading of . In different contexts, it can also be read with the reading , such as in the Chinese loanword (; &#x27;Japanese sword&#x27;), with a pronunciation corresponding to that in Chinese at the time of borrowing. Prior to the universal adoption of , loanwords were typically written with unrelated kanji with readings matching the syllables in the loanword. These spellings are called : for example, was the spelling of &#x27;America&#x27;, now rendered as . As opposed to used solely for their pronunciation, still corresponded to specific Japanese words. Some are still in use: the official list of kanji includes 106 readings.

=== Korean ===

In Korean, Chinese characters are referred to as &quot;hanja&quot;. Literary Chinese may have been written in Korea as early as the 2nd century BCE. During Korea&#x27;s Three Kingdoms period (57 BCE668 CE), characters were also used to write , a form of Korean-language literature that mostly made use of Sino-Korean vocabulary. During the Goryeo period (918–1392), Korean writers developed a system of phonetic annotations for Literary Chinese called , comparable to in Japan, though it only entered widespread use during the later Joseon period (1392–1897). While the hangul alphabet was invented by the Joseon king Sejong in 1443, it was not adopted by the Korean literati and was relegated to use in glosses for Literary Chinese texts until the late 19th century.

Much of the Korean lexicon consists of Chinese loanwords, especially technical and academic vocabulary. While hanja were usually only used to write this Sino-Korean vocabulary, there is evidence that vernacular readings were sometimes used. Compared to the other written vernaculars, very few characters were invented to write Korean words; these are called &quot;gukja&quot;. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Korean was written either using a mixed script of hangul and hanja, or only using hangul. Following the end of the Empire of Japan&#x27;s occupation of Korea in 1945, the total replacement of hanja with hangul was advocated throughout the country as part of a broader &quot;purification movement&quot; of the national language and culture. However, due to the lack of tones in spoken Korean, there are many Sino-Korean words that are homophones with identical hangul spellings. For example, the phonetic dictionary entry for () yields more than 30 different entries. This ambiguity had historically been resolved by also including the associated hanja. While still sometimes used for Sino-Korean vocabulary, it is much rarer for native Korean words to be written using hanja. When learning new characters, Korean students are instructed to associate each one with both its Sino-Korean pronunciation, as well as a native Korean synonym. Examples include:

=== Vietnamese ===

In Vietnamese, Chinese characters are referred to as &#x27; (), &#x27; (; &#x27;Confucian characters&#x27;), or &#x27; (). Literary Chinese was used for all formal writing in Vietnam until the modern era, having first acquired official status in 1010. Literary Chinese written by Vietnamese authors is first attested in the late 10th century, though the local practice of writing is likely several centuries older. Characters used to write Vietnamese called &#x27; () are first attested in an inscription dated to 1209 made at the site of a pagoda. A mature script had likely emerged by the 13th century, and was initially used to record Vietnamese folk literature. Some characters are phono-semantic compounds corresponding to spoken Vietnamese syllables. Another technique with no equivalent in China created compounds using two phonetic components. This was done because Vietnamese phonology included consonant clusters not found in Chinese, and were thus poorly approximated by the sound values of borrowed characters. Compounds used components with two distinct consonant sounds to specify the cluster, e.g. (; &#x27;Moon&#x27;) was created as a compound of () and (). As a system, was highly complex, and the literacy rate among the Vietnamese population never exceeded 5%. Both Literary Chinese and fell out of use during the French colonial period, and were gradually replaced by the Latin-based Vietnamese alphabet. Following the end of colonial rule in 1954, the Vietnamese alphabet has been sole official writing system in Vietnam, and is used exclusively in Vietnamese-language media.

=== Other languages ===
Several minority languages of South and Southwestern China have been written with scripts using both borrowed and locally created characters. The most well-documented of these is the script for the Zhuang languages of Guangxi. While little is known about its early development, a tradition of vernacular Zhuang writing likely first emerged during the Tang dynasty (618–907). Modern scholarship characterizes writing as a network of regional traditions that have mutually influenced one another while maintaining their local characteristics. Like Vietnamese, some invented Zhuang characters are phonetic–phonetic compounds, though not primarily ones intended to describe consonant clusters. Despite the Chinese government encouraging its replacement with a Latin-based Zhuang alphabet, remains in use. Other non-Sinitic languages of China historically written with Chinese characters include Miao, Yao, Bouyei, Bai, and Hani; each of these are now written with Latin-based alphabets designed for use with each language.

=== Graphically derived scripts ===
Between the 10th and 13th centuries, dynasties founded by non-Han peoples in northern China also created scripts for their languages that were inspired by Chinese characters, but did not use them directly: these included the Khitan large script, Khitan small script, Tangut script, and Jurchen script. This has occurred in other contexts as well: Nüshu was a script used by Yao women to write the Xiangnan Tuhua language, and bopomofo () is a semi-syllabary first invented in 1907 to represent the sounds of Standard Chinese; both use forms graphically derived from Chinese characters. Other scripts within China that have adapted some characters but are otherwise distinct include the Geba syllabary used to write the Naxi language, the script for the Sui language, the script for the Yi languages, and the syllabary for the Lisu language.

Chinese characters have also been repurposed phonetically to transcribe the sounds of non-Chinese languages. For example, the only manuscripts of the 13th-century &quot;Secret History of the Mongols&quot; that have survived from the medieval era use characters in this manner to write the Mongolian language.

== Literacy and lexicography ==

The memorization of thousands of different characters is required to achieve literacy in languages written with them, in contrast to the relatively small inventory of graphemes used in phonetic writing. Historically, character literacy was often acquired via Chinese primers like the 6th-century &quot;Thousand Character Classic&quot; and 13th-century &quot;Three Character Classic&quot;, as well as surname dictionaries like the Song-era &quot;Hundred Family Surnames&quot;. Studies of Chinese-language literacy suggest that literate individuals generally have an active vocabulary of three to four thousand characters; for specialists in fields like literature or history, this figure may be between five and six thousand.

=== Dictionaries ===
According to analyses of mainland Chinese, Taiwanese, Hong Kong, Japanese, and Korean sources, the total number of characters in the modern lexicon is around . Dozens of schemes have been devised for indexing Chinese characters and arranging them in dictionaries, though relatively few have achieved widespread use. Characters may be ordered according to methods based on their meaning, visual structure, or pronunciation.

The &#x27; () organized the Chinese lexicon into 19 sections according to character meaning: 3 sections deal with everyday vocabulary, while each of the remaining 16 is dedicated to specialized vocabulary related to a specific topic. The &#x27; () introduced what would ultimately become the predominant method of organization used by later character dictionaries, whereby characters are grouped according to certain visually prominent components called &quot;radicals&quot; (). The &#x27; used a system of 540 radicals, while subsequent dictionaries have generally used fewer. The set of 214 Kangxi radicals was popularized by the &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot; (1716), but originally appeared in the earlier &#x27; (1615). Character dictionaries have historically been indexed using radical-and-stroke sorting, where characters are grouped by radical and sorted within each group by stroke number. Some modern dictionaries arrange character entries alphabetically according to their pinyin spelling, while also providing a traditional radical-based index.

Before the invention of romanization systems for Chinese, the pronunciation of characters was transmitted via rhyme dictionaries. These used the () method, where each entry lists a common character with the same initial sound as the character in question, alongside one with the same final sound.

=== Neurolinguistics ===
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), neurolinguists have studied the brain activity associated with literacy. Compared to phonetic systems, reading and writing with characters involves additional areas of the brain—including those associated with visual processing. While the level of memorization required for character literacy is significant, identification of the phonetic and semantic components in compounds—which constitute the vast majority of characters—also plays a key role in reading comprehension. The ease of recognition for a given character is impacted by how regular the positioning of its components is, as well as how reliable its phonetic component is in indicating a specific pronunciation. Moreover, due to the high level of homophony in Chinese languages and the more irregular correspondences between writing and the sounds of speech, it has been suggested that knowledge of orthography plays a greater role in speech recognition for literate Chinese speakers.

Developmental dyslexia in readers of character-based languages appears to involve independent visuospatial and phonological disorders co-occurring. This seems to be a distinct phenomenon from dyslexia as experienced with phonetic orthographies, which can result from only one of the aforementioned disorders.

== Reform and standardization ==
Attempts to reform and standardize the use of characters—including aspects of form, stroke order, and pronunciation—have been undertaken by states throughout history. Thousands of simplified characters were standardized and adopted in mainland China during the 1950s and 1960s, with most either already existing as common variants, or being produced via the systematic simplification of their components. After World War II, the Japanese government also simplified hundreds of character forms, including some simplifications distinct from those adopted in China. Orthodox forms that have not undergone simplification are referred to as &quot;traditional characters&quot;. Across Chinese-speaking polities, mainland China, Malaysia, and Singapore use simplified characters, while Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau use traditional characters. In general, Chinese and Japanese readers can successfully identify characters from all three standards.

Prior to the 20th century, reforms were generally conservative and sought to reduce the use of simplified variants. During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, an increasing number of intellectuals in China came to see both the Chinese writing system and the lack of a national spoken dialect as serious impediments to achieving the mass literacy and mutual intelligibility required for the country&#x27;s successful modernization. Many began advocating for the replacement of Literary Chinese with a written language that more closely reflected speech, as well as for a mass simplification of character forms, or even the total replacement of characters with an alphabet tailored to a specific spoken variety. In 1909, the educator and linguist Lufei Kui formally proposed the adoption of simplified characters in education for the first time.

In 1911, the Xinhai Revolution toppled the Qing dynasty, and resulted in the establishment of the Republic of China the following year. The early Republican era (1912–1949) was characterized by growing social and political discontent that erupted into the 1919 May Fourth Movement, catalysing the replacement of Literary Chinese with written vernacular Chinese over the subsequent decades. Alongside the corresponding spoken variety of Standard Chinese, this written vernacular was promoted by intellectuals and writers such as Lu Xun and Hu Shih. It was based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin, as well as on the existing body of vernacular literature authored over the preceding centuries, which included classic novels such as &quot;Journey to the West&quot; () and &quot;Dream of the Red Chamber&quot; (mid-18th century). At this time, character simplification and phonetic writing were being discussed within both the ruling Kuomintang (KMT) party, as well as the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). In 1935, the Republican government published the first official list of simplified characters, comprising 324 forms collated by Peking University professor Qian Xuantong. However, strong opposition within the party resulted in the list being rescinded in 1936.

=== People&#x27;s Republic of China ===

The project of script reform in China was ultimately inherited by the Communists, who resumed work following the proclamation of the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1949. In 1951, Premier Zhou Enlai ordered the formation of a Script Reform Committee, with subgroups investigating both simplification and alphabetization. The simplification subgroup began surveying and collating simplified forms the following year, ultimately publishing a draft scheme of simplified characters and components in 1956. In 1958, Zhou Enlai announced the government&#x27;s intent to focus on simplification, as opposed to replacing characters with Hanyu Pinyin, which had been introduced earlier that year. The 1956 scheme was largely ratified by a revised list of characters promulgated in 1964. The majority of these characters were drawn from conventional abbreviations or ancient forms with fewer strokes. The committee also sought to reduce the total number of characters in use by merging some forms together. For example, was written as in oracle bone script. The simpler form remained in use as a loangraph meaning &#x27;to say&#x27;; it was replaced in its original sense of &#x27;cloud&#x27; with a form that added a semantic (&#x27;rain&#x27;) component. The simplified forms of these two characters have been merged into .

A second round of simplified characters was promulgated in 1977, but was poorly received by the public and quickly fell out of official use. It was ultimately formally rescinded in 1986. The second-round simplifications were unpopular in large part because most of the forms were completely new, in contrast to the familiar variants comprising the majority of the first round. With the rescission of the second round, work toward further character simplification largely came to an end. The &quot;Chart of Generally Utilized Characters of Modern Chinese&quot; was published in 1988 and included simplified and unsimplified characters. Of these, half were also included in the revised &quot;List of Commonly Used Characters in Modern Chinese&quot;, which specified common characters and less common characters. In 2013, the &quot;List of Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters&quot; was published as a revision of the 1988 lists; it includes a total of characters.

=== Japan ===

After World War II, the Japanese government instituted its own program of orthographic reforms. Some characters were assigned simplified forms called ; the older forms were then labelled . Inconsistent use of different variant forms was discouraged, and lists of characters to be taught to students at each grade level were developed. The first of these was the -character kanji list published in 1946, later replaced by the -character kanji list in 1981. In 2010, the kanji were expanded to include a total of characters. The Japanese government restricts characters that may be used in names to the kanji, plus an additional list of 983 kanji whose use are historically prevalent in names.

=== South Korea ===
Hanja are still used in South Korea, though not to the extent that kanji are used in Japan. In general, there is a trend toward the exclusive use of hangul in ordinary contexts. Characters remain in use in place names, newspapers, and to disambiguate homophones. They are also used in the practice of calligraphy. Use of hanja in education is politically contentious, with official policy regarding the prominence of hanja in curricula having vacillated since the country&#x27;s independence. Some support the total abandonment of hanja, while others advocate an increase in use to levels previously seen during the 1970s and 1980s. Students in grades 7–12 are presently taught with a principal focus on simple recognition and attaining sufficient literacy to read a newspaper. The South Korean Ministry of Education published the &quot;Basic Hanja for Educational Use&quot; in 1972, which specified characters meant to be learned by secondary school students. In 1991, the Supreme Court of Korea published the &quot;Table of Hanja for Use in Personal Names&quot; (; ), which initially included characters. The list has been expanded several times since; , it includes characters.

=== North Korea ===
In the years following its establishment, the North Korean government sought to eliminate the use of hanja in standard writing; by 1949, characters had been almost entirely replaced with hangul in North Korean publications. While mostly unused in writing, hanja remain an important part of North Korean education: a 1971 textbook for university history departments contained distinct characters, and in the 1990s North Korean schoolchildren were still expected to learn characters. A 2013 textbook appears to integrate the use of hanja in secondary school education. It has been estimated that North Korean students learn around hanja by the time they graduate university.

=== Taiwan ===
The &quot;Chart of Standard Forms of Common National Characters&quot; was published by Taiwan&#x27;s Ministry of Education in 1982, and lists traditional characters. The Ministry of Education also compiles dictionaries of characters used in Taiwanese Hokkien and Hakka.

=== Other regional standards ===
Singapore&#x27;s Ministry of Education promulgated three successive rounds of simplifications: the first round in 1969 included 502 simplified characters, and the second round in 1974 included simplified characters—including 49 that differed from those in the PRC, which were ultimately removed in the final round in 1976. In 1993, Singapore adopted the revisions made in mainland China in 1986.

The Hong Kong Education and Manpower Bureau&#x27;s &quot;List of Graphemes of Commonly-Used Chinese Characters&quot; includes traditional characters used in elementary and junior secondary education.

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
=== Primary and media sources ===
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Unihan DatabaseReference glyphs, readings, and meanings for characters in &quot;The Unicode Standard&quot;, with information about the history of Han unification
* Chinese Text Project DictionaryComprehensive character dictionary, including examples of Classical Chinese usage
* zi.toolsCharacter lookup by orthography, phonology, and etymology
* Chinese Etymology by Richard Sears</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="0" end="18" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="23" end="32" title="logograph" label="logograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="39" end="69" title="Written Chinese" label="to write the Chinese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="121" end="136" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="173" end="187" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="515" end="523" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="713" end="733" title="The Unicode Standard" label="The Unicode Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="927" end="951" title="oracle bone inscriptions" label="oracle bone inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q324293" start="1000" end="1006" title="Anyang" label="Anyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="1055" end="1068" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="1121" end="1131" title="pictograph" label="pictograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195660" start="1270" end="1287" title="small seal script" label="small seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1295" end="1306" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073960" start="1322" end="1337" title="Clerical script" label="Clerical script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="1370" end="1381" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="1532" end="1546" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="1700" end="1712" title="lexicography" label="lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="1786" end="1807" title="simplified characters" label="simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="1837" end="1851" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1853" end="1862" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1868" end="1876" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="1884" end="1906" title="traditional characters" label="traditional characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="1919" end="1925" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="1927" end="1936" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="1942" end="1947" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="2033" end="2049" title="Literary Chinese" label="Literary Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="2127" end="2137" title="Sinosphere" label="Sinosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2142" end="2150" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="2152" end="2158" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="2164" end="2174" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="2214" end="2219" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="2233" end="2238" title="hanja" label="hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q835866" start="2331" end="2349" title="languages of China" label="languages of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q13216" start="2385" end="2401" title="Zhuang languages" label="Zhuang languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="2405" end="2412" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565510" start="2536" end="2570" title="Sino-Xenic vocabularies" label="loanwords it borrowed from Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q190502" start="2838" end="2861" title="Japanese writing system" label="Japanese writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689024" start="2916" end="2923" title="Chinese character strokes" label="strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="3112" end="3122" title="woodblock printing" label="woodblocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="3126" end="3139" title="moveable type" label="moveable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141351" start="3230" end="3244" title="telegraph code" label="telegraph code"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="3250" end="3260" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q529029" start="3274" end="3286" title="input method" label="input method"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="3292" end="3306" title="text encodings" label="text encodings"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="3528" end="3537" title="ideograph" label="ideograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="3607" end="3611" title="sign (semiotics)" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175774" start="3694" end="3707" title="proto-writing" label="proto-writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q816260" start="4820" end="4825" title="rebus" label="rebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="5471" end="5485" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="5605" end="5613" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="5763" end="5772" title="logograph" label="logograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="5895" end="5903" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="6146" end="6161" title="written Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="6188" end="6202" title="morphosyllabic" label="morphosyllabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="6238" end="6244" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="6252" end="6260" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="6288" end="6295" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="6683" end="6693" title="Sinosphere" label="Sinosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="6725" end="6737" title="lexicography" label="lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q15911848" start="7153" end="7163" title="Chinese character components" label="components"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327801" start="8279" end="8288" title="Qiu Xigui" label="Qiu Xigui"/>
<link wikidata="Q711888" start="8375" end="8387" title="Chen Mengjia" label="Chen Mengjia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="8922" end="8932" title="pictograph" label="pictograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="9589" end="9599" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073560" start="11156" end="11173" title="Peter A. Boodberg" label="Peter A. Boodberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q101937531" start="11178" end="11194" title="William G. Boltz" label="William G. Boltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032930" start="12562" end="12577" title="phonetic series (Chinese characters)" label="phonetic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="12825" end="12836" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="12961" end="12981" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="13045" end="13053" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="13058" end="13067" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="14451" end="14460" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="14541" end="14546" title="sign (semiotics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q683566" start="14667" end="14679" title="Chinese numerals" label="the numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q559731" start="14898" end="14905" title="Xu Shen" label="Xu Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="17233" end="17249" title="Chinese classics" label="Chinese classics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17264" end="17277" title="Chinese knotting#Recordkeeping" label="knotted cords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033199" start="17550" end="17557" title="Cangjie" label="Cangjie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="17585" end="17599" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="18113" end="18122" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="18150" end="18162" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178509" start="18553" end="18560" title="Dawenkou culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325593" start="19019" end="19029" title="Late Shang" label="Late Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q369159" start="19099" end="19106" title="Wu Ding" label="Wu Ding"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="19180" end="19191" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="19211" end="19218" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="19262" end="19272" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="19419" end="19437" title="oracle bone script" label="oracle bone script"/>
<link wikidata="Q324293" start="19704" end="19710" title="Anyang" label="Anyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="19714" end="19719" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q464904" start="19749" end="19752" title="Yinxu" label="Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684288" start="19815" end="19820" title="Li Ji (archaeologist)" label="Li Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q337266" start="19830" end="19845" title="Academia Sinica" label="Academia Sinica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406932" start="20205" end="20217" title="scapulimancy" label="scapulimancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991980" start="20686" end="20698" title="stroke order" label="stroke order"/>
<link wikidata="Q905725" start="21229" end="21252" title="bamboo and wooden slips" label="bamboo and wooden slips"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="21587" end="21600" title="bronze script" label="bronze script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167876" start="21694" end="21708" title="Chinese ritual bronzes" label="ritual bronzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="22020" end="22032" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195660" start="22086" end="22103" title="small seal script" label="small seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="22129" end="22141" title="state of Qin" label="state of Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915825" start="22197" end="22218" title="bird-worm seal script" label="bird-worm seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148488" start="22408" end="22425" title="large seal script" label="large seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986801" start="22564" end="22583" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s wars of unification" label="Qin&amp;#x27;s conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="22660" end="22671" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q152919" start="22799" end="22804" title="Li Si" label="Li Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="23215" end="23236" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073960" start="23268" end="23283" title="clerical script" label="clerical script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="23469" end="23480" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="23659" end="23676" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="24061" end="24072" title="Eastern Han" label="Eastern Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="24312" end="24318" title="stelae" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="24391" end="24405" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="24440" end="24454" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q607543" start="24522" end="24536" title="Cursive script (East Asia)" label="Cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="24681" end="24692" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q378564" start="25132" end="25142" title="Wang Xizhi" label="Wang Xizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367992" start="25241" end="25260" title="semi-cursive script" label="semi-cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="26020" end="26034" title="Regular script" label="Regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q197825" start="26219" end="26228" title="Zhong Yao" label="Zhong Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="26256" end="26263" title="Cao Wei" label="Cao Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="26675" end="26686" title="Eastern Jin" label="Eastern Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q559425" start="26736" end="26748" title="Wang Xianzhi (calligrapher)" label="Wang Xianzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="26879" end="26907" title="Northern and Southern period" label="Northern and Southern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="26981" end="27001" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="27048" end="27059" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="27103" end="27119" title="Literary Chinese" label="Literary Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689024" start="27441" end="27448" title="Chinese character strokes" label="strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411056" start="27566" end="27575" title="graphemic" label="graphemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143266" start="27772" end="27791" title="Eight Principles of Yong" label="Eight Principles of"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991980" start="28515" end="28566" title="stroke order" label="order in which the strokes of a component are drawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q837611" start="29006" end="29028" title="variant character form" label="variant character form"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30558" end="30573" title="Word#Word boundaries" label="Word boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q380933" start="30607" end="30612" title="space (punctuation)" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q571005" start="31217" end="31254" title="scriptio continua" label="written without spaces or punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167876" start="31437" end="31451" title="Chinese ritual bronzes" label="ritual bronzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811550" start="31559" end="31577" title="history of paper" label="invention of paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q229235" start="31675" end="31682" title="Cai Lun" label="Cai Lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751511" start="32153" end="32162" title="four arts" label="four arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q494618" start="32316" end="32325" title="ink brush" label="ink brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="32640" end="32652" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="33021" end="33039" title="Woodblock printing" label="Woodblock printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="33126" end="33139" title="moveable type" label="moveable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q200662" start="33143" end="33151" title="Bi Sheng" label="Bi Sheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="33216" end="33220" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="33237" end="33241" title="Qing" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="33394" end="33405" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="33437" end="33454" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="33577" end="33585" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071487" start="33636" end="33640" title="Ming typefaces" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="33800" end="33805" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="34008" end="34020" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q908121" start="34215" end="34235" title="East Asian Gothic typeface" label="Sans-serif typefaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004164" start="34433" end="34441" title="Fangsong" label="Fangsong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249794" start="34509" end="34522" title="Script typeface" label="script styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="34668" end="34677" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="34683" end="34693" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="34773" end="34786" title="text encoding" label="text encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="34793" end="34803" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="34808" end="34813" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="35129" end="35135" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="35139" end="35147" title="bopomofo" label="bopomofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q649913" start="35162" end="35170" title="Jyutping" label="Jyutping"/>
<link wikidata="Q667558" start="35189" end="35196" title="Hepburn romanization" label="Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q912105" start="35521" end="35525" title="Wubi method" label="Wubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033196" start="35547" end="35554" title="Cangjie input method" label="Cangjie"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="35900" end="35904" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="36150" end="36170" title="The Unicode Standard" label="The Unicode Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572774" start="36256" end="36274" title="Unicode Consortium" label="Unicode Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118549" start="36382" end="36391" title="allograph" label="allograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853148" start="36463" end="36487" title="Basic Multilingual Plane" label="Basic Multilingual Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q796156" start="36584" end="36606" title="CJK Unified Ideographs" label="CJK Unified Ideographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q117285848" start="36664" end="36689" title="Chinese family of scripts" label="Chinese family of scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="36896" end="36907" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="37016" end="37033" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="37077" end="37090" title="Chinese classics" label="classic works"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="37439" end="37449" title="Sinosphere" label="Sinosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="37483" end="37488" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="37640" end="37650" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619693" start="37681" end="37713" title="literary and colloquial readings" label="literary and colloquial readings"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="37912" end="37926" title="compound (linguistics)" label="compound words"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="38389" end="38406" title="language families" label="language families"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013041" start="38993" end="39002" title="brushtalk" label="brushtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="39347" end="39355" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565510" start="39424" end="39445" title="Sino-Xenic vocabulary" label="Sino-Xenic vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="39619" end="39643" title="Middle Chinese phonology" label="Middle Chinese phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q403827" start="39693" end="39719" title="Vietnam under Chinese rule" label="millennium of Chinese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="40729" end="40743" title="phonetic shift" label="phonetic shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="40953" end="40958" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="40974" end="40987" title="reduplication" label="reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="41390" end="41397" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="42017" end="42043" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="42173" end="42189" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472605" start="42193" end="42210" title="Written Cantonese" label="Written Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="42807" end="42818" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222379" start="43289" end="43313" title="Sino-Japanese vocabulary" label="Sino-Japanese vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190502" start="43699" end="43722" title="Japanese writing system" label="Japanese writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="43828" end="43832" title="mora (linguistics)" label="mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="43877" end="43886" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q210523" start="44210" end="44219" title="word stem" label="word stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q875368" start="45676" end="45681" title="Jōyō kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q165292" start="45891" end="45905" title="Three Kingdoms of Korea" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142087" start="46027" end="46049" title="Sino-Korean vocabulary" label="Sino-Korean vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="46062" end="46068" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="46255" end="46261" title="Joseon" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="46292" end="46298" title="hangul" label="hangul"/>
<link wikidata="Q37682" start="46340" end="46346" title="Sejong" label="Sejong"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="46855" end="46860" title="gukja" label="gukja"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="47030" end="47045" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="47970" end="47979" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622712" start="49294" end="49313" title="Vietnamese alphabet" label="Vietnamese alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="49542" end="49547" title="South China" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190484" start="49552" end="49570" title="Southwestern China" label="Southwestern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q13216" start="49710" end="49726" title="Zhuang languages" label="Zhuang languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="49730" end="49737" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="49863" end="49875" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439353" start="50280" end="50295" title="Zhuang alphabet" label="Zhuang alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q835866" start="50331" end="50349" title="languages of China" label="languages of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040772" start="50403" end="50407" title="Hmongic languages" label="Miao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992695" start="50409" end="50412" title="Mienic languages" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50414" end="50420" title="Bouyei language#Ancient Bouyei script" label="Bouyei"/>
<link wikidata="Q35103" start="50422" end="50425" title="Bai language" label="Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56516" start="50431" end="50435" title="Hani language" label="Hani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401797" start="50793" end="50812" title="Khitan large script" label="Khitan large script"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401800" start="50814" end="50833" title="Khitan small script" label="Khitan small script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373610" start="50835" end="50848" title="Tangut script" label="Tangut script"/>
<link wikidata="Q912240" start="50854" end="50868" title="Jurchen script" label="Jurchen script"/>
<link wikidata="Q56436" start="50915" end="50920" title="Nüshu" label="Nüshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q370868" start="50942" end="50945" title="Yao people" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031342" start="50965" end="50979" title="Xiangnan Tuhua" label="Xiangnan Tuhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="50994" end="51002" title="bopomofo" label="bopomofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781304" start="51011" end="51025" title="semi-syllabary" label="semi-syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q731189" start="51254" end="51268" title="Geba syllabary" label="Geba syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478711" start="51287" end="51300" title="Naxi language" label="Naxi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q752854" start="51302" end="51312" title="Sui script" label="the script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112388" start="51321" end="51333" title="Sui language" label="Sui language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197646" start="51335" end="51345" title="Yi script" label="the script"/>
<link wikidata="Q37035" start="51354" end="51366" title="Yi languages" label="Yi languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56480" start="51394" end="51407" title="Lisu language" label="Lisu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q469930" start="51579" end="51608" title="Secret History of the Mongols" label="Secret History of the Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="51699" end="51717" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265243" start="52055" end="52081" title="Thousand Character Classic" label="Thousand Character Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q603260" start="52111" end="52134" title="Three Character Classic" label="Three Character Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55274" start="52198" end="52221" title="Hundred Family Surnames" label="Hundred Family Surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="52318" end="52335" title="active vocabulary" label="active vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q849778" start="53384" end="53392" title="Chinese character radicals" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q655897" start="53517" end="53532" title="Kangxi radicals" label="Kangxi radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="53562" end="53579" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="53708" end="53734" title="radical-and-stroke sorting" label="radical-and-stroke sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q120398347" start="53780" end="53821" title="Stroke-based sorting" label="sorted within each group by stroke number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191807" start="54092" end="54110" title="rhyme dictionaries" label="rhyme dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54194" end="54207" title="Syllable#Chinese model" label="initial sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="54311" end="54348" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="54357" end="54370" title="neurolinguist" label="neurolinguist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="55306" end="55328" title="Developmental dyslexia" label="Developmental dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="55829" end="55850" title="simplified characters" label="simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="56291" end="56313" title="traditional characters" label="traditional characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q117073" start="57222" end="57264" title="Romanization of Chinese" label="replacement of characters with an alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699599" start="57339" end="57348" title="Lufei Kui" label="Lufei Kui"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="57452" end="57469" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="57537" end="57554" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="57700" end="57719" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="57773" end="57799" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="57875" end="57891" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q23114" start="57967" end="57973" title="Lu Xun" label="Lu Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q47667" start="57978" end="57985" title="Hu Shih" label="Hu Shih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147606" start="58007" end="58022" title="Beijing dialect" label="Beijing dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="58026" end="58034" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753883" start="58147" end="58161" title="Classic Chinese Novels" label="classic novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q70784" start="58176" end="58195" title="Journey to the West" label="Journey to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8265" start="58215" end="58239" title="Dream of the Red Chamber" label="Dream of the Red Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="58370" end="58380" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="58409" end="58432" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952" start="58568" end="58585" title="Peking University" label="Peking University"/>
<link wikidata="Q419112" start="58596" end="58609" title="Qian Xuantong" label="Qian Xuantong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872057" start="58856" end="58907" title="proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="proclamation of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="58934" end="58944" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088266" start="59186" end="59238" title="Chinese Character Simplification Scheme" label="draft scheme of simplified characters and components"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="59375" end="59387" title="Hanyu Pinyin" label="Hanyu Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15895297" start="59476" end="59502" title="General List of Simplified Chinese Characters" label="revised list of characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q906650" start="60065" end="60102" title="second round of simplified characters" label="second round of simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934868" start="60753" end="60803" title="List of Commonly Used Characters in Modern Chinese" label="List of Commonly Used Characters in Modern Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14941454" start="60892" end="60941" title="List of Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters" label="List of Commonly Used Standard Chinese Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144657" start="61419" end="61424" title="Tōyō kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q875368" start="61482" end="61487" title="Jōyō kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439720" start="61685" end="61690" title="Jinmeiyō kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q485267" start="62596" end="62627" title="Basic Hanja for Educational Use" label="Basic Hanja for Educational Use"/>
<link wikidata="Q623906" start="62733" end="62755" title="Supreme Court of Korea" label="Supreme Court of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498184" start="63660" end="63713" title="Chart of Standard Forms of Common National Characters" label="Chart of Standard Forms of Common National Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="63891" end="63908" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="63913" end="63918" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152418" start="64408" end="64461" title="List of Graphemes of Commonly-Used Chinese Characters" label="List of Graphemes of Commonly-Used Chinese Characters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91233" wikidata="Q492355" url="?curid=91233" title="Winchester, Virginia">
<text>Winchester is the northwesternmost independent city in the Commonwealth of Virginia, United States. It is the county seat of Frederick County, although the two are separate jurisdictions. As of the 2020 United States census, the city&#x27;s population was 28,120. It is the principal city of the Winchester metropolitan area with a population of just over 145,000 extending into West Virginia, which is a part of the Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area. Winchester is home to Shenandoah University and the Museum of the Shenandoah Valley.

==History==
===Native Americans===
Indigenous peoples lived along the waterways of present-day Virginia for thousands of years before European contact. Archeological, linguistic and anthropological studies have provided insights into their cultures. Though little is known of specific tribal movements before European contact, the Shenandoah Valley area, considered a sacred common hunting ground, appears by the 17th century to have been controlled mostly by the local Iroquoian-speaking groups, including the Senedo and Sherando. 

The Algonquian-speaking Shawnee began to challenge the Iroquoians for the hunting grounds later in that century. The explorers Batts and Fallam in 1671 reported the Shawnee were contesting with the Iroquoians for control of the valley and were losing. During the later Beaver Wars, the powerful Iroquois Confederacy from New York (particularly Seneca from the western part of the territory) subjugated all tribes in the frontier region west of the Fall Line.

By the time Anglo-European settlers arrived in the Shenandoah Valley around 1729, the Shawnee were the principal occupants in the area of the Shenandoah Valley that developed into Winchester. During the first decade of white settlement, the valley was also a conduit and battleground in a bloody intertribal war between the Seneca and allied Algonquian-speaking Lenape from the north, and their distant traditional enemies, the Siouan Catawba based in the Carolinas. 

The Iroquois Six Nations (the Tuscarora people had joined them by 1722 after losing battles in the Carolinas in the early 18th century) finally ceded their nominal claim to the Shenandoah Valley at the Treaty of Lancaster (1744), arranged by British officials. The treaty also established the right of colonists to use the Indian Road through the valley, later known as the Great Wagon Road.

The father of Shawnee chief Cornstalk had his own court at Shawnee Springs, near today&#x27;s Cross Junction, Virginia, until 1754. In 1753, on the eve of the French and Indian War (Seven Years&#x27; War), messengers came to the Shawnee from tribes further west, inviting them to leave the Valley and cross the Alleghenies, which they did the following year. The Shawnee settled for some years in the Ohio Country before being forced by the US government under Indian Removal in the 1830s to remove to Indian Territory.

===European exploration and settlement===
French Jesuit expeditions may have first entered the valley as early as 1606, as the explorer Samuel de Champlain made a crude map of the area in 1632. The first confirmed exploration of the northern valley was by the explorer John Lederer, who viewed the region from the current Fauquier and Warren County line on August 26, 1670. In 1705 the Swiss explorer Louise Michel and in 1716 Governor Alexander Spotswood did more extensive mapping and surveying. In the late 1720s, Governor William Gooch promoted settlement by issuing large land grants. Robert &quot;King&quot; Carter, manager of the Lord Fairfax proprietorship, acquired . This combination of events directly precipitated an inrush of settlers from Pennsylvania and New York, made up of a blend of Quakers and German and Scots-Irish homesteaders, many of them new immigrants. The Scots-Irish comprised the most numerous group of immigrants from the British Isles before the American Revolutionary War.

The settlement of Winchester began as early as 1729, when Quakers such as Abraham Hollingsworth migrated up (south) the Great Valley along the long-traveled Indian Path (later called the Great Wagon Road by the colonists) from Pennsylvania. He and others began to homestead on old Shawnee campgrounds. Tradition holds that the Quakers purchased several tracts on Apple-pie Ridge from the natives, who did not disturb those settlements. The first German settler appears to have been Jost Hite in 1732, who brought ten other families, including some Scots-Irish. Though Virginia was an Anglican colony, Governor William Gooch had a tolerant policy on religion. The availability of land grants brought in many religious families, who were often given plots through the sponsorship of fellow-religious grant purchasers and speculators. As a result, the Winchester area became home to some of the oldest Presbyterian, Quaker, Lutheran and Anglican churches in the valley. The first Lutheran worship was established by Rev. John Casper Stoever Jr., and Alexander Ross established Hopewell Meeting for the Quakers. By 1736, Scots-Irish built the Opequon Presbyterian Church in Kernstown.

A legal fight erupted in 1735 when Thomas Fairfax, Sixth Lord Fairfax came to Virginia to claim his land grant. It included &quot;all the land in Virginia between the Rappahannock and the Potomac rivers&quot;, an old grant from King Charles II which overlapped and included Frederick County. It took some time for land titles to be cleared among early settlers.

===Founding===
By 1738 these settlements became known as Frederick Town. The county of Frederick was carved out of Orange County. The first government was created, consisting of a County Court as well as the Anglican Frederick Parish (for purposes of tax collection). Colonel James Wood, an immigrant from Winchester, England, was the first court clerk and had been a surveyor for Orange County, Virginia. He contracted for his own home Glen Burnie homstead around 1737, and it may have been used for early government business. Wood laid out 26 half-acre (2,000 m2) lots in 1744. The County Court held its first session on November 11, 1743, where James Wood served until 1760. Lord Fairfax, understanding that possession is 9/10ths of the law, built a home here (in present-day Clarke County) in 1748.

In February 1752, the Virginia House of Burgesses granted the fourth city charter in Virginia to &#x27;Winchester&#x27; as Frederick Town was renamed after Colonel Wood&#x27;s birthplace in England. In 1754, Abraham Hollingsworth built the local residence called Abram&#x27;s Delight, which served as the first local Quaker meeting house. George Washington spent a good portion of his young life in Winchester helping survey the Fairfax land grant for Thomas Fairfax, Sixth Lord Fairfax, as well as performing surveying work for Colonel Wood. In 1758 Wood added 158 lots to the west side of town. In 1759 Thomas Lord Fairfax contributed 173 more lots to the south and east.

===French and Indian War===

General Edward Braddock&#x27;s expeditionary march to Fort Duquesne crossed through this area in 1755 on the way to Fort Cumberland. Knowing the area well from work as a surveyor, George Washington accompanied General Braddock as his aide-de-camp. Resident Daniel Morgan joined Braddock&#x27;s Army as a wagoner on its march to Pennsylvania. In 1756, on land granted by James Wood, Colonel George Washington designed and began constructing Fort Loudoun, which ultimately covered in present-day downtown Winchester on North Loudoun Street. Fort Loudoun was occupied and manned with guns until the start of the American Revolutionary War.

During this era, a jail was built in Winchester. It occasionally held Quakers from many parts of Virginia who protested the French and Indian War and refused to pay taxes to the Anglican parish. While their cousins in Pennsylvania dominated politics there, Virginia was an Anglican colony and did not tolerate pacifism well. The strong Quaker tradition of pacifism against strong Virginia support for this war and the next, led to long-term stifling of the Quaker population. Winchester became a gateway to Quaker settlements further west; by the mid-19th century, the Quaker population was a small minority here.

During the war in 1758, at the age of 26, Colonel George Washington was elected to represent Frederick County to the House of Burgesses. Daniel Morgan later served as a ranger protecting the borderlands of Virginia against Indian raids, returning to Winchester in 1759. Following the war, from 1763 to 1774 Daniel Morgan served in Captain Ashby&#x27;s company and defended Virginia against Pontiac&#x27;s Rebellion and Shawnee Indians in the Ohio valley (that part now in West Virginia).

===Revolutionary War===

During the Revolutionary War, the Virginia House of Burgesses chose local resident and French and Indian War veteran Daniel Morgan to raise a company of militia to support General George Washington&#x27;s efforts during the Siege of Boston. He led the 96 men of &quot;Morgan&#x27;s Sharpshooters&quot; from Winchester on July 14, 1775, and marched to Boston in 21 days. Morgan, Wood, and others also performed duties in holding captured prisoners of war, particularly Hessian soldiers. Hessian soldiers were known to walk to the high ridge north and west of town, where they could purchase and eat apple pies made by the Quakers. The ridge became affectionately known as Apple Pie Ridge. The Ridge Road built before 1751 leading north from town was renamed Apple Pie Ridge Road. The local farmers found booming business in feeding the Virginia Militia and fledgling volunteer American army.

Following the war, the town&#x27;s first newspapers, &quot;The Gazette&quot; and &quot;The Centinel&quot;, were established. Daniel Morgan continued his public service, being elected to one term in the U.S. House of Representatives (1797–1799).

===Civil War===
Winchester and the surrounding area were the site of numerous battles during the American Civil War, as the Confederate and Union armies strove to control that portion of the Shenandoah Valley. Seven major battlefields are in the original Frederick County:

Within the city of Winchester:
* The First Battle of Kernstown, March 23, 1862
* The First Battle of Winchester, May 25, 1862
* The Second Battle of Winchester, June 13–15, 1863
* The Second Battle of Kernstown, July 24, 1864
* The Third Battle of Winchester, September 19, 1864

Near the city of Winchester:
* The Battle of Cool Spring at Snicker&#x27;s Gap, July 17–18, 1864
* The Battle of Berryville, September 3–4, 1864
* The Battle of Belle Grove (or Cedar Creek), October 19, 1864

Winchester was a key strategic position for the Confederate States Army during the war. It was an important operational objective in Gen Joseph E. Johnston&#x27;s and Col Thomas J. &quot;Stonewall&quot; Jackson&#x27;s defense of the Shenandoah Valley in 1861, Jackson&#x27;s Valley Campaign of 1862, the Gettysburg Campaign of 1863, and the Valley Campaigns of 1864. Including minor cavalry raids and patrols, and occasional reconnaissances, historians claim that Winchester changed hands as many as 72 times and 13 times in one day. Battles raged along Main Street at points in the war. Union General Sheridan and Stonewall Jackson located their headquarters just one block apart at times.

At the north end of the lower Shenandoah Valley, Winchester was a base of operations for major Confederate invasions into the Northern United States. At times the attacks threatened the capital of Washington, D.C. The town served as a central point for troops conducting major raids against the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, and turnpike and telegraph paths along those routes and the Potomac River Valley. For instance, in 1861, Stonewall Jackson removed 56 locomotives and over 300 railroad cars, along with miles of track, from the B&amp;O Railroad. His attack closed down the B&amp;O&#x27;s main line for ten months. Much of the effort to transport this equipment by horse and carriage centered in Winchester.

During the war, Winchester was occupied by the Union Army for four major periods: by Major General Nathaniel Banks (March ? May 12 to 25, 1862, and June 4 to September 2, 1862), Major General Robert Milroy (December 24, 1862, to June 15, 1863), Major General Philip Sheridan (September 19, 1864, to February 27, 1865), and Major General Winfield Scott Hancock (February 27, 1865, to June 27, 1865). Major General Sheridan raided up the valley from Winchester, where his forces destroyed &quot;2,000 barns filled with grain and implements, not to mention other outbuildings, 70 mills filled with wheat and flour&quot; and &quot;numerous head of livestock,&quot; to lessen the area&#x27;s ability to supply the Confederates.

Numerous local men served with the Confederate Army, mostly as troops. Hunter McGuire was Chief Surgeon of the Second &quot;Jackson&#x27;s&quot; Corps of the Army of Northern Virginia. He laid the foundations for the future Geneva conventions regarding the treatment of medical doctors during warfare. Winchester served as a major center for Confederate medical operations, particularly after the Battle of Sharpsburg in 1862 and the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863. Among those who took part in battles at Winchester were future U.S. presidents McKinley and Hayes, both as officers in the Union IX Corps.

The United States assigned military presence to Winchester and other parts of the South during Reconstruction after the war. Winchester was part of the First Military District, commanded by Major General John Schofield. This period lasted until January 26, 1870.

===20th century===
Winchester was the first city south of the Potomac River to install electric light. In 1917 the Winchester and Western Railroad connected Winchester with Rock Enon Springs, moving both vacationers and supplies to the resort that is now Camp Rock Enon with far greater speed. Winchester is the location of the bi-annual N-SSA national competition, keeping the tradition of Civil War era firearms alive. A three-block section of downtown Loudoun Street was closed to vehicular traffic in the 1970s and is a popular pedestrian area featuring many boutiques and cafés. The street was repaved with brick and landscaped in 2013. Apple Blossom Mall opened in 1982.

In 1983, a tire dump in the area containing over seven million tires burned for nine months, polluting nearby areas with lead and arsenic. The location was cleaned up as a Superfund project between 1983 and 2002.

Winchester is known as a &quot;City of Trees&quot; and has been awarded the City of Trees USA award from the Arbor Day Foundation for over three decades.

==Geography==
Winchester is located at .

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , virtually all land.

It is in the Shenandoah Valley, located between the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Allegheny Mountains, and is 15 miles north-northeast of the northern peak of Massanutten Mountain. I-81 passes through the city, along with US 50, US 522, US 17, which ends in the city, and SR 7, which also ends in the city. The city is approximately to the west of Washington, D.C., south of Martinsburg, West Virginia, north of Front Royal, south of Harrisburg, PA and north of Roanoke.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Winchester has depending on which isotherm is used, either a humid continental climate or a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps. The hardiness zone is 6b/7a. Winchester is one of the only cities in Virginia to have a humid continental climate.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

==Economy==

Companies based in Winchester include American Woodmark, Trex, and Rubbermaid Commercial Products. Federal agencies with operations in Winchester include the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.

According to the City&#x27;s 2016 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:
===Record manufacturing===
Winchester was home to Capitol Records&#x27; East Coast Pressing Plant. Capitol Records Distribution Corporation announced in 1968 the purchasing of land in Winchester, Va for a new record processing plant. Along with this plant they built several houses, bought a few small businesses and later built a tape production plant. The Winchester plant began construction in 1968 and production in 1969. The plant initially had a workforce of 250 people. This plant complemented the other existing manufacturing facilities of Capitol Records in Scranton, PA, Jacksonville, FL and Los Angeles, CA. In 1969 Capitol Records&#x27; Pressing Plant in Scranton began phasing out its vinyl manufacturing in favor of the new Winchester plant. Records pressed here include Talking Heads&#x27; &quot;Remain in Light&quot;, Dead Boys&#x27; &quot;Young, Loud and Snotty&quot;, and Yoko Ono&#x27;s &quot;Fly&quot;. Capitol Records announced in late 1987 that it would end tape duplicating production in the US, in favor of offshore manufacturing, including in Winchester by early 1988, putting more than 500 employees out of work when they closed the Winchester plant.

==Arts and culture==

===Historic sites===

===Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival===
Winchester is the location of the annual Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival, which has existed since 1924. It is usually held during the first weekend in May. The festival includes a carnival, firework show, parades, several dances and parties, and a coronation where the Apple Blossom Queen is crowned. Local school systems and many businesses close the Friday of Apple Blossom weekend.

Winchester has more than 20 different &quot;artistic&quot; apples that are made of various materials including wood, rubber pipe, plaster, and paint. These apples were created in 2005 by occupants of the city and were placed at a specific location at the artists&#x27; request after being auctioned off. For example, a bright red apple with a large stethoscope attached to it was placed beside a much-used entrance to the Winchester Medical Center.

==Sports==
Winchester is home to the Winchester Royals, which is part of the Valley Baseball League, a National Collegiate Athletic Association-sanctioned collegiate summer baseball league in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia.

Shenandoah University is located in Winchester and has numerous male and female sports in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference. Winchester is also home to the Winchester Speedway, a 3/8-mile clay oval track, which plays host to a number of touring series, such as the World of Outlaws Late Model Series, and the Lucas Oil Late Model Dirt Series.

==Government and politics==














===City council===

Winchester&#x27;s follows a Council-Manager form of government. It is governed by the Common Council, an elected body within a ward system. The city is composed of four wards, each with 2 councilmen, with the city&#x27;s mayor serving as the ninth representative and leader of the council. While the council began as a 13-member board, it transitioned from 13 to 9, beginning in 2006 and ending in 2008.
* Mayor: Les Veach (R)
* Ward 1: Chip Newcom (D), Richard Bell (D)
* Ward 2: Emily Windle (R), Terry Sloane (I)
* Ward 3: Kim Herbstritt (D), Corey Sullivan (R)
* Ward 4: Kathy Tagnesi (R), John Fox (R)

==Education==
Winchester Public Schools operates public schools, including John Handley High School.

==Transportation==

The most prominent highway serving Winchester is Interstate 81. I-81 extends northeast to southwest, connecting Winchester to eastern Tennessee, southwestern Virginia, eastern West Virginia, western Maryland and central Pennsylvania. Other highways passing through Winchester include U.S. Route 11, U.S. Route 17, U.S. Route 50 and U.S. Route 522. These four highways follow city streets through downtown Winchester, with U.S. Route 17 coming to its northern terminus. Virginia State Route 7 also serves Winchester, terminating in downtown. Virginia State Route 37 bypasses the city to the west.

Winchester Transit provides weekday transit for the city of Winchester. Winchester Regional Airport provides general aviation and air taxi service to the area.

==Notable people==

===18th century===

* John H. Aulick (1787–1873), United States Navy officer and veteran of the War of 1812
* Briscoe Baldwin (1789–1852), Virginia delegate and member of the Constitutional Convention
* Rebecca Boone (1739–1813), pioneer and wife of frontiersman Daniel Boone
* Jane Frazier (1735–1815), frontier woman
* Daniel Morgan (1735–1802), major general of Virginia militia in Revolutionary War; buried at Mount Hebron cemetery
* Presley Neville (1756–1818), general, Revolutionary War aide-de-camp to the Marquis de Lafayette and Chief Burgess of the Borough of Pittsburgh
* Francis White (–1826), U.S. Representative
* James Wood (1741–1813), brigadier general, Governor of Virginia, son of Winchester&#x27;s founder

===19th century=== 

* Robert T. Barton (1842–1917), Virginia Delegate, Mayor of Winchester and Confederate veteran of the American Civil War
* Frances Courtenay Baylor (1848–1920), American novelist
* Rear Admiral Richard E. Byrd (1888–1957), pioneering polar explorer 
* John Snyder Carlile (1817–1878), U.S. Senator, instrumental in the creation of West Virginia*U.S. Solicitor General
* Charles Magill Conrad (1804–1878), Secretary of War under President Millard Fillmore
* Holmes Conrad (1840–1915), United States Assistant Attorney General and Solicitor General of the United States under President Grover Cleveland and Confederate cavalry Major in the American Civil War
* James William Denver (1817–1892), briefly a Brigadier General in the Union Army during the American Civil War, and for whom the city of Denver, Colorado, was named
* Helen H. Gardener (1853–1925), rationalist orator and novelist
* Frederick W. M. Holliday (1828–1899), colonel of 33rd Virginia Regiment, Provisional Army of the Confederate States, member of the Confederate Congress during the American Civil War and the Governor of Virginia from 1878 to 1882.
* George Hay Lee (1808–1873), United States judge
* Mary Greenhow Lee (1819–1907), diarist during the Civil War.
* James M. Mason, U.S. Senator
* Cornelia Peake McDonald (1822–1909), diarist during the Civil War
* Hunter McGuire, M.D. (1835–1900), Chief Surgeon of the Second &quot;Jackson&#x27;s&quot; Corps of the Army of Northern Virginia. President of the American Medical Association.
* Admiral Louis M. Nulton (1869-1954), superintendent of the U.S. Naval Academy (1925-1928) and Commander Battle Fleet (1929-1930).
* Sara Winifred Brown (1868–1948), African American professor and doctor of gynecology. Founded the National Association of University Women, and was the first woman to serve as an alumni trustee of Howard University.
* Spot Poles (1887–1962), accomplished baseball player in the precursor to the Negro leagues
* James Innes Randolph (1837–1887), Confederate Army officer, lawyer, and poet
* Heyward Shepherd (†1859), Black baggage porter on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, first person killed during John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry. There is a monument to him in Harpers Ferry.
* John Randolph Tucker (1823-1897), U.S. Representative from Virginia
* Josiah T. Walls (1842–1905), first African-American U.S. congressman from Florida
* Charles Franklin Moss (1878-1961), photographer and artist
===20th century===

* Anne Tucker McGuire (1913–1988) was an American-born actress who appeared largely in British films and television
* Joe Bageant (1946–2011), writer and journalist
* Brian Benben (1956–), actor
* Harry F. Byrd Jr. (1914–2013), politician and U.S. Senator
* Lang Campbell (1981–), professional football quarterback
* Patsy Cline (1932–1963), country/pop vocalist and music icon, born in Winchester, interred at Shenandoah Memorial Park.
* Doug Creek (1969–2024), professional baseball player
* Claude Dallas (1950–), self-styled mountain man convicted of voluntary manslaughter in the deaths of two game wardens in Idaho.
* Penny DeHaven (1948–2014), country music singer
* John Gilkerson (1985–), professional soccer player
* Erick Green (1991–), professional basketball player
* Jack Holt (1888–1951), actor
* John Kirby (1908–1952), jazz musician
* Mark McFarland (1978–), NASCAR driver
* Devon McTavish (1984–), professional soccer player with D.C. United
* J. Kenneth Robinson (1916–1990), U.S. Representative
* Rick Santorum (1958–), presidential candidate, former U.S. senator
* Henry H. Whiting (1923–2012), Justice of the Supreme Court of Virginia
* Emma Howard Wight (1863–1935), author
* James &quot;Clayster&quot; Eubanks (1992–), professional &quot;Call of Duty&quot; player
==Sister cities==
* Ambato, Ecuador
* Winchester, United Kingdom

Winchester&#x27;s first sister city, Winchester, England, is where the Virginia town gets its name. During the Eisenhower administration, Winchester also formalized a sister city relationship with Ambato, Ecuador.
==References==
==Further reading==
* Bageant, Joe. &quot;Deer Hunting with Jesus: Dispatches from America&#x27;s Class War&quot; (2008), Bageant&#x27;s family was based here; he moved away and became a writer, then returned to study economic and cultural poverty. online

==External links==
* 
* City of Winchester
* Official Winchester-Frederick County tourism website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="0" end="10" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35" end="51" title="Administrative divisions of Virginia#Independent cities" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="59" end="71" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="75" end="83" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="85" end="98" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="110" end="121" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="125" end="141" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="198" end="223" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023770" start="296" end="324" title="Winchester, VA–WV MSA" label="Winchester metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="379" end="392" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828301" start="417" end="463" title="Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area" label="Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799245" start="487" end="508" title="Shenandoah University" label="Shenandoah University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941117" start="517" end="548" title="Museum of the Shenandoah Valley" label="Museum of the Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="586" end="604" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="703" end="716" title="Archeological" label="Archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="718" end="728" title="linguistics" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="733" end="748" title="anthropological" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="882" end="899" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="1021" end="1030" title="Iroquoian" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1062" end="1068" title="Senedo" label="Senedo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1073" end="1081" title="Sherando" label="Sherando"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1089" end="1099" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="1109" end="1116" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="1202" end="1211" title="explorers" label="explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q856216" start="1354" end="1365" title="Beaver Wars" label="Beaver Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="1380" end="1400" title="Iroquois Confederacy" label="Iroquois Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="1429" end="1435" title="Seneca nation" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816534" start="1533" end="1542" title="Atlantic Seaboard fall line" label="Fall Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="1907" end="1913" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="1973" end="1979" title="Siouan" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="1980" end="1987" title="Catawba (tribe)" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="2044" end="2060" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837117" start="2216" end="2235" title="Treaty of Lancaster" label="Treaty of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="2316" end="2325" title="colonists" label="colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599355" start="2337" end="2348" title="Indian Road" label="Indian Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600130" start="2388" end="2404" title="Great Wagon Road" label="Great Wagon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q248519" start="2435" end="2444" title="Cornstalk (Shawnee leader)" label="Cornstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188325" start="2466" end="2481" title="Cross Junction, Virginia" label="Shawnee Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188325" start="2501" end="2525" title="Cross Junction, Virginia" label="Cross Junction, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="2566" end="2587" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="2589" end="2610" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="2718" end="2729" title="Alleghenies" label="Alleghenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="2808" end="2820" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="2868" end="2882" title="Indian Removal" label="Indian Removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="2909" end="2925" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="3064" end="3083" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012459" start="3197" end="3209" title="John Lederer" label="John Lederer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="3364" end="3383" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529611" start="3454" end="3467" title="Sir William Gooch, 1st Baronet" label="William Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q648281" start="3518" end="3548" title="Robert Carter I" label="Robert &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767667" start="3565" end="3577" title="Thomas Fairfax, 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron" label="Lord Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3730" end="3737" title="Religious Society of Friends" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="3742" end="3748" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="3753" end="3764" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3906" end="3932" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600130" start="4122" end="4138" title="Great Wagon Road" label="Great Wagon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4519" end="4527" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529611" start="4545" end="4558" title="Sir William Gooch, 1st Baronet" label="William Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="4834" end="4846" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="4848" end="4854" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="4856" end="4864" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4869" end="4877" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4953" end="4976" title="John Casper Stoever Jr." label="John Casper Stoever Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7096559" start="5074" end="5081" title="Opequon, Virginia" label="Opequon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394237" start="5105" end="5114" title="Kernstown, Virginia" label="Kernstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021164" start="5119" end="5130" title="Hite v. Fairfax" label="legal fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767667" start="5152" end="5186" title="Thomas Fairfax, 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron" label="Thomas Fairfax, Sixth Lord Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5345" end="5360" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="5567" end="5576" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q880696" start="5748" end="5766" title="James Wood (governor)" label="Colonel James Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="5786" end="5796" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q506225" start="5861" end="5884" title="Orange County, Virginia" label="Orange County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941117" start="5917" end="5937" title="Museum of the Shenandoah Valley" label="Glen Burnie homstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233403" start="6191" end="6223" title="possession is 9/10ths of the law" label="possession is 9/10ths of the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="6315" end="6333" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6623" end="6640" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="6988" end="7011" title="General Edward Braddock" label="General Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177722" start="7019" end="7038" title="Braddock&amp;#x27;s March" label="expeditionary march"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="7042" end="7055" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471008" start="7104" end="7119" title="Fort Cumberland (Maryland)" label="Fort Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="7168" end="7185" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="7245" end="7258" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150292" start="7428" end="7440" title="Fort Loudoun (Virginia)" label="Fort Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7597" end="7623" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="7750" end="7771" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="8358" end="8376" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="8631" end="8655" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Conspiracy" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="8713" end="8726" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="8842" end="8863" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="8872" end="8885" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="9192" end="9208" title="prisoners of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="9223" end="9239" title="Hessian (soldiers)" label="Hessian soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994751" start="9512" end="9532" title="White Hall, Frederick County, Virginia" label="Apple Pie Ridge Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="9849" end="9878" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9990" end="10008" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="10084" end="10101" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052376" start="10204" end="10229" title="Battle of Kernstown I" label="First Battle of Kernstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106454" start="10252" end="10278" title="First Battle of Winchester" label="First Battle of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q765215" start="10299" end="10326" title="Battle of Winchester II" label="Second Battle of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128034" start="10351" end="10377" title="Battle of Kernstown II" label="Second Battle of Kernstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626179" start="10399" end="10425" title="Battle of Opequon" label="Third Battle of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870788" start="10482" end="10503" title="Battle of Cool Spring" label="Battle of Cool Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547734" start="10507" end="10525" title="Snicker&amp;#x27;s Gap" label="Snicker&amp;#x27;s Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870473" start="10550" end="10570" title="Battle of Berryville" label="Battle of Berryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710916" start="10598" end="10636" title="Battle of Cedar Creek" label="Battle of Belle Grove (or Cedar Creek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="10704" end="10727" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="10789" end="10792" title="General (CSA)" label="Gen"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="10793" end="10811" title="Joseph E. Johnston" label="Joseph E. Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="10827" end="10873" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Thomas J. &amp;quot;Stonewall&amp;quot; Jackson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153610" start="10931" end="10946" title="Valley Campaign" label="Valley Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377639" start="10960" end="10979" title="Gettysburg Campaign" label="Gettysburg Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543603" start="10997" end="11021" title="Valley Campaigns of 1864" label="Valley Campaigns of 1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="11258" end="11266" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="11643" end="11670" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070564" start="11672" end="11697" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Canal" label="Chesapeake and Ohio Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q714106" start="12188" end="12203" title="Nathaniel Banks" label="Nathaniel Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q774052" start="12281" end="12294" title="Robert Milroy" label="Robert Milroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="12348" end="12363" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q435517" start="12426" end="12448" title="Winfield Scott Hancock" label="Winfield Scott Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944462" start="12884" end="12898" title="Hunter McGuire" label="Hunter McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="12971" end="12996" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="13037" end="13054" title="Geneva convention" label="Geneva convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q719252" start="13210" end="13230" title="Battle of Antietam" label="Battle of Sharpsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33132" start="13247" end="13267" title="Battle of Gettysburg" label="Battle of Gettysburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="13356" end="13364" title="William McKinley" label="McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q35686" start="13369" end="13374" title="Rutherford B. Hayes" label="Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156546" start="13406" end="13414" title="IX Corps (ACW)" label="IX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="13512" end="13526" title="Reconstruction era (United States)" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453336" start="13569" end="13592" title="First Military District" label="First Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q996047" start="13621" end="13635" title="John Schofield" label="John Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="13743" end="13756" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="13768" end="13782" title="electric light" label="electric light"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023871" start="13796" end="13827" title="Winchester and Western Railroad" label="Winchester and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354416" start="13854" end="13871" title="Rock Enon Springs, Virginia" label="Rock Enon Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093853" start="13936" end="13950" title="Camp Rock Enon" label="Camp Rock Enon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053556" start="14019" end="14024" title="N-SSA" label="N-SSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781131" start="14323" end="14341" title="Apple Blossom Mall" label="Apple Blossom Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14480" end="14484" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="14489" end="14496" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="14531" end="14540" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970405" start="14682" end="14702" title="Arbor Day Foundation" label="Arbor Day Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="14787" end="14814" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="14881" end="14898" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="14920" end="14940" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="14949" end="14968" title="Allegheny Mountains" label="Allegheny Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784529" start="15026" end="15046" title="Massanutten Mountain" label="Massanutten Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447647" start="15048" end="15052" title="Interstate 81 in Virginia" label="I-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818438" start="15089" end="15094" title="U.S. Route 50 in Virginia" label="US 50"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15096" end="15102" title="U.S. Route 522#Virginia" label="US 522"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818373" start="15104" end="15109" title="U.S. Route 17 in Virginia" label="US 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507607" start="15139" end="15143" title="Virginia State Route 7" label="SR 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010194" start="15242" end="15268" title="Martinsburg, West Virginia" label="Martinsburg, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="15279" end="15290" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="15301" end="15315" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg, PA"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="15329" end="15336" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15470" end="15499" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="15569" end="15594" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="15600" end="15625" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="15676" end="15690" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745391" start="16088" end="16105" title="American Woodmark" label="American Woodmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985774" start="16107" end="16111" title="Trex Company, Inc." label="Trex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375851" start="16117" end="16147" title="Rubbermaid Commercial Products" label="Rubbermaid Commercial Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="16208" end="16243" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="16249" end="16280" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="16290" end="16327" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="16488" end="16503" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="17223" end="17236" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q843416" start="17249" end="17264" title="Remain in Light" label="Remain in Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180791" start="17272" end="17281" title="Dead Boys" label="Dead Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091206" start="17294" end="17316" title="Young, Loud and Snotty" label="Young, Loud and Snotty"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="17328" end="17336" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q616152" start="17350" end="17353" title="Fly (Yoko Ono album)" label="Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744828" start="17741" end="17774" title="Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival" label="Shenandoah Apple Blossom Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023853" start="18575" end="18592" title="Winchester Royals" label="Winchester Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911976" start="18615" end="18637" title="Valley Baseball League" label="Valley Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="18641" end="18681" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610731" start="18693" end="18726" title="List of collegiate summer baseball leagues" label="collegiate summer baseball league"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="18734" end="18751" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799245" start="18766" end="18787" title="Shenandoah University" label="Shenandoah University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036621" start="19034" end="19068" title="World of Outlaws Late Model Series" label="World of Outlaws Late Model Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696250" start="19078" end="19110" title="Lucas Oil Late Model Dirt Series" label="Lucas Oil Late Model Dirt Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="19203" end="19218" title="Council–manager government" label="Council-Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023848" start="19797" end="19822" title="Winchester Public Schools (Virginia)" label="Winchester Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237586" start="19858" end="19882" title="John Handley High School" label="John Handley High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447647" start="19954" end="19967" title="Interstate 81 in Virginia" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="20039" end="20048" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="20081" end="20094" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="20104" end="20112" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="20125" end="20137" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818350" start="20189" end="20202" title="U.S. Route 11 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818373" start="20204" end="20217" title="U.S. Route 17 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818438" start="20219" end="20232" title="U.S. Route 50 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120325" start="20237" end="20251" title="U.S. Route 522 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 522"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507607" start="20374" end="20396" title="Virginia State Route 7" label="Virginia State Route 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507667" start="20446" end="20469" title="Virginia State Route 37" label="Virginia State Route 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853499" start="20574" end="20601" title="Winchester Regional Airport" label="Winchester Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236705" start="20705" end="20719" title="John H. Aulick" label="John H. Aulick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="20733" end="20751" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="20779" end="20790" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968654" start="20793" end="20808" title="Briscoe Baldwin" label="Briscoe Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301672" start="20886" end="20899" title="Rebecca Boone" label="Rebecca Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="20946" end="20958" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156252" start="20961" end="20973" title="Jane Frazier" label="Jane Frazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767" start="21004" end="21017" title="Daniel Morgan" label="Daniel Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241575" start="21121" end="21136" title="Presley Neville" label="Presley Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="21177" end="21189" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="21197" end="21217" title="Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365866" start="21222" end="21235" title="List of Mayors of Pittsburgh" label="Chief Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="21254" end="21264" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q282480" start="21267" end="21280" title="Francis White (Virginia politician)" label="Francis White"/>
<link wikidata="Q880696" start="21312" end="21322" title="James Wood (governor)" label="James Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350208" start="21434" end="21450" title="Robert T. Barton" label="Robert T. Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478577" start="21555" end="21579" title="Frances Courtenay Baylor" label="Frances Courtenay Baylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210268" start="21626" end="21641" title="Admiral Byrd" label="Richard E. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701638" start="21684" end="21703" title="John Snyder Carlile" label="John Snyder Carlile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="21763" end="21776" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065426" start="21802" end="21823" title="Charles Magill Conrad" label="Charles Magill Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625016" start="21889" end="21902" title="Holmes Conrad" label="Holmes Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889542" start="21916" end="21956" title="United States Assistant Attorney General" label="United States Assistant Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298067" start="21961" end="21999" title="Solicitor General of the United States" label="Solicitor General of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="22016" end="22032" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="22070" end="22088" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q365789" start="22091" end="22111" title="James William Denver" label="James William Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="22227" end="22233" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169345" start="22257" end="22274" title="Helen H. Gardener" label="Helen H. Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q881251" start="22322" end="22346" title="Frederick W. M. Holliday" label="Frederick W. M. Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635310" start="22371" end="22437" title="33rd Virginia Infantry Regiment" label="33rd Virginia Regiment, Provisional Army of the Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q628728" start="22453" end="22473" title="Confederate Congress" label="Confederate Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="22485" end="22503" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="22512" end="22532" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540340" start="22554" end="22568" title="George Hay Lee" label="George Hay Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779674" start="22604" end="22621" title="Mary Greenhow Lee" label="Mary Greenhow Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q167795" start="22667" end="22681" title="James M. Mason" label="James M. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171175" start="22698" end="22721" title="Cornelia Peake McDonald" label="Cornelia Peake McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944462" start="22766" end="22780" title="Hunter McGuire" label="Hunter McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="22912" end="22940" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687801" start="22952" end="22967" title="Louis M. Nulton" label="Louis M. Nulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598700" start="22981" end="23021" title="List of Superintendents of the United States Naval Academy" label="superintendent of the U.S. Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870041" start="23048" end="23060" title="Battle Fleet" label="Battle Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52450906" start="23076" end="23095" title="Sara Winifred Brown" label="Sara Winifred Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580038" start="23294" end="23304" title="Spot Poles" label="Spot Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="23371" end="23384" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q31213064" start="23387" end="23407" title="James Innes Randolph" label="James Innes Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q108824580" start="23466" end="23482" title="Heyward Shepherd monument" label="Heyward Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q805757" start="23520" end="23547" title="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad" label="Baltimore and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="23576" end="23615" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q108824580" start="23628" end="23643" title="Heyward Shepherd monument" label="monument to him"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701525" start="23664" end="23684" title="John Randolph Tucker (1823–1897)" label="John Randolph Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708665" start="23734" end="23749" title="Josiah T. Walls" label="Josiah T. Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q123476142" start="23818" end="23839" title="Charles Franklin Moss" label="Charles Franklin Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q761483" start="23899" end="23918" title="Tucker McGuire" label="Anne Tucker McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208450" start="24015" end="24026" title="Joe Bageant" label="Joe Bageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q45168" start="24064" end="24076" title="Brian Benben" label="Brian Benben"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="24094" end="24111" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="Harry F. Byrd Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6485592" start="24155" end="24168" title="Lang Campbell" label="Lang Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q273080" start="24214" end="24225" title="Patsy Cline" label="Patsy Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300389" start="24336" end="24346" title="Doug Creek" label="Doug Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128788" start="24391" end="24404" title="Claude Dallas" label="Claude Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="24512" end="24517" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164366" start="24521" end="24534" title="Penny DeHaven" label="Penny DeHaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235343" start="24571" end="24585" title="John Gilkerson" label="John Gilkerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10345591" start="24624" end="24635" title="Erick Green" label="Erick Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357250" start="24678" end="24687" title="Jack Holt (actor)" label="Jack Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q338644" start="24709" end="24719" title="John Kirby (musician)" label="John Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768801" start="24749" end="24763" title="Mark McFarland" label="Mark McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421488" start="24789" end="24803" title="Devon McTavish" label="Devon McTavish"/>
<link wikidata="Q238593" start="24845" end="24856" title="D.C. United" label="D.C. United"/>
<link wikidata="Q302193" start="24859" end="24878" title="J. Kenneth Robinson" label="J. Kenneth Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155985" start="24914" end="24927" title="Rick Santorum" label="Rick Santorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722421" start="24983" end="24999" title="Henry H. Whiting" label="Henry H. Whiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q64240961" start="25056" end="25073" title="Emma Howard Wight" label="Emma Howard Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907296" start="25096" end="25130" title="James &amp;quot;Clayster&amp;quot; Eubanks" label="James &amp;quot;Clayster&amp;quot; Eubanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="25159" end="25171" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q210161" start="25205" end="25211" title="San Juan de Ambato" label="Ambato"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="25223" end="25233" title="Winchester, England" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="25288" end="25298" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q210161" start="25448" end="25463" title="San Juan de Ambato" label="Ambato, Ecuador"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91234" wikidata="Q492346" url="?curid=91234" title="Williamsburg, Virginia">
<text>Williamsburg is an independent city in Virginia, United States. As of the 2020 census, it had a population of 15,425. Located on the Virginia Peninsula, Williamsburg is in the northern part of the Hampton Roads metropolitan area. It is bordered by James City County on the west and south and York County on the east.

English settlers founded Williamsburg in 1632 as Middle Plantation, a fortified settlement on high ground between the James and York rivers, and farther inland than their headquarters at Jamestown. The city functioned as the capital of the Colony and Commonwealth of Virginia from 1699 to 1780 and became the center of political events in Virginia leading to the American Revolution. The College of William &amp; Mary, established in 1693, is the second-oldest institution of higher education in the United States and the only one of the nine colonial colleges in the South. Its alumni include three U.S. presidents as well as many other important figures in the nation&#x27;s early history.

The city&#x27;s tourism-based economy is driven by Colonial Williamsburg, the city&#x27;s restored Historic Area. Along with nearby Jamestown and Yorktown, Williamsburg forms part of the Historic Triangle, which annually attracts more than four million tourists. Modern Williamsburg is also a college town, inhabited in large part by William &amp; Mary students, faculty and staff.

==History==

===17th century===
Before English settlers arrived at Jamestown to establish the Colony of Virginia in 1607, the area that would become Williamsburg formed part of the territory of the Powhatan Confederacy. By the 1630s, English settlements had grown to dominate the lower (eastern) portion of the Virginia Peninsula, and Powhatan tribes had abandoned their nearby villages. Between 1630 and 1633, after the war that followed the Indian massacre of 1622, English colonists constructed a defensive palisade across the peninsula and a settlement named Middle Plantation as a primary guard-station along the palisade.

Jamestown, the original capital of Virginia Colony, burned down during the events of Bacon&#x27;s Rebellion in 1676. Once Governor William Berkeley had regained control, temporary government headquarters were established about away on the high ground at Middle Plantation, pending the rebuilding of the Statehouse at Jamestown. The members of the House of Burgesses discovered that the &quot;temporary&quot; location was both safer and more pleasant than Jamestown, which was humid and plagued with mosquitoes.

A school of higher education had long been an aspiration of the colonists. An early attempt at Henricus failed after the Indian massacre of 1622; the location at the outskirts of the developed part of the colony had left it vulnerable to attack. In the 1690s, the colonists again tried to establish a school. They commissioned Reverend James Blair, who spent several years in England lobbying, and finally obtained a royal charter for the desired new school. It was to be named the College of William &amp; Mary in honor of the monarchs of the time. When Blair returned to Virginia, the new school was founded in a safe place, Middle Plantation, in 1693. Classes began in temporary quarters in 1694, and construction soon started on the College Building, a precursor to the Wren Building.

Four years later, in 1698, the rebuilt Statehouse in Jamestown burned down again, this time accidentally. The government again &quot;temporarily&quot; relocated to Middle Plantation, and in addition to the better climate now also enjoyed use of the college&#x27;s facilities. The college students made a presentation to the House of Burgesses, and it was agreed in 1699 that the colonial capital would move to Middle Plantation permanently. A village was laid out and Middle Plantation was renamed Williamsburg in honor of King William III of England, befitting the town&#x27;s newly elevated status.

After Williamsburg&#x27;s designation as the colony&#x27;s capital, immediate provision was made for construction of a capitol building and for platting the city according to Theodorick Bland&#x27;s survey. His design utilized the college&#x27;s extant sites and the almost new Bruton Parish Church as focal points, and placed the new Capitol building opposite the college, with Duke of Gloucester Street connecting them.

Alexander Spotswood, who arrived in Virginia as lieutenant governor in 1710, had several ravines filled and streets leveled, and assisted in erecting additional college buildings, a church, and a magazine for the storage of arms. In 1722, Williamsburg was granted a royal charter as a &quot;city incorporate&quot;, which is now believed to be the oldest charter in the United States.

Middle Plantation was included in James City Shire when it was established in 1634, as the colony reached a total population of approximately 5,000. (James City and Virginia&#x27;s other shires changed their names a few years later; James City Shire then became known as James City County). The middle ground ridge-line was essentially the dividing line with Charles River Shire, which was renamed York County after King Charles I () fell out of favor with the citizens of England. As Middle Plantation (and later Williamsburg) developed, the boundaries were adjusted slightly. For most of the colonial period, the border between the two counties ran down the center of Duke of Gloucester Street.

===18th century===
For almost a century after the 1776 formation both of the Commonwealth of Virginia and of the United States, despite practical complications, the town remained divided between the two counties.

Williamsburg was the site of the first attempted canal in the United States. In 1771, Lord Dunmore, who was Virginia&#x27;s last Royal Governor, announced plans to connect Archer&#x27;s Creek, which leads to the James River, with Queen&#x27;s Creek, leading to the York River. It would have formed a water route across the Virginia Peninsula, but was not completed. Remains of this canal are visible at the rear of the grounds behind the Governor&#x27;s Palace in Colonial Williamsburg.

In the 1770s, the first purpose-built psychiatric hospital in the United States, the Public Hospital for Persons of Insane and Disordered Minds, was founded in the city. Known in modern times as Eastern State Hospital, it was established by Act of the Virginia colonial legislature on June 4, 1770. The Act to &quot;Make Provision for the Support and Maintenance of Ideots, Lunaticks, and other Persons of unsound Minds&quot; authorized the House of Burgesses to appoint a 15-man Court Of Directors to oversee the hospital&#x27;s operations and admissions. In 1771, contractor Benjamin Powell constructed a two-story building on Francis Street near the college, capable of housing 24 patients. The design included &quot;yards for patients to walk and take the Air in&quot; as well as provisions for a fence to keep the patients out of the town.

The Gunpowder Incident began in April 1775 as a dispute between Dunmore and Virginia colonists over gunpowder stored in the Williamsburg magazine. Fearing rebellion, Dunmore ordered royal marines to seize gunpowder from the magazine. Virginia militia led by Patrick Henry responded to the &quot;theft&quot; and marched on Williamsburg. A standoff ensued, with Dunmore threatening to destroy the city if attacked by the militia. The dispute was resolved when payment for the powder was arranged. This was an important precursor in the run-up to the American Revolution. Following the Declaration of Independence from Britain, the American Revolutionary War broke out in 1776.

On July 25, 1776, the Declaration of Independence was proclaimed at Williamsburg and received with &quot;applause under discharge of cannon and firing of small arms with illuminations [fireworks] in the evening&quot;.

During the war, Virginia&#x27;s capital was moved again, in 1780, this time to Richmond at the urging of then-Governor Thomas Jefferson, who feared Williamsburg&#x27;s location made it vulnerable to a British attack. Williamsburg remained a venue for many important conventions during the war.

Williamsburg ceased to be the capital of the new Commonwealth of Virginia in 1780 and went into decline, although not to the degree of Jamestown. Another factor was travel. In the 18th and early 19th-century, transportation in the colony was largely by canals and navigable rivers. As it had been built on &quot;high ground&quot;, Williamsburg was not sited on a major water-route, unlike many early U.S. communities. The railroads that began to be built in the 1830s also did not yet come through the city.

===19th century===
Despite Williamsburg&#x27;s loss of the business activity involved in government, the College of William &amp; Mary continued and expanded, as did the Public Hospital for Persons of Insane and Disordered Minds. The latter became known as Eastern State Hospital.

At the outset of the American Civil War (1861–1865), enlistments in the Confederate Army depleted the College of William &amp; Mary&#x27;s student body and on May 10, 1861, the faculty voted to close the college for the duration of the war. The College Building served as a Confederate barracks and later as a hospital before being burned by Union forces in 1862.

The Williamsburg area saw combat in the spring of 1862 during the Peninsula Campaign, a Union effort to take Richmond from the east from a base at Fort Monroe. Throughout late 1861 and early 1862, the small contingent of Confederate defenders was known as the Army of the Peninsula, led by General John B. Magruder. He successfully created ruses to fool the invaders as to the size and strength of his forces, and deterred their attack. The subsequent slow Union movement up the peninsula gained valuable time for defenses to be constructed at the Confederate capital at Richmond.

In early May 1862, after holding off Union troops for over a month, the defenders withdrew quietly from the Warwick Line (stretching across the Peninsula between Yorktown and Mulberry Island). As General George McClellan&#x27;s Union forces crept up the Peninsula to pursue the retreating Confederate forces, a rear-guard force led by General James Longstreet and supported by General J. E. B. Stuart&#x27;s cavalry blocked their westward progression at the Williamsburg Line. This was a series of 14 redoubts east of town, with earthen Fort Magruder (also known as Redoubt # 6) at the crucial junction of the two major roads leading to Williamsburg from the east. College of William &amp; Mary President Benjamin S. Ewell oversaw the design and construction. He owned a farm in James City County, and had been commissioned as an officer in the Confederate Army after the college closed in 1861.

At the Battle of Williamsburg on May 5, 1862, the defenders succeeded in delaying the Union forces long enough for the retreating Confederates to reach the outer defenses of Richmond.

A siege of Richmond ensued, culminating in the Seven Days Battles (June to July 1862). McClellan&#x27;s campaign failed to capture Richmond. Meanwhile, on May 6, 1862, Williamsburg had fallen to the Union. The college&#x27;s Brafferton building operated for a time as quarters for the commanding officer of the Union garrison occupying the town. On September 9, drunken soldiers of the 5th Pennsylvania Cavalry set fire to the College Building, allegedly to prevent Confederate snipers from using it for cover. Williamsburg underwent much damage during the Union occupation, which lasted until September 1865.
In 1881, Collis P. Huntington&#x27;s Chesapeake and Ohio Railway (C&amp;O) built its Peninsula Extension through the area, eventually establishing six stations in Williamsburg and the surrounding area. The Peninsula Extension was good news for the farmers and merchants of the Virginia Peninsula, and they generally welcomed the railroad, which aided passenger travel and shipping. Williamsburg allowed tracks to be placed down Duke of Gloucester Street and even directly through the ruins of the capitol building. (They were later relocated, and Collis Huntington&#x27;s real-estate arm, Old Dominion Land Company, donated the site to the forerunner of the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities.)

The railroad&#x27;s main purpose was shipping eastbound West Virginia bituminous coal to Newport News. Using the new coal piers, coal was loaded aboard large colliers in the harbor of Hampton Roads for shipment to New England and to export destinations worldwide.

Due in no small part to President Ewell&#x27;s efforts, education continued at the College of William &amp; Mary, although teaching was temporarily suspended for financial reasons from 1882 to 1888. Ewell&#x27;s efforts to restore the school and its programs during and after Reconstruction became legendary in Williamsburg and at the college, and were ultimately successful, with funding both from the U.S. Congress and from the Commonwealth of Virginia. In 1888, the college secured $10,000 from the General Assembly of the Commonwealth and established a normal school to educate teachers; in 1906, the General Assembly modified the college charter, took ownership of the college buildings and grounds, and assumed primary responsibility for funding it. Ewell remained in Williamsburg as President Emeritus of the college until his death in 1894.

Beginning in the 1890s, C&amp;O land agent Carl M. Bergh, a Norwegian-American who had earlier farmed in the midwestern states, realized that eastern Virginia&#x27;s gentler climate and depressed post-Civil War land prices would be attractive to his fellow Scandinavians who were farming in other northern parts of the country. He began sending out notices and selling land. Soon there was a substantial concentration of relocated Americans of Norwegian, Swedish, and Danish descent in the area. The location earlier known as Vaiden&#x27;s Siding on the railroad just west of Williamsburg in James City County was renamed Norge. These citizens and their descendants found the local conditions favorable, and many became leading merchants, tradespersons, and farmers in the community. These transplanted Americans brought some new blood and enthusiasm to the old colonial capital area.

===20th century===

In the early 20th century, Williamsburg remained a sleepy small town. Some newer structures were interspersed with colonial-era buildings, but the town was much less progressive than Virginia&#x27;s other, busier communities of similar size. Some local lore indicates that the residents liked it that way, as described in longtime Virginia Peninsula journalist, author and historian Parke S. Rouse Jr.&#x27;s work. On June 26, 1912, the &quot;Richmond Times-Dispatch&quot; published an editorial that dubbed Williamsburg &quot;Lotusburg,&quot; for &quot;Tuesday was election day in Williamsburg but nobody remembered it. The clerk forgot to wake the electoral board, the electoral board could not arouse itself long enough to have the ballots printed, the candidates forgot they were running, the voters forgot they were alive.&quot;

But even if such complacency existed, one Episcopal priest dreamed of expanding and changing Williamsburg&#x27;s future to give it a new major purpose, turning much of it into a massive living museum. In the early 20th century, the Reverend Dr. W. A. R. Goodwin of Williamsburg&#x27;s Bruton Parish Church championed one of the nation&#x27;s largest historic restorations. Initially, Goodwin just aimed to save his historic church building. This he had accomplished by 1907, in time for the 300th anniversary of the founding of the Episcopal Church in Virginia. But upon returning to Williamsburg in 1923 after serving a number of years in upstate New York, he realized that many of the other remaining colonial-era buildings were also in deteriorating condition.

Goodwin dreamed of a much larger restoration along the lines of what he had accomplished with his church. Of modest means, he sought support and financing from a number of sources before successfully attracting the interest and major financial support of Standard Oil heir and philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr. and his wife Abby Aldrich Rockefeller. Their combined efforts created Colonial Williamsburg, restoring much of downtown Williamsburg and developing a Historic Area celebrating the patriots and early history of the colonial-era.

, Colonial Williamsburg is Virginia&#x27;s largest tourist attraction by attendance and the cornerstone of the Historic Triangle, with Jamestown and Yorktown joined by the Colonial Parkway. In the 21st century, Williamsburg has continued to update and refine its attractions. There are more features designed to attract modern children and to offer better and additional interpretation of the black American experience in the town. A century after Goodwin&#x27;s work began, Colonial Williamsburg remains a work in progress.

In addition to Colonial Williamsburg, the city&#x27;s railroad station was restored to become an intermodal passenger facility. In nearby James City County, the 1908 C&amp;O Railway combination passenger and freight station at Norge was preserved and, with a donation from CSX Transportation, relocated in 2006 to a site at the Williamsburg Regional Library&#x27;s Croaker Branch. Other landmarks outside the historic area include Carter&#x27;s Grove and Gunston Hall.

In 1932, a Catholic church was built to minister to students at the College of William &amp; Mary. Old Saint Bede was made a national shrine, dedicated to Our Lady of Walsingham.

On October 22, 1976, the third of three debates between Republican President Gerald Ford and Democratic challenger Jimmy Carter in the 1976 presidential election was held at Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall at the College of William &amp; Mary, during which both candidates, perhaps in tribute to the historic venue and the United States Bicentennial celebration, spoke of a &quot;new spirit&quot; in America.

The 9th G7 summit took place in Williamsburg in 1983. The participants discussed the growing debt-crisis, arms control and greater cooperation between the Soviet Union and the G7 (subsequently the G8). At the end of the meeting, Secretary of State George P. Shultz read to the press a statement confirming the deployment of American Pershing II-nuclear missiles in West Germany later in 1983.

===21st century===
On May 3, 2007, Britain&#x27;s Queen Elizabeth II visited Jamestown and Williamsburg. She had previously visited Williamsburg in 1957. Many world leaders, including President George W. Bush, visited Jamestown to mark its 400th anniversary. The celebration began in part in 2005 with events leading up to the anniversary, and was celebrated statewide throughout 2007, though the official festivities took place during the first week of May.

On February 5, 2009, President Barack Obama took his first trip aboard Air Force One to a House Democrats retreat in the city to attend and address their &quot;Issues Conference&quot;.

==Geography==
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and (1.8%) is water.

Williamsburg stands upon a ridge on the Virginia Peninsula between the James and York Rivers. Queen&#x27;s Creek and College Creek partly encircle the city. James City County is to the west and south and York County to the north and east. As with all cities in Virginia, Williamsburg is legally independent of both counties.

The city is on the I-64 corridor, southeast of Richmond and about northwest of Norfolk. It is in the northwest corner of Hampton Roads, the nation&#x27;s 37th-largest metropolitan area, with a population of 1,576,370. Within Hampton Roads, Norfolk is recognized as the central business district, while the Virginia Beach seaside resort district and Williamsburg are primarily tourism centers.

===Climate===
Williamsburg is in the humid subtropical climate zone, with cool to mild winters, and hot, humid summers. Due to the inland location, winters are slightly cooler and spring days slightly warmer than in Norfolk, though lows average cooler here due to the substantial urban buildup to the southeast. Snowfall averages per season, and the summer months tend to be slightly wetter. With a period of record dating only back to 1951, extreme temperatures range from on January 21, 1985, to on August 22, 1983, and June 26, 1952.

==Demographics==

During the Revolutionary era, African Americans made up over 50% of Williamsburg&#x27;s population. 

Williamsburg was 78% White and 13% Black at the 2000 census, and 71% White and 14% Black at the 2010 census. The 2020 census indicated a dramatic demographic shift in the city, reporting that Williamsburg was 48% White and 37% Black. Census data shows almost all of the Black population growth occurring in Census blocks containing William &amp; Mary dorms, but data from the State Council of Higher Education for Virginia shows no growth in the number of Black students in William &amp; Mary dorms during the 2010s. University of Virginia researchers believe that the high Black population figure was not due to an actual demographic shift but instead due to &quot;the Bureau’s decision to swap some census respondents’ identities with other respondents for privacy protection&quot;, a phenomenon known as differential privacy.
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 census===

As of the 2010 census, there were 14,068 people, 3,619 households, and 1,787 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 3,880 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 74.0% White, 14.0% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 5.7% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 2.5% from other races, and 3.5% from two or more races. 6.7% of the population were Hispanics or Latinos of any race.

There were 3,619 households, out of which 16.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.2% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 50.6% were non-families. 35.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.07 and the average family size was 2.66.

The age distribution was: 9.6% under the age of 18, 46.0% from 18 to 24, 17.7% from 25 to 44, 15.0% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 81.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $37,093, and the median income for a family was $52,358. Males had a median income of $28,625 versus $26,840 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,483. 18.3% of the population and 9.3% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 29.7% of those under the age of 18 and 5.5% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

A high proportion of Williamsburg residents derive a significant percentage of their annual income from investments, either in addition to or in lieu of income from work. This is because many retirees relocate to Williamsburg and typically draw income from investments such as 401(k) plans and the like.

==Economy==

The tourist volume of Colonial Williamsburg has attracted many related businesses to the area. Notable among these was Anheuser-Busch, which established large operations in James City County and York County just outside the city. The company operates a large brewery there. It also used to operate two theme parks near the brewery, Busch Gardens Williamsburg, and Water Country USA, but both properties were sold to private investors after foreign brewer InBev took over Anheuser-Busch in 2010. Anheuser-Busch also previously operated a commerce park, McLaw&#x27;s Circle, and Kingsmill on the James, a gated residential neighborhood that contains a resort of the same name.

Williamsburg has an outlet mall, Williamsburg Premium Outlets. A second outlet mall, Williamsburg Outlet Mall, closed in December 2013. Williamsburg Pottery Factory also has outlet stores.

==Arts and culture==

Williamsburg is often associated with the larger American South. People who grew up in the Hampton Roads area have a unique Tidewater accent that differs from a stereotypical Southern accent. Vowels have a longer pronunciation than in a regular southern accent. For example, &quot;house&quot; is pronounced &quot;hoose&quot; in the Tidewater accent.

Tourist sites include Colonial Williamsburg, a living history museum depicting the lifestyles and culture of the 18th-century colonial period. Within this area is Virginia&#x27;s first capitol building, the Governor&#x27;s Palace, Bruton Parish Church (the oldest continually operating church in the United States), the Peyton Randolph House (home of Peyton Randolph, the first President of Continental Congress) and the College of William &amp; Mary.

Other sites include the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Museum, The Williamsburg Winery, the Williamsburg Botanical Garden, the National Center for State Courts and the Virginia Musical Museum. Williamsburg has two theme parks, Busch Gardens Williamsburg and Water Country USA. Presidents Park was an educational attraction that displayed outdoor statue heads and biographies of 43 presidents. In 2010, Presidents Park closed due to financial issues.

==Government==












Williamsburg is part of Virginia&#x27;s 1st congressional district, represented by Republican Rob Wittman, who was first elected in 2007.

When Williamsburg received its charter in 1722, it had portions in both James City and York County. In 1870, the Virginia General Assembly changed the boundaries so that it was entirely within James City County.

A year later, a new state constitution created the political entity known as an independent city, which is not located in any county. Williamsburg subsequently incorporated as a city in 1884 and separated from James City County, but continues to share several constitutional officers with James City County. The city also operates a joint school division with James City County, under a voluntary agreement that leaders revisit at planned intervals.

As an independent city, Williamsburg has had a council-manager form of government since 1932. The city council elects the mayor, who presides over council meetings and serves as the city&#x27;s Chief Elected Official. The city council consists of five members who serve staggered, four-year terms. It hires a city manager, comparable to a corporation&#x27;s chief executive officer, who is usually a professionally trained public administrator and is charged with implementing the council&#x27;s policies and directives and has broad administrative authority with strict rules prohibiting political interference in administrative matters.

, Williamsburg&#x27;s mayor is Douglas Pons, and the vice mayor is W. Pat Dent. Other city council members are Barbara Ramsey, Ted Maslin and Caleb Rogers. The city manager is Andrew O. Trivette.

The city now shares all constitutional officers, courts, and the Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools system (WJCC) with adjacent James City County, and is the county seat. Until 1998, the city had its own Sheriff&#x27;s Office. It was consolidated with the James City County Sheriff&#x27;s Office, becoming Williamsburg-James City County Sheriff&#x27;s Office.

As a college town, Williamsburg&#x27;s large student population has also resulted in a few conflicts with the city government. For example, in addressing concerns of property values and noise complaints near campus, the council has undertaken initiatives to reduce student off-campus residential presence in the city by instituting a maximum occupancy rule of three unrelated persons for single-family dwellings, as well as a plan to buy rental houses with taxpayer dollars and resell them with the stipulation that the new owners must occupy them. Until July 1, 2007, the voting registrar, David Andrews, had interpreted Virginia law to exclude a high percentage of students, arguing that students should be registered where their parents live. The new voter registrar, Win Sowder, said she is registering students as she would &quot;any other resident of the city. If they&#x27;re living in the dorms for eight months out of the year, and have an address located within the city limits on a Virginia driver&#x27;s license, they&#x27;re entitled to register to vote.&quot;
In presidential elections, Williamsburg was a Republican-leaning city for most of the time from the 1950s to the 1980s. Between 1948 and 1988, it supported a Democratic presidential nominee only once, in Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s 1964 landslide victory over Republican Barry Goldwater. This changed in the 1990s when Democrat Bill Clinton won Williamsburg in both of his presidential campaigns. Due in part to Green Party candidate Ralph Nader&#x27;s strong showing as a left-wing protest candidate in the college town, Republican George W. Bush secured a very narrow plurality in 2000.

Democrat John Kerry won the city by a single-digit margin over Bush in 2004. In the elections since then, Williamsburg has swung heavily to the Democrats, and has become one of the most Democratic areas of Hampton Roads and Virginia. Democrat Barack Obama swept Williamsburg by 29-point margins in both the 2008 and 2012 elections. In the 2016 election, Democrat Hillary Clinton beat Republican Donald Trump in Williamsburg by 45 points. Trump won 25% of the vote, the worst showing for a Republican in the city in over a century. Four years later, the city gave an equally massive victory to Joe Biden, who carried the county with 69% of the vote, the best showing for a Democrat since Franklin D. Roosevelt.

==Education==

The Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools operates the following schools in Williamsburg: Matthew Whaley School, Berkeley Middle School, James Blair Middle School, Lafayette High School, and Warhill High School.

There are several private schools that also serve the Williamsburg and James City Country area, including Williamsburg Christian Academy, a Christian International Baccalaureate School, Walsingham Academy, a private Catholic school serving pre-kindergarten through 12th grade, Williamsburg Montessori School, and Providence Classical School.

The city has been the home to the College of William &amp; Mary since its founding in 1693, making it America&#x27;s second-oldest college (after Harvard University). Technically a university, William &amp; Mary was also the first U.S. institution to have a Royal Charter, and the only one to have coat-of-arms from the College of Arms in London. The campus adjoins the Historic District, and the Wren Building at the head of Duke of Gloucester Street was one of the earliest restored by W. A. R. Goodwin and the family of John D. Rockefeller Jr. as they began creating Colonial Williamsburg. Over 70% of the college&#x27;s students either work part-time or volunteer in the community. Students contribute over 300,000 hours of volunteer service to Williamsburg annually.

==Media==
Williamsburg is primarily served by two newspapers, &quot;The Virginia Gazette&quot; and &quot;Williamsburg-Yorktown Daily&quot;.

The &quot;Gazette&quot; is a biweekly, published in Williamsburg, and was the first newspaper to be published south of the Potomac River, starting in 1736. Its publisher was William Parks, who had similar ventures in Maryland. After his death in 1750, Parks&#x27;s shop foreman William Hunter restarted the paper in 1751.

The &quot;Daily Press&quot;, published in nearby Newport News, covers local, regional, and national news. The College of William &amp; Mary has two student newspapers, the student-fee-supported campus newspaper &quot;The Flat Hat&quot; and the independent campus newspaper &quot;The Virginia Informer&quot;. William &amp; Mary students produce many other publications and run their own radio station, WCWM. &quot;Hampton Roads Magazine&quot; is a bimonthly regional magazine for Williamsburg and the Hampton Roads area. Williamsburg is served by a variety of AM and FM radio stations, including two based directly within city limits; WTYD and WBQK.

Williamsburg is served by the Norfolk–Portsmouth–Newport News designated market area (DMA), the nation&#x27;s 42nd-largest, with 712,790 homes (0.64% of the total U.S.).

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
Williamsburg is located adjacent to Interstate 64 and U.S. Route 60, which connect the city with Richmond to the northwest and Norfolk to the southeast. State Route 199, officially named the Humelsine Parkway after a former Colonial Williamsburg president, surrounds the city in a semicircle. State Route 5 links the city with the James River Plantations along the north shore of the James River, Interstate 295 and Richmond. State Route 31 provides a route to Jamestown and the toll-free Jamestown Ferry. The Colonial Parkway provides a bucolic low-speed link to Jamestown and Yorktown, passing under Colonial Williamsburg in a tunnel. With the exception of buses, commercial vehicles are not allowed on the Parkway.

The community&#x27;s public bus system, Williamsburg Area Transit Authority (WATA), has its central hub at the transportation center. A network of disabled-accessible transit bus routes serve the city, James City County, and most portions of York County adjacent to the Williamsburg area, with hourly service seven days a week, and half-hourly service on select routes during peak weekday hours. The routes operated by WATA include a loop around the William &amp; Mary campus while classes are in session. The system also provides paratransit services and operates replica trolley buses at the Yorktown Riverfront attraction. WATA connects with the much larger Hampton Roads Transit (HRT) bus system at Lee Hall in northwestern Newport News and at the Williamsburg Transportation Center.

Walking is a major mode of transportation in Williamsburg, with about a fifth of people walking to work between 2006 and 2010. Walk Score, a website which algorithmically determines how friendly communities are to walkers, describes the city as &quot;very walkable&quot;. With few exceptions, motorized traffic is not allowed on Duke of Gloucester Street, which passes through Colonial Williamsburg and the shopping district of Merchant&#x27;s Square. The city is also increasingly bicycle-friendly, having built 48 miles of bicycle facilities in the area since 1992. Upon completion, the Virginia Capital Trail will provide a paved off-road path to Richmond for bicyclists and pedestrians via the Colonial Parkway.

The primary airport for the Virginia Peninsula is the Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport in Newport News, a twenty-minute drive from Williamsburg. Norfolk International Airport and Richmond International Airport also serve passengers from the city. Amtrak serves Williamsburg with three trains a day stopping at the Amtrak Station. The line runs west along the Virginia Peninsula to Richmond and points beyond. A high-speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor are also under study. Intercity bus services are provided by Greyhound.

===Utilities===
Waller Mill Reservoir is the main water source for Williamsburg. A 350-acre lake holding 1.5 billion gallons of water, it has been in operation since 1945. The City owns a large percentage of the surrounding watershed. During drought, this source may be supplemented by groundwater from a well at Waller Mill and from raw (untreated) water from Newport News Waterworks under a long-term agreement.

The City provides wastewater services for residents and transports wastewater to the regional Hampton Roads Sanitation District treatment plants.

==Notable people==

* John Amson (1698–1765) – English physician, alderman, and mayor of Williamsburg
* Brent Ashabranner (1921–2016) – Peace Corps administrator and author
* Matt Behncke (b. 1990) – soccer player
* David Berman (1967–2019) – singer-songwriter, poet, and founder of Silver Jews
* John Blair Jr. (1732–1800) – Founding Father and Supreme Court justice
* Lemuel J. Bowden (1815–1864) – senator for Virginia
* Al Clark (b. 1948) – baseball umpire for American League and Major League Baseball
*Richard Coke (1829–1897) – governor and senator for Texas
*Octavius Coke (1840–1895) – Secretary of State of North Carolina
* Jimmy Fortune (b. 1955) – singer for The Statler Brothers
* Bruce Hornsby (b. 1954) – singer and pianist
* Keith Hornsby (b. 1992) – basketball player
* John Nicholas (1764–1819) – representative for Virginia and member of the New York Senate
* Robert C. Nicholas (1801–1854) – member of the New York Senate
* Robert Carter Nicholas Sr. (1728/29–1780) – Supreme Court of Virginia justice
* Wilson Cary Nicholas (1761–1820) – governor, senator, and representative of Virginia
* Edmund Randolph (1753–1813) – Founding Father, Attorney General, and Secretary of State
* Carolynn Reid-Wallace (b. 1942) – president of Fisk University
* Lawrence Taylor (b. 1959) – National Football League (NFL) player
* Georgia O&#x27;Keeffe (1887–1986) – painter and draftswoman
* Canaan Smith (b. 1982) – singer-songwriter
* John Tayloe II (1721–1779) – builder of the Mount Airy Plantation and member of the Virginia Governor&#x27;s Council

==See also==
* Colonial Williamsburg
* Hampton Roads
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Williamsburg, Virginia
* Williamsburg Winery
* Wren Building
* Virginia Peninsula
* Tayloe House (Williamsburg, Virginia)
* Williamsburg Charter

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* 
* Convention an Visitors&#x27; Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="0" end="12" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="19" end="35" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="39" end="47" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="74" end="85" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="133" end="151" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="197" end="210" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="248" end="265" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="292" end="303" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933662" start="367" end="384" title="Middle Plantation (Virginia)" label="Middle Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="436" end="441" title="James River" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="446" end="450" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="505" end="514" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="558" end="564" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="681" end="700" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="706" end="735" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188663" start="861" end="878" title="colonial colleges" label="colonial colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="886" end="891" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="1062" end="1083" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12346147" start="1143" end="1152" title="Jamestown Settlement" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="1157" end="1165" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773704" start="1198" end="1215" title="Historic Triangle" label="Historic Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="1304" end="1316" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="1461" end="1470" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="1488" end="1506" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849523" start="1592" end="1612" title="Powhatan Confederacy" label="Powhatan Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="1705" end="1723" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q616307" start="1837" end="1860" title="Indian massacre of 1622" label="Indian massacre of 1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933662" start="1957" end="1974" title="Middle Plantation (Virginia)" label="Middle Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q798594" start="2108" end="2130" title="Bacon&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Bacon&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2809463" start="2154" end="2170" title="William Berkeley (governor)" label="William Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="2370" end="2388" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715850" start="2630" end="2638" title="Henricus" label="Henricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q616307" start="2656" end="2679" title="Indian massacre of 1622" label="Indian massacre of 1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129861" start="2871" end="2882" title="James Blair (clergyman)" label="James Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="3017" end="3046" title="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037738" start="3309" end="3322" title="Wren Building" label="Wren Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="3853" end="3875" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782140" start="4102" end="4118" title="Theodorick Bland (surveyor)" label="Theodorick Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646102" start="4205" end="4225" title="Bruton Parish Church" label="Bruton Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="4306" end="4331" title="Duke of Gloucester Street" label="Duke of Gloucester Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="4350" end="4369" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q931202" start="4398" end="4417" title="Lieutenant Governor of Virginia" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4616" end="4629" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131350" start="4769" end="4785" title="James City Shire" label="James City Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="5006" end="5023" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082085" start="5094" end="5113" title="Charles River Shire" label="Charles River Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="5133" end="5144" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="5156" end="5165" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="5696" end="5701" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="5733" end="5745" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="Lord Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="5776" end="5790" title="List of colonial governors of Virginia" label="Royal Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146359" start="5819" end="5838" title="College Creek" label="Archer&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="5859" end="5870" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713109" start="5877" end="5895" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="5912" end="5922" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="5970" end="5988" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q378819" start="6085" end="6107" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="6111" end="6132" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="6173" end="6193" title="psychiatric hospital" label="psychiatric hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330492" start="6330" end="6352" title="Eastern State Hospital (Virginia)" label="Eastern State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="6387" end="6416" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia colonial legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q985470" start="6985" end="7003" title="Gunpowder Incident" label="Gunpowder Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q311885" start="7239" end="7252" title="Patrick Henry" label="Patrick Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="7529" end="7548" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="7564" end="7591" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="7610" end="7636" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="7955" end="7963" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q878942" start="7986" end="7994" title="Governor of Virginia" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="7995" end="8011" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="8424" end="8429" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="8445" end="8450" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330492" start="8937" end="8959" title="Eastern State Hospital (Virginia)" label="Eastern State Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="8983" end="9001" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="9034" end="9050" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037738" start="9207" end="9223" title="Wren Building" label="College Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="9393" end="9411" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="9474" end="9485" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298040" start="9625" end="9641" title="John B. Magruder" label="John B. Magruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018335" start="10017" end="10029" title="Warwick Line" label="Warwick Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="10071" end="10079" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933819" start="10084" end="10099" title="Mulberry Island" label="Mulberry Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="10113" end="10129" title="George B. McClellan" label="George McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311514" start="10252" end="10268" title="James Longstreet" label="James Longstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313583" start="10294" end="10309" title="J. E. B. Stuart" label="J. E. B. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748476" start="10446" end="10459" title="Fort Magruder" label="Fort Magruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889259" start="10614" end="10631" title="Benjamin S. Ewell" label="Benjamin S. Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140288" start="10813" end="10835" title="Battle of Williamsburg" label="Battle of Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q492324" start="11038" end="11056" title="Seven Days Battles" label="Seven Days Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955360" start="11216" end="11235" title="Brafferton (building)" label="Brafferton building"/>
<link wikidata="Q22021679" start="11377" end="11401" title="5th Pennsylvania Cavalry" label="5th Pennsylvania Cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109882" start="11610" end="11630" title="Collis P. Huntington" label="Collis P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070560" start="11638" end="11665" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway" label="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162930" start="11686" end="11705" title="Peninsula Extension" label="Peninsula Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162930" start="12190" end="12215" title="Old Dominion Land Company" label="Old Dominion Land Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241041" start="12259" end="12315" title="Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities" label="Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="12375" end="12388" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="12389" end="12404" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="12408" end="12420" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137831" start="12436" end="12445" title="coal pier" label="coal pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109500" start="12477" end="12485" title="Collier (ship type)" label="colliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="12503" end="12516" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="12860" end="12874" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="14026" end="14043" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362123" start="14056" end="14061" title="Norge, Virginia" label="Norge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="14671" end="14689" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138237" start="14723" end="14741" title="Parke S. Rouse Jr." label="Parke S. Rouse Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7331013" start="14783" end="14806" title="Richmond Times-Dispatch" label="Richmond Times-Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q596552" start="14867" end="14876" title="Lotophagi" label="Lotusburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659501" start="15361" end="15374" title="living museum" label="living museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501853" start="15420" end="15436" title="W. A. R. Goodwin" label="W. A. R. Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646102" start="15460" end="15480" title="Bruton Parish Church" label="Bruton Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="15707" end="15723" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="16195" end="16207" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="16232" end="16255" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q306870" start="16269" end="16293" title="Abby Aldrich Rockefeller" label="Abby Aldrich Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="16326" end="16347" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773704" start="16596" end="16613" title="Historic Triangle" label="Historic Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="16634" end="16642" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148359" start="16657" end="16673" title="Colonial Parkway" label="Colonial Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070560" start="17177" end="17192" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway" label="C&amp;amp;O Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362123" start="17238" end="17243" title="Norge, Virginia" label="Norge"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="17284" end="17302" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047087" start="17442" end="17461" title="Carter&amp;#x27;s Grove" label="Carter&amp;#x27;s Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554859" start="17466" end="17478" title="Gunston Hall" label="Gunston Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17492" end="17500" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="17549" end="17578" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17580" end="17594" title="Saint Bede Catholic Church, Williamsburg#National Shrine of Our Lady of Walsingham" label="Old Saint Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q200614" start="17606" end="17621" title="national shrine" label="national shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860175" start="17636" end="17658" title="Our Lady of Walsingham" label="Our Lady of Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="17738" end="17749" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="17776" end="17788" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="17796" end="17822" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181509" start="17835" end="17863" title="Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall" label="Phi Beta Kappa Memorial Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="17871" end="17900" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="17981" end="18007" title="United States Bicentennial" label="United States Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q472633" start="18072" end="18085" title="9th G7 summit" label="9th G7 summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="18244" end="18246" title="G7" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="18297" end="18315" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="18316" end="18332" title="George P. Shultz" label="George P. Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="18512" end="18530" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="18656" end="18670" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="18953" end="18965" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q179969" start="18993" end="19006" title="Air Force One" label="Air Force One"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="19012" end="19017" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="19139" end="19166" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="19273" end="19291" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="19304" end="19309" title="James River" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="19314" end="19318" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713109" start="19327" end="19345" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146359" start="19350" end="19363" title="College Creek" label="College Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="19390" end="19407" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="19437" end="19448" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q94388" start="19578" end="19582" title="Interstate 64" label="I-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="19606" end="19614" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="19638" end="19645" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="19680" end="19693" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="19713" end="19725" title="List of United States metropolitan statistical areas by population" label="37th-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934136" start="19880" end="19903" title="Virginia Beach Oceanfront" label="seaside resort district"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="19990" end="20015" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="20233" end="20246" title="urban heat island" label="urban buildup"/>
<link wikidata="Q82242" start="20430" end="20446" title="January 1985 Arctic outbreak" label="January 21, 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="20520" end="20537" title="American Revolution" label="Revolutionary era"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="20539" end="20556" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058964" start="20918" end="20931" title="Census block" label="Census blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="20943" end="20961" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603174" start="20987" end="21033" title="State Council of Higher Education for Virginia" label="State Council of Higher Education for Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="21281" end="21287" title="United States Census Bureau" label="Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275358" start="21418" end="21438" title="differential privacy" label="differential privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="21803" end="21821" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="21926" end="21931" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="21939" end="21964" title="African American" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="21971" end="21986" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="21993" end="21998" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="22005" end="22021" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22033" end="22044" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#Race" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="22060" end="22077" title="Multiracial American" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="22107" end="22127" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics or Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="23040" end="23057" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="23144" end="23156" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206798" start="23567" end="23573" title="401(k)" label="401(k)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125074" start="23727" end="23741" title="Anheuser-Busch" label="Anheuser-Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="23781" end="23798" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="23803" end="23814" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="23867" end="23874" title="brewery" label="brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="23910" end="23921" title="amusement park" label="theme parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928695" start="23940" end="23966" title="Busch Gardens Williamsburg" label="Busch Gardens Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973282" start="23972" end="23989" title="Water Country USA" label="Water Country USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416717" start="24063" end="24068" title="InBev" label="InBev"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="24160" end="24179" title="McLaw&amp;#x27;s Circle" label="McLaw&amp;#x27;s Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413365" start="24185" end="24207" title="Kingsmill, Virginia" label="Kingsmill on the James"/>
<link wikidata="Q76470" start="24304" end="24315" title="outlet mall" label="outlet mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021174" start="24317" end="24345" title="Williamsburg Premium Outlets" label="Williamsburg Premium Outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021171" start="24369" end="24393" title="Williamsburg Outlet Mall" label="Williamsburg Outlet Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021173" start="24420" end="24448" title="Williamsburg Pottery Factory" label="Williamsburg Pottery Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="24545" end="24559" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="24587" end="24600" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085381" start="24620" end="24636" title="Tidewater accent" label="Tidewater accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="24671" end="24686" title="Southern American English" label="Southern accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="24869" end="24890" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q355646" start="24894" end="24908" title="living history" label="living history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357190" start="25010" end="25048" title="Capitol (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s first capitol building"/>
<link wikidata="Q378819" start="25054" end="25076" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646102" start="25078" end="25098" title="Bruton Parish Church" label="Bruton Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179632" start="25167" end="25188" title="Peyton Randolph House" label="Peyton Randolph House"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="25238" end="25258" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="25264" end="25297" title="the College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="the College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021179" start="25366" end="25389" title="The Williamsburg Winery" label="The Williamsburg Winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021157" start="25395" end="25424" title="Williamsburg Botanical Garden" label="Williamsburg Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971373" start="25430" end="25462" title="National Center for State Courts" label="National Center for State Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986567" start="25471" end="25494" title="Virginia Musical Museum" label="Virginia Musical Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="25517" end="25527" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928695" start="25530" end="25556" title="Busch Gardens Williamsburg" label="Busch Gardens Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973282" start="25561" end="25578" title="Water Country USA" label="Water Country USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241504" start="25580" end="25595" title="Presidents Park (Virginia)" label="Presidents Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241504" start="25705" end="25720" title="Presidents Park (Virginia)" label="Presidents Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q11066302" start="25805" end="25847" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q541251" start="25875" end="25886" title="Rob Wittman" label="Rob Wittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="26033" end="26058" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="26213" end="26229" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432341" start="26472" end="26487" title="school division" label="school division"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="26631" end="26646" title="council-manager" label="council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="26682" end="26694" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="26893" end="26905" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="26942" end="26965" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021150" start="27486" end="27531" title="Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools" label="Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="27560" end="27577" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="27590" end="27601" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="27798" end="27810" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="28913" end="28923" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="29025" end="29035" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="29071" end="29085" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="29093" end="29115" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964 landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="29132" end="29147" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="29189" end="29201" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="29273" end="29284" title="Green Party of the United States" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q193156" start="29295" end="29306" title="Ralph Nader" label="Ralph Nader"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="29394" end="29408" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959363" start="29444" end="29448" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="29460" end="29470" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893125" start="29522" end="29526" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="29694" end="29706" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893126" start="29758" end="29762" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198005" start="29767" end="29771" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018340" start="29790" end="29794" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="29814" end="29829" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="29846" end="29858" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="30044" end="30053" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="30138" end="30159" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021150" start="30181" end="30226" title="Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools" label="Williamsburg-James City County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791405" start="30275" end="30296" title="Matthew Whaley School" label="Matthew Whaley School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471436" start="30349" end="30370" title="Lafayette High School (Virginia)" label="Lafayette High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969409" start="30376" end="30395" title="Warhill High School" label="Warhill High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021160" start="30504" end="30534" title="Williamsburg Christian Academy" label="Williamsburg Christian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="30548" end="30575" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963859" start="30584" end="30602" title="Walsingham Academy" label="Walsingham Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="30606" end="30613" title="private school" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="30614" end="30629" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="30771" end="30804" title="the College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="the College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="30887" end="30905" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="30999" end="31012" title="Royal Charter" label="Royal Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="31039" end="31051" title="coat-of-arms" label="coat-of-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109101" start="31061" end="31076" title="College of Arms" label="College of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="31111" end="31128" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037738" start="31138" end="31151" title="Wren Building" label="Wren Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501853" start="31229" end="31245" title="W. A. R. Goodwin" label="W. A. R. Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="31264" end="31287" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7772819" start="31582" end="31602" title="The Virginia Gazette" label="The Virginia Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="31778" end="31791" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772199" start="31829" end="31842" title="William Parks (publisher)" label="William Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209347" start="31988" end="31999" title="Daily Press (Virginia)" label="Daily Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="32027" end="32039" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="32088" end="32117" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734384" start="32195" end="32207" title="The Flat Hat" label="The Flat Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772821" start="32257" end="32278" title="The Virginia Informer" label="The Virginia Informer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635703" start="32314" end="32345" title="List of publications at The College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="produce many other publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948201" start="32379" end="32383" title="WCWM" label="WCWM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956517" start="32612" end="32616" title="WTYD" label="WTYD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947377" start="32621" end="32625" title="WBQK" label="WBQK"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="32658" end="32665" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="32666" end="32676" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="32677" end="32689" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="32690" end="32712" title="designated market area" label="designated market area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446385" start="32875" end="32888" title="Interstate 64 (Virginia)" label="Interstate 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818466" start="32893" end="32906" title="U.S. Route 60 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="32936" end="32944" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="32966" end="32973" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508023" start="32992" end="33007" title="State Route 199 (Virginia)" label="State Route 199"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507603" start="33132" end="33145" title="State Route 5 (Virginia)" label="State Route 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142168" start="33170" end="33193" title="James River Plantations" label="James River Plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="33223" end="33234" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450655" start="33236" end="33250" title="Interstate 295 (Virginia)" label="Interstate 295"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507651" start="33265" end="33279" title="State Route 31 (Virginia)" label="State Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146225" start="33328" end="33343" title="Jamestown Ferry" label="Jamestown Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148359" start="33349" end="33365" title="Colonial Parkway" label="Colonial Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021156" start="33598" end="33633" title="Williamsburg Area Transit Authority" label="Williamsburg Area Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373492" start="33725" end="33736" title="transit bus" label="transit bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="33760" end="33777" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="33800" end="33811" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="34089" end="34100" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="34152" end="34171" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown Riverfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646293" start="34219" end="34240" title="Hampton Roads Transit" label="Hampton Roads Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513782" start="34261" end="34269" title="Lee Hall, Virginia" label="Lee Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="34474" end="34484" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934165" start="34936" end="34958" title="Virginia Capital Trail" label="Virginia Capital Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586790" start="35118" end="35165" title="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport" label="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432196" start="35224" end="35253" title="Norfolk International Airport" label="Norfolk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857178" start="35258" end="35288" title="Richmond International Airport" label="Richmond International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="35326" end="35332" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021152" start="35393" end="35407" title="Williamsburg (Amtrak station)" label="Amtrak Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="35438" end="35456" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="35460" end="35468" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="35541" end="35559" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569345" start="35568" end="35602" title="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor" label="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="35664" end="35673" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218918" start="36260" end="36270" title="John Amson" label="John Amson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="36304" end="36312" title="alderman" label="alderman"/>
<link wikidata="Q60379014" start="36342" end="36359" title="Brent Ashabranner" label="Brent Ashabranner"/>
<link wikidata="Q458620" start="36374" end="36385" title="Peace Corps" label="Peace Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788333" start="36413" end="36425" title="Matt Behncke" label="Matt Behncke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231354" start="36454" end="36466" title="David Berman (musician)" label="David Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044501" start="36521" end="36532" title="Silver Jews" label="Silver Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q778866" start="36535" end="36549" title="John Blair Jr." label="John Blair Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="36564" end="36579" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="36584" end="36597" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767673" start="36608" end="36624" title="Lemuel J. Bowden" label="Lemuel J. Bowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="36639" end="36646" title="United States Senate" label="senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703680" start="36662" end="36670" title="Al Clark (umpire)" label="Al Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856798" start="36692" end="36698" title="Umpire (baseball)" label="umpire"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="36703" end="36718" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="36723" end="36744" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q880265" start="36746" end="36758" title="Richard Coke" label="Richard Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="36773" end="36781" title="Governor of Texas" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="36798" end="36803" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66780151" start="36805" end="36818" title="Octavius Coke" label="Octavius Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054588" start="36833" end="36851" title="North Carolina Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="36855" end="36869" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200123" start="36872" end="36885" title="Jimmy Fortune" label="Jimmy Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q167408" start="36909" end="36929" title="The Statler Brothers" label="The Statler Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q918502" start="36932" end="36945" title="Bruce Hornsby" label="Bruce Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q26251744" start="36979" end="36992" title="Keith Hornsby" label="Keith Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701213" start="37025" end="37038" title="John Nicholas (congressman)" label="John Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="37053" end="37067" title="United States House of Representatives" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="37099" end="37114" title="New York State Senate" label="New York Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342641" start="37117" end="37135" title="Robert C. Nicholas (New York politician)" label="Robert C. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938229" start="37182" end="37208" title="Robert Carter Nicholas Sr." label="Robert Carter Nicholas Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2398783" start="37226" end="37251" title="Supreme Court of Virginia" label="Supreme Court of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q885553" start="37262" end="37282" title="Wilson Cary Nicholas" label="Wilson Cary Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="37349" end="37364" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="37396" end="37412" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="37418" end="37436" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q116448143" start="37439" end="37460" title="Carolynn Reid-Wallace" label="Carolynn Reid-Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q49087" start="37486" end="37501" title="Fisk University" label="Fisk University"/>
<link wikidata="Q963129" start="37504" end="37519" title="Lawrence Taylor" label="Lawrence Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="37532" end="37556" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q46408" start="37572" end="37593" title="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe" label="Georgia O&amp;#x27;Keeffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q683754" start="37620" end="37631" title="Drafter" label="draftswoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029183" start="37634" end="37646" title="Canaan Smith" label="Canaan Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260306" start="37679" end="37693" title="John Tayloe II" label="John Tayloe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919298" start="37723" end="37744" title="Mount Airy Plantation" label="Mount Airy Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934286" start="37763" end="37795" title="Virginia Governor&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Virginia Governor&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q841700" start="37812" end="37833" title="Colonial Williamsburg" label="Colonial Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="37836" end="37849" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977874" start="37852" end="37923" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Williamsburg, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021179" start="37926" end="37945" title="Williamsburg Winery" label="Williamsburg Winery"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037738" start="37948" end="37961" title="Wren Building" label="Wren Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="37964" end="37982" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345331" start="37985" end="38022" title="Tayloe House (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Tayloe House (Williamsburg, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774996" start="38025" end="38045" title="Williamsburg Charter" label="Williamsburg Charter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91236" wikidata="Q849429" url="?curid=91236" title="Underworld (band)">
<text>Underworld are a British electronic music group formed in 1987 in Cardiff, Wales and the principal collaborative project of Karl Hyde and Rick Smith.

After briefly performing as a funk and synth-pop outfit, resulting in two albums between 1988 and 1989, Underworld gained prominence after reshaping into a dance and techno band, releasing albums including &quot;Dubnobasswithmyheadman&quot; (1994), &quot;Second Toughest in the Infants&quot; (1996) and &quot;Beaucoup Fish&quot; (1999), as well as singles &quot;Born Slippy Nuxx&quot; and &quot;Dark &amp; Long (Dark Train)&quot;. Known for their atmospheric, progressive compositions, Hyde&#x27;s cryptic and stream of consciousness lyrics, and dynamic live performances, Underworld have influenced a wide range of artists and have been featured in soundtracks and scores for films and television.

== History ==
=== The Screen Gemz, Freur, and Underworld Mk1 ===
In the late 1970s, Karl Hyde and Rick Smith formed a band in Cardiff called the Screen Gemz, which was influenced by Kraftwerk and reggae. They were joined by bassist Alfie Thomas, drummer Bryn Burrows, and keyboardist John Warwicker in forming Freur. The band signed to CBS Records and released &quot;Doot-Doot&quot; (1983). Freur disbanded in 1986 after CBS withheld the UK release of their followup album, &quot;Get Us out of Here&quot;.

In 1987, Hyde, Smith, Thomas, Burrows and bassist Baz Allen formed Underworld, named after the 1985 horror film &quot;Underworld,&quot; which was scored by Freur. Underworld signed to Sire Records and released the album &quot;Underneath the Radar&quot; in 1988. Following the departure of Burrows, they released another album, &quot;Change the Weather,&quot; in 1989.

This lineup, referred to by the group as &quot;Underworld Mk1&quot;, disbanded in 1990. The band had just finished a stadium tour opening for Eurythmics and had incurred a large debt that Smith spent a year attempting to pay off. Hyde stayed in Los Angeles while Smith returned to the United Kingdom. Hyde recalled feeling miserable during the Eurythmics tour, and said of Underworld Mk1, &quot;We’d subvert what we naturally did to fit an idea of what was going to be successful in the charts, and we just weren’t very good at it. We realised we were a band trapped in the body of another band. We were denying what we were.&quot;

=== Emerson&#x27;s arrival and Underworld Mk2 ===

After a break—to concentrate on, among other things, art/design project Tomato—Hyde and Smith recruited DJ Darren Emerson and signed to Steven Hall&#x27;s Junior Boys Own label. After several releases and remixes as Lemon Interupt and Steppin&#x27; Razor, they readopted the Underworld moniker. They produced danceable techno as a trio (&quot;Underworld Mk2&quot;).

The addition of Emerson completed Underworld&#x27;s techno/rock fusion and seemed to eliminate the pop elements in the original duo&#x27;s work. Their first album, &quot;Dubnobasswithmyheadman&quot;, was considered more accessible than the group&#x27;s earlier material and crossed a large spectrum of dance music. The signature Hyde lyrics were in place: poetic, hypnotic and whispered; mixing conventional song writing with the use of found material from overheard conversations, answering machine recordings and the like. Hyde had been the lead singer in Underworld Mk1 but the original Hyde/Smith dance material was lyric-free as was most of the electronic music emerging from the aftermath of acid house.

===&quot;Trainspotting&quot; and breakthrough ===
The band&#x27;s 1996 album, &quot;Second Toughest in the Infants&quot;, was their second studio album with Emerson and achieved a degree of commercial success, due in part to its release coinciding with that of the film &quot;Trainspotting&quot;. The film featured &quot;Dark &amp; Long (Dark Train)&quot;, as well as the band&#x27;s most commercially successful track to date, &quot;Born Slippy Nuxx&quot;, which was originally released only as a B-side of a single and does not appear on the &quot;Second Toughest&quot; album. The single and the album showed Underworld maturing as a trio, mixing elements of techno, house, drum and bass and experimental music. &quot;Born Slippy .NUXX&quot; is one of Underworld&#x27;s best-known tracks and is celebrated as one of the greatest dance tracks of the decade. The track has since sold over a million copies and appeared on countless compilations, mashups and remixes.

=== &quot;Beaucoup Fish&quot; era ===
After the release of fifth studio album &quot;Beaucoup Fish&quot; in 1999, Hyde declared in his interviews that he had sorted out earlier problems with alcoholism but all the members admitted that the sessions had been fraught with problems, with the individual members working in their own studios and only communicating via mixes of the raw material passed back and forth on DAT. After the release of the album a large number of mixes of the album tracks seemed to surface on singles, magazine promotional CDs and similar ephemeral formats perhaps indicating the number of revisions the tracks had gone through to get to the point where they were acceptable to all three. The album&#x27;s name derives from a sample of a Cajun fisherman in Louisiana on the track &quot;Jumbo&quot;. The band originally wanted to call the album &quot;Tonight, Matthew, I&#x27;m going to be Underworld&quot; (a catchphrase used by contestants on the UK ITV programme Stars in Their Eyes) but were convinced by their record company, Junior Boy&#x27;s Own, that the name would not be easily understood outside the UK. Finally, after all the singles had been released, a box set, &quot;Beaucoup Fish Singles&quot;, which was a retrospective of all 4 singles came out.

Underworld embarked on a well-received tour in 1999, which resulted in a live CD and DVD drawn from several dates on the tour. Called &quot;Everything, Everything&quot;, the project captured the live Underworld experience very faithfully. A companion DVD was released separately soon after the album&#x27;s release. The DVD features live footage of the band mixed with videography and artistic effects by the design group Tomato. The DVD also features several songs not on the album: &quot;Moaner&quot;, &quot;Puppies&quot;, &quot;Kittens&quot; and &quot;Rowla&quot;. The disco scene in &quot;Vanilla Sky&quot; features Underworld&#x27;s 1993 hit &quot;Rez&quot;. Their tour was also documented by Danish film director Helene Moltke-Leth and shown on The Danish National Broadcasting Corporation (DR).

=== Emerson&#x27;s departure and back to a duo ===
After the release and promotion of &quot;Everything, Everything&quot;, Emerson decided to leave Underworld to focus on his solo projects and record label. Hyde and Smith decided to continue as a duo. They recorded a new album, &quot;A Hundred Days Off&quot;, released to general approval. Despite its status as the band&#x27;s first studio album since Emerson&#x27;s departure, its general sound and feel was, perhaps surprisingly for many Underworld fans, not dissimilar to the previous albums on which Emerson had had input. In 2003, a 2-disc anthology entitled &quot;1992–2002&quot; was released. This was the first appearance on an album of previously unavailable single tracks and B-sides, such as &quot;Bigmouth&quot;, &quot;Spikee&quot;, &quot;Dirty&quot; and &quot;8 Ball&quot;. While touring in the summer and autumn of 2005, the duo was joined on stage by Darren Price, a DJ and producer who had remixed Underworld releases in the past.

During their tour, they released a 3-CD set &quot;Live in Tokyo&quot;, which was sold after the concert in Japan and later sold online. In late 2005, they released two compilations of new songs with accompanying photographs on Underworld Live, in a series entitled &quot;Riverrun&quot;. These were only released online, with no physical release (except for a promo CD). On 5 June 2006, they released their third installment, and on 10 July 2006, they released &quot;The Misterons Mix&quot;, a special retrospective mix composed of &quot;Riverrun&quot; tracks, as an exclusive free download for customers that had purchased all three &quot;Riverrun&quot; releases.

In September 2006, Underworld released five limited edition (10,000 copies each) 12&quot; vinyl releases, containing remixes of various &quot;Riverrun&quot; tracks. These tracks were also made available for purchase by digital download on the Beatport website. Later in 2006, the band teamed up with Gabriel Yared to compose the music score to Anthony Minghella&#x27;s film &quot;Breaking and Entering&quot;. The soundtrack was released in the UK on 6 November, and in the USA on 5 December.

=== &quot;Oblivion with Bells&quot;===

Underworld&#x27;s seventh studio album, &quot;Oblivion with Bells&quot;, was released on 16 October 2007. The first single from the new album, &quot;Crocodile&quot;, was released on 5 September 2007. U2&#x27;s drummer Larry Mullen Jr helped out on the track &quot;Boy, Boy, Boy&quot;. Underworld, in collaboration with composer John Murphy, completed the soundtrack to the Danny Boyle film, &quot;Sunshine&quot;, in late 2006. Well over a year after the film&#x27;s release, the official soundtrack was released on iTunes on 25 November 2008.

On 16 June 2007, Underworld were forced to cancel their show at the Ejekt Festival in Athens, Greece. Approximately 30 masked Greek anarchists stormed the stadium while the Beastie Boys were performing. Rick Smith was one of the people injured in the ensuing violence and he was taken to a nearby Athens hospital for treatment. On 19 October 2007, Underworld cancelled the remaining dates of their European tour due to illness in the band. The tour was picked up again on 28 January 2008, with a concert in Cologne, followed by 16 dates in Europe, including some festivals.

On 8 August 2008, Underworld appeared at the All Points West Music &amp; Arts Festival in Liberty State Park, New Jersey. Karl Hyde appeared with Brian Eno on the final day of the Eno-curated Luminous Festival at Sydney Opera House. &quot;Pure Scenius&quot; consisted of three live improvised performances on the same day, featuring Eno, Hyde, Australian improv trio the Necks, electronic artist Jon Hopkins and guitarist Leo Abrahams.

Underworld has released two new series via their underworldlive.com site, in mp3 and WAV formats. The tracks are 020202, and the phonestrap/autotrader series. On 3 July 2009, Underworld debuted a new song tentatively titled &quot;Between Stars&quot; at the Montreux Jazz Festival. Shortly before that, a post was made on the band&#x27;s diary page showing a piece of paper with the song&#x27;s first verse on it. On 8 August 2009, a show at Los Angeles&#x27; Forum was cancelled in circumstances similar to those that led to the group cancelling the show in Athens two years prior. Some of the crowd were climbing down the seats and onto the main floor, a potential safety hazard. The group apologized on their website for having the show called off.

On 8 March 2010, Mark Knight and D. Ramirez released the single &quot;Downpipe&quot;, which featured vocal contributions from Underworld&#x27;s Karl Hyde. The song, released on Mark Knight&#x27;s Toolroom Records label, has a music video featuring the &quot;Playhouse&quot;, a lighting setup on Liberty Hall, the tallest building in Dublin.

===&quot;Barking&quot;===
On 13 May 2010, the band released a track called &quot;Scribble&quot; for download on the band&#x27;s site. The track shares elements with &quot;You Do Scribble&quot;, an unreleased song which they featured many times since 2005 in their live performance shows. The track is a collaboration with High Contrast, a drum and bass DJ also from Cardiff. On 14 May, the full version of &quot;Scribble&quot; was featured on Pete Tong&#x27;s Radio 1 radio show, declaring it as Essential New Tune of the week. The group also released a video clip for &quot;Scribble&quot; on YouTube. It has been commercially released on 28 June as the lead single from their latest album.

Underworld&#x27;s eighth studio album, &quot;Barking&quot;, was released on 13 September 2010 in the UK. The album features collaborations with German trance producer Paul van Dyk and British house artists Mark Knight and D. Ramirez, among others.

On 25 August 2010, Rick Smith released a limited edition solo album &quot;Bungalow With Stairs 1&quot;, music to accompany &quot;What&#x27;s Going on in Your Head When You&#x27;re Dancing&quot; an exhibition of paintings by Karl Hyde at the Laforet Museum, Harajuku, Tokyo during 2010. The album was available from the band&#x27;s website and was packaged with the exhibition catalogue. In December 2010 it was announced that Underworld would reunite with &quot;Trainspotting&quot; director Danny Boyle to write the musical score for his production of Frankenstein at the Royal National Theatre. The production was broadcast as a part of National Theatre Live on 17 March 2011, with a soundtrack release on Underworld&#x27;s website in March 2011.

=== &quot;Anthology,&quot; the Olympics and solo projects ===
In November 2011, Underworld announced two new compilations, &quot;A Collection&quot; and &quot;1992–2012 Anthology&quot;. &quot;A Collection&quot; features many of the band&#x27;s biggest tracks alongside recent collaborations with High Contrast featuring Tiësto &amp; Underworld (&quot;The First Note Is Silent&quot;), Mark Knight &amp; D. Ramirez (&quot;Downpipe&quot;) and Brian Eno (&quot;Beebop Hurry&quot;). &quot;1992–2012 Anthology&quot; is a 3-disc set and is a refreshed and revisited version of &quot;1992–2002&quot; with more material, unreleased tracks and rarities to go some way to completing the picture of the first two decades of Underworld.

In December 2011, Underworld were chosen to direct the music for the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics, reprising their partnership with filmmaker and ceremony director Danny Boyle. The band also contributed two original tracks for the opening ceremony: &quot;And I Will Kiss&quot; (featuring Dame Evelyn Glennie with the Pandemonium Drummers) and &quot;Caliban&#x27;s Dream&quot; in collaboration with the Dockhead Choir, Dame Evelyn Glennie, Only Men Aloud, Elizabeth Roberts, Esme Smith (band member Rick Smith&#x27;s daughter) and Alex Trimble. Underworld contributed 11 of the 36 tracks on the soundtrack, &quot;Isles of Wonder&quot;. For their work on the Olympics, Underworld won the 2012 Q Award for Innovation in Sound.

On 22 April 2013, Karl Hyde released his debut solo album &quot;Edgeland&quot;. In 2014, he went on to release two collaborative albums with Brian Eno titled &quot;Someday World&quot; on 5 May and &quot;High Life&quot; on 30 June. Rick Smith went on to do some solo work, with two of his musical works being for projects by frequent collaborator director Danny Boyle. His first work was the soundtrack to Boyle&#x27;s 2013 film &quot;Trance&quot; and the score for the 2014 British drama television series &quot;Babylon&quot; which Boyle co-created and directed the 90 minute pilot.

=== Reissues and &quot;Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future&quot; ===
In 2014, the group announced their intention to release remastered and expanded editions of all of their studio albums &quot;in the next few years&quot;. An expanded edition of &quot;Dubnobasswithmyheadman&quot; was released on 6 October 2014 and the group toured in support of the album. An expanded edition of &quot;Second Toughest in the Infants&quot; was released on 20 November 2015. Just four days after the re-release of &quot;Second Toughest&quot;, on 24 November, Underworld announced a new album (their first studio album in six years) titled &quot;Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future&quot;, released on 18 March 2016. The album earned a 2017 Grammy Award nomination for Best Dance/Electronic Album. They embarked on a brief European tour in support of the album. The tour was later expanded to include the United States, Japan and Australia. In 2017, joining once again with frequent collaborator Danny Boyle, Smith wrote the musical score and produced the soundtrack for &quot;T2 Trainspotting&quot;. On 25 August 2017, they released an expanded, remastered edition of &quot;Beaucoup Fish&quot;.

=== The World of Underworld and &quot;Drift&quot;===
On 21 May 2018, Underworld announced a new project called the World of Underworld. Part of the project involves reflecting on and sometimes reimagining their nearly 30 year body of work. But it also serves as an outlet for experimentation, new releases, and spontaneous creativity. The first new song released as part of the World of Underworld, &quot;Brilliant Yes That Would Be&quot;, was recorded and mixed just days before it was released. Another new song, &quot;Bells &amp; Circles&quot;, was a collaboration with Iggy Pop that came out of sessions recorded a couple years earlier for possible inclusion on the &quot;T2 Trainspotting&quot; soundtrack. The remaining songs from that collaboration formed a joint four-track EP &quot;Teatime Dub Encounters&quot;, released on 27 July 2018.

On 1 November 2018, Underworld started a year-long experimental music-and-video project named &quot;Drift&quot;, which aimed to release the band&#x27;s new and previously unreleased material on a weekly basis. The full album titled &quot;Drift Series 1&quot; was released on 1 November 2019, and concluded the band&#x27;s 52 week &quot;Drift&quot; project. &quot;Drift Series 1&quot; received critical acclaim. On Metacritic, a review aggregator that assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 86, based on 6 reviews, which indicates &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

=== Remixes and &quot;Strawberry Hotel&quot; ===
On 27 May 2021, a &quot;2021 Edition&quot; of &quot;Two Months Off&quot; was released. Later that year on 28 October, a &quot;Drift 2 Dark Train&quot; version of &quot;Dark &amp; Long (Dark Train)&quot; was released. Exactly a year after the re-release of &quot;Two Months Off&quot;, &quot;Juanita 2022&quot; was released, a remix of &quot;Juanita&quot;.

On 3 April 2023, the first single of &quot;Strawberry Hotel&quot;, &quot;And the Colour Red&quot;, was released. Later that year on 1 December, the second single, &quot;Denver Luna&quot;, was released followed by a remix of the song by Kettama titled &quot;G-Town Euphoria (Luna) on 15 December. In 2024, the non-album single &quot;Fen Violet&quot;, a collaboration with Kettama, was released. Later in the year, the &quot;Strawberry Hotel&quot; album was announced for release on 25 October 2024, alongside the release of the third single, &quot;Black Poppies&quot;.

==Influence on video game composers==
Underworld have been mentioned as an influence by a number of video game composers, such as Nobuyoshi Sano, Andrew Sega, Jesper Kyd, Michiel van den Bos, and Rom Di Prisco.

==Charity==
In 2008, the band participated in an album called &quot;Songs for Tibet&quot;, &quot;to express our support for the Tibetan people... at a time when the eyes of the world are on China&quot; (referring to the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing). The album was issued on 5 August via iTunes and on 19 August in music stores around the world.

== Band members ==
Current members
* Karl Hyde – vocals, guitars (1987–present)
* Rick Smith – keyboards and mixing, backing vocals (1987–present)

Former members
* Bryn Burrows – drums (1987–1988)
* Alfie Thomas – guitars, keyboards, bass (1987–1990) 
* Baz Allen – bass (1987–1990)
* Pascal Consoli – drums (1989–1990)
* Darren Emerson – keyboards and mixing (1990–2000)

Touring members
* Darren Price – keyboards and mixing (2005–2016)

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;Underneath the Radar&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Change the Weather&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Dubnobasswithmyheadman&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Second Toughest in the Infants&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Beaucoup Fish&quot; (1999)
* &quot;A Hundred Days Off&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Oblivion with Bells&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Barking&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Drift Series 1&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Strawberry Hotel&quot; (2024)

EPs
* 2005 – &quot;Lovely Broken Thing&quot;
* 2005 – &quot;Pizza for Eggs&quot;
* 2006 – &quot;I&#x27;m a Big Sister, and I&#x27;m a Girl, and I&#x27;m a Princess, and This Is My Horse&quot;
* 2006 – &quot;The Misterons Mix&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* Discography: Freur/Underworld/Lemon Interupt – Detailed discography to 1999
* The Underworld Gigography
* Underworld at Rolling Stone
* Karl Hyde interviewed in Chaos Control Digizin (2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q849429" start="0" end="10" title="Underworld (band)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="25" end="41" title="electronic music" label="electronic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="66" end="73" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189316" start="124" end="133" title="Karl Hyde" label="Karl Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q20878239" start="138" end="148" title="Rick Smith (musician)" label="Rick Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="181" end="185" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="190" end="199" title="synth-pop" label="synth-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040557" start="363" end="385" title="Dubnobasswithmyheadman" label="Dubnobasswithmyheadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q848669" start="406" end="436" title="Second Toughest in the Infants" label="Second Toughest in the Infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273731" start="460" end="473" title="Beaucoup Fish" label="Beaucoup Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408348" start="513" end="529" title="Born Slippy Nuxx" label="Born Slippy Nuxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223105" start="546" end="574" title="Dark &amp;amp; Long" label="Dark &amp;amp; Long (Dark Train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248857" start="611" end="622" title="progressive music" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284176" start="661" end="684" title="stream of consciousness" label="stream of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="977" end="984" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44892" start="1033" end="1042" title="Kraftwerk" label="Kraftwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="1047" end="1053" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984800" start="1161" end="1166" title="Freur" label="Freur"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="1187" end="1198" title="Columbia Records" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714067" start="1218" end="1227" title="Doot-Doot" label="Doot-Doot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761482" start="1331" end="1349" title="Get Us out of Here" label="Get Us out of Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q798811" start="1476" end="1486" title="Underworld (1985 film)" label="Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="1542" end="1554" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883741" start="1584" end="1604" title="Underneath the Radar" label="Underneath the Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071887" start="1691" end="1709" title="Change the Weather" label="Change the Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q207706" start="1869" end="1879" title="Eurythmics" label="Eurythmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1972" end="1983" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022874" start="2483" end="2489" title="Tomato (design collective)" label="Tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016505" start="2518" end="2532" title="Darren Emerson" label="Darren Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="2730" end="2736" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040557" start="2948" end="2970" title="Dubnobasswithmyheadman" label="Dubnobasswithmyheadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q572916" start="3215" end="3229" title="Found art" label="found material"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="3476" end="3486" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q848669" start="3573" end="3603" title="Second Toughest in the Infants" label="Second Toughest in the Infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q109135" start="3765" end="3778" title="Trainspotting (film)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408348" start="3923" end="3939" title="Born Slippy Nuxx" label="Born Slippy Nuxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="4150" end="4156" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="4158" end="4163" title="House music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="4165" end="4178" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="4183" end="4201" title="experimental music" label="experimental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="4421" end="4433" title="Compilation album" label="compilations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48445" start="4435" end="4442" title="Mashup (music)" label="mashups"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="4447" end="4452" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273731" start="4541" end="4554" title="Beaucoup Fish" label="Beaucoup Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="4647" end="4657" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q597615" start="4872" end="4875" title="Digital Audio Tape" label="DAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310869" start="5266" end="5271" title="Jumbo (Underworld song)" label="Jumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5431" end="5434" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977899" start="5445" end="5464" title="Stars in Their Eyes" label="Stars in Their Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313173" start="5510" end="5531" title="Junior Boy&amp;#x27;s Own" label="Junior Boy&amp;#x27;s Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877436" start="5661" end="5682" title="Beaucoup Fish Singles" label="Beaucoup Fish Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406367" start="5884" end="5906" title="Everything, Everything (album)" label="Everything, Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022874" start="6166" end="6172" title="Tomato (design collective)" label="Tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q110278" start="6337" end="6348" title="Vanilla Sky" label="Vanilla Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319708" start="6397" end="6400" title="Rez (song)" label="Rez"/>
<link wikidata="Q24705192" start="6463" end="6481" title="Helene Moltke-Leth" label="Helene Moltke-Leth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164334" start="6541" end="6543" title="DR (broadcaster)" label="DR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273820" start="6831" end="6849" title="A Hundred Days Off" label="A Hundred Days Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577231" start="7329" end="7335" title="Spikee" label="Spikee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7349" end="7354" title="Dirty Epic#&amp;quot;Dirty&amp;quot;" label="Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408822" start="7596" end="7609" title="Live in Tokyo 25th November 2005" label="Live in Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406357" start="7817" end="7825" title="Riverrun (Underworld project)" label="Riverrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q918887" start="8292" end="8300" title="12&amp;quot;" label="12&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q813240" start="8454" end="8462" title="Beatport" label="Beatport"/>
<link wikidata="Q502957" start="8511" end="8524" title="Gabriel Yared" label="Gabriel Yared"/>
<link wikidata="Q188726" start="8555" end="8572" title="Anthony Minghella" label="Anthony Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q241391" start="8591" end="8612" title="Breaking and Entering (film)" label="Breaking and Entering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408818" start="8620" end="8634" title="Breaking and Entering (soundtrack)" label="The soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272948" start="8790" end="8809" title="Oblivion with Bells" label="Oblivion with Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388787" start="8893" end="8902" title="Crocodile (song)" label="Crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="8944" end="8946" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q814065" start="8962" end="8977" title="Larry Mullen Jr" label="Larry Mullen Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272948" start="9008" end="9021" title="Boy, Boy, Boy" label="Boy, Boy, Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701175" start="9072" end="9083" title="John Murphy (composer)" label="John Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9099" end="9109" title="Sunshine (soundtrack)#Score" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="9117" end="9128" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q478212" start="9141" end="9149" title="Sunshine (2007 film)" label="Sunshine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="9461" end="9473" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729261" start="9908" end="9949" title="All Points West Music &amp;amp; Arts Festival" label="All Points West Music &amp;amp; Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363986" start="9953" end="9971" title="Liberty State Park" label="Liberty State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="10009" end="10018" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531070" start="10230" end="10239" title="the Necks" label="the Necks"/>
<link wikidata="Q903592" start="10259" end="10270" title="Jon Hopkins" label="Jon Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523515" start="10285" end="10297" title="Leo Abrahams" label="Leo Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q669118" start="10557" end="10579" title="Montreux Jazz Festival" label="Montreux Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5999518" start="11069" end="11080" title="Mark Knight (DJ)" label="Mark Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203795" start="11085" end="11095" title="D. Ramirez" label="D. Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="11385" end="11391" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408822" start="11565" end="11580" title="Live in Tokyo 25th November 2005" label="You Do Scribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q538289" start="11716" end="11729" title="High Contrast" label="High Contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="11733" end="11746" title="drum and bass" label="drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="11747" end="11749" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q947180" start="11837" end="11846" title="Pete Tong" label="Pete Tong"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="11854" end="11861" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399551" start="11890" end="11908" title="Essential Selection" label="Essential New Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="11987" end="11994" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q510145" start="12131" end="12138" title="Barking (album)" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q170435" start="12237" end="12243" title="trance music" label="trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q77034" start="12253" end="12265" title="Paul van Dyk" label="Paul van Dyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q109135" start="12797" end="12810" title="Trainspotting (film)" label="Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082890" start="12887" end="12899" title="Frankenstein (2011 play)" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="12907" end="12929" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336948" start="12973" end="12994" title="National Theatre Live" label="National Theatre Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q183508" start="13403" end="13409" title="Tiësto" label="Tiësto"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="13523" end="13532" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="13877" end="13893" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="13901" end="13921" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="13988" end="13999" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753321" start="14079" end="14094" title="And I Will Kiss" label="And I Will Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q239275" start="14112" end="14131" title="Evelyn Glennie" label="Dame Evelyn Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019809" start="14173" end="14193" title="Caliban&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="Caliban&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q239275" start="14242" end="14261" title="Evelyn Glennie" label="Dame Evelyn Glennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799876" start="14263" end="14277" title="Only Men Aloud" label="Only Men Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q777302" start="14354" end="14366" title="Alex Trimble" label="Alex Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14436" end="14451" title="Isles of Wonder: Music for the Opening Ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games" label="Isles of Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14515" end="14522" title="Q Awards#2012" label="Q Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112865" start="14613" end="14621" title="Edgeland (album)" label="Edgeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="14690" end="14699" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15831185" start="14713" end="14726" title="Someday World" label="Someday World"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004465" start="14752" end="14761" title="High Life (Eno and Hyde album)" label="High Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q134867" start="14904" end="14915" title="Danny Boyle" label="Danny Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q502374" start="14983" end="14989" title="Trance (2013 film)" label="Trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836634" start="15061" end="15068" title="Babylon (TV series)" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561029" start="15767" end="15808" title="Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future" label="Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="15867" end="15879" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542147" start="15895" end="15922" title="Grammy Award for Best Dance/Electronic Album" label="Best Dance/Electronic Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758755" start="16203" end="16219" title="T2 Trainspotting" label="T2 Trainspotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q182665" start="16896" end="16904" title="Iggy Pop" label="Iggy Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q56071796" start="17113" end="17135" title="Teatime Dub Encounters" label="Teatime Dub Encounters"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058812" start="17270" end="17275" title="Drift (Underworld project)" label="Drift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17408" end="17422" title="Drift (Underworld project)#Drift Series 1" label="Drift Series 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="17584" end="17594" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050272" start="17631" end="17641" title="Standard score" label="normalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408455" start="17908" end="17922" title="Two Months Off" label="Two Months Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q5223105" start="18024" end="18052" title="Dark &amp;amp; Long" label="Dark &amp;amp; Long (Dark Train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301517" start="18196" end="18203" title="Juanita (Underworld song)" label="Juanita"/>
<link wikidata="Q130259605" start="18255" end="18271" title="Strawberry Hotel" label="Strawberry Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="18881" end="18901" title="Video game music" label="video game composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138851" start="18911" end="18925" title="Nobuyoshi Sano" label="Nobuyoshi Sano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300683" start="18927" end="18938" title="Andrew Sega" label="Andrew Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q316449" start="18940" end="18950" title="Jesper Kyd" label="Jesper Kyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650748" start="18952" end="18971" title="Michiel van den Bos" label="Michiel van den Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q253336" start="18977" end="18990" title="Rom Di Prisco" label="Rom Di Prisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q610227" start="19061" end="19076" title="Songs for Tibet" label="Songs for Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="19121" end="19135" title="Tibetan people" label="Tibetan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="19213" end="19233" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="19237" end="19244" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="19284" end="19290" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189316" start="19380" end="19389" title="Karl Hyde" label="Karl Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q20878239" start="19425" end="19435" title="Rick Smith (musician)" label="Rick Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016505" start="19666" end="19680" title="Darren Emerson" label="Darren Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883741" start="19823" end="19843" title="Underneath the Radar" label="Underneath the Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071887" start="19865" end="19883" title="Change the Weather" label="Change the Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040557" start="19905" end="19927" title="Dubnobasswithmyheadman" label="Dubnobasswithmyheadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q848669" start="19949" end="19979" title="Second Toughest in the Infants" label="Second Toughest in the Infants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273731" start="20001" end="20014" title="Beaucoup Fish" label="Beaucoup Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273820" start="20036" end="20054" title="A Hundred Days Off" label="A Hundred Days Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272948" start="20076" end="20095" title="Oblivion with Bells" label="Oblivion with Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q510145" start="20117" end="20124" title="Barking (album)" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561029" start="20146" end="20187" title="Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future" label="Barbara Barbara, We Face a Shining Future"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20209" end="20223" title="Drift (Underworld project)#Drift Series 1" label="Drift Series 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130259605" start="20245" end="20261" title="Strawberry Hotel" label="Strawberry Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="20664" end="20677" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91237" wikidata="Q501779" url="?curid=91237" title="Waynesboro, Virginia">
<text>Waynesboro (; formerly Flack) is an independent city in the Commonwealth of Virginia. It is a principal city of the Staunton-Waynesboro Metropolitan Statistical Area. Waynesboro is located in the Shenandoah Valley and is surrounded by Augusta County. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 22,196.

== History ==

Located in the British Colony of Virginia, even after the American Revolution and independence and statehood for the Commonwealth of Virginia, the areas west of the Appalachian and Blue Ridge Mountains were known as the frontier. Travel by wagon over the mountains was considered to be nearly impossible except where nature afforded some gap between them. Until after the Civil War, Jarmans Gap, only some six miles northeast of Waynesboro, was the major crossing of the Blue Ridge Mountains in that area, making Waynesboro a convenient location for a stop for many who sought to travel west.

In the mid-18th century, the Waynesboro area was commonly referred to as Teasville (or Teesville). Shortly after U.S. Army General Anthony Wayne&#x27;s significant victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 during the Northwest Indian War, the area began to be called Waynesborough. Many settlers to the area at the time originated from Pennsylvania. General Wayne&#x27;s well-known popularity with Pennsylvanians is suspected to have helped contribute to this naming.

As early as 1798, the current downtown area was plotted and sold. On January 8, 1801, the town of Waynesborough was officially recognized by the state of Virginia and was incorporated by 1834.

Some of the remaining buildings from this period of its history include the Plumb House (now a museum open for tours seasonally) and the Coiner-Quesenbury House, built in 1806, believed to be the first brick house built in the town, which is still standing on Main Street.

Population growth in the town was slow at first. In 1810, the town had a population of 250, and by 1860 that number had grown to 457. The town maintained a steady stream of visitors primarily due to its position on Three Notch&#x27;d Road, which connected Staunton to the west with Charlottesville and Richmond to the east. This road crossed the Blue Ridge Mountains through Jarman&#x27;s Gap. Additionally, a railroad tunnel was constructed through Rockfish Gap a short time before the Civil War began. This was to establish Rockfish Gap as the major crossing through the mountains between Waynesboro and Charlottesville.

On March 2, 1865, Waynesboro was the site of the last battle of the Civil War for the Confederate Lt. General Jubal A. Early. The Battle of Waynesboro lasted twenty minutes, was a complete victory for George Armstrong Custer, and was a final blow for the Confederate Army in the Shenandoah Valley. Sometime after, General Early relinquished the town and the valley to General Philip Sheridan. Many of the buildings from this period still show damage from the battle. During and after the war, casualties from the nearby Valley Campaign and other battles were buried in Ridgeview Cemetery where the Waynesboro Confederate Monument lists and commemorates their names and states.

After the war, the Waynesboro area became the junction of two important railroad lines: an east-to-west track (operated by the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway) and a north–south trunk line (of the Shenandoah Valley Railroad, which soon became the Norfolk and Western Railway). The tracks intersected near Waynesboro, giving the site the nickname of the &quot;Iron Cross.&quot; The transportation advantages coming from the Iron Cross fueled great hopes for economic development.

In a flurry of land speculation, land lots to the east of Waynesboro, mostly on the east side of South River, were plotted and sold in 1890. Within that year, the area was incorporated as the Town of Basic City. An opera house, a wide boulevard called Commerce Avenue, and the upscale Hotel Brunswick were built there. A friendly rivalry soon developed between the two towns with each attempting to outdo the other regarding their development. The overall population from May 1, 1890, to May 1 of 1891 rose 150% (from 1,000 people to 2,500). An important difference between the two was that, unlike Basic City, Waynesboro had implemented restrictive laws banning the sale of alcohol. Effects of the Panic of 1896 abruptly dried up the boomtown investment in Basic City; grand plans for more hotels and manufacturing complexes were scuttled. The established blocks of small-size land plots meant for worker housing remain, and today the former Basic City area is largely low-income housing.

Waynesboro steadily prospered and circa 1900-1920 many spacious houses were built on a scenic hill that was gridded into the &quot;Tree Streets&quot; neighborhood, with residential lanes named Oak Avenue, Chestnut Avenue, Poplar Avenue, and the like. In 1923, Waynesboro and Basic City consolidated into a single town to be called Waynesboro-Basic. Later, officials dropped Basic and the name became Waynesboro, with the former Basic City disappearing as one of the &quot;lost towns of Virginia.&quot; Since 1924, Waynesboro has made numerous territorial acquisitions from areas of Augusta County through annexation and officially became an independent city in 1948. In 2005, Waynesboro established a new charter, repealing one in place since 1948.

==Geography==
Waynesboro is located at (38.069874, -78.894517). It averages1,305 feet above sea level, ranging from 1,050 feet to 1,800 feet above sea level. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (1.0%) is water.

Waynesboro is located in the Shenandoah Valley. It is in the Valley and Ridge physiographic province. The South River, a tributary of the Shenandoah River, flows through the city.

=== Climate ===
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 21,006 people, 8,903 households, and 5,589 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 9,717 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 82.2% White, 10.6% African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 2.9% from other races, and 3.2% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.4% of the population.

There were 8,903 households, of which 27.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.4% were married couples living together, 15.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.2% were non-families. 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.90.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 23.3% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 17.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.5 males. For every 100 females aged eighteen and over, there were 85.7 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $41,077, and the median income for a family was $55,668. Males had a median income of $36,013 versus $30,699 for females. The per capita income for the city was $24,372. About 12.9% of families and 18.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.6% of those under age 18 and 11.0% of those age 65 or over.

== Economy ==
A large former DuPont plant and the associated Benger Laboratory where spandex was invented (under the brand name Lycra), as well as a large textile mill called Wayn-Tex (now owned by Mohawk Industries), were significant employers for residents through much of the 20th century. The DuPont plant was later sold to Koch Industries as part of the subsidiary company Invista. In January 2019, the plant was again sold to Chinese luxury apparel firm Shandong Ruyi Group and rebranded as The Lycra Company. A General Electric site on the northeast side, which made relays and later computer printers, was also a substantial employer. Waynesboro was home to the corporate headquarters of nTelos (a regional wireless and telecommunications company serving Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Ohio) before that company&#x27;s merger with Shentel. Tourism, industrial production, and retail remain vital to the Waynesboro economy.

== Arts and culture ==

=== Film and television ===
Two movies have filmed scenes in Waynesboro: &quot;Toy Soldiers&quot; (1991) and &quot;Evan Almighty&quot; (2007). The city has been mentioned several times on television series &quot;The Waltons&quot;.

=== Architecture ===
Nearby is Swannanoa palace, which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1969.

== Sports ==
The Generals of the Valley Baseball League play there.

== Parks and recreation ==
The Blue Ridge Parkway, Skyline Drive, and the Appalachian Trail are fewer than from Waynesboro. Near Waynesboro, is the west portal and visitor parking for the historical Blue Ridge Tunnel, which opened to the public as a linear park in 2021.

== Government ==








Like the rest of the Shenandoah Valley, Waynesboro is a traditionally Republican stronghold. Despite improved Democratic performance over time, Waynesboro has remained Republican even since the 2008 presidential election, which marked the beginning of a string of Democratic presidential victories in other Valley independent cities such as Harrisonburg, Staunton, and Winchester. Joe Biden, in 2020, received the highest percentage (46.3%) of Waynesboro votes for any Democratic presidential candidate in 56 years, but still received 546 fewer votes than then-president Donald Trump.

== Education ==
The Waynesboro City Public Schools system serves the area and operates Waynesboro High School. Waynesboro is the home of Fishburne Military School, an all-male private military boarding school for grades 8 through 12.

==Infrastructure==

=== Transportation ===
==== Intercity rail ====
The city is served by two freight rail lines, owned by Norfolk Southern and CSX. The intersection of the two lines is known as &quot;The Iron Cross&quot;, a historically significant symbol of the city&#x27;s economic growth.

==== Freeways and primary routes ====
The main highway through Waynesboro is Interstate 64, which runs east to west across much of Virginia. It also has a junction with Interstate 81 just to the west of Waynesboro, the main north–south highway across western Virginia. Additional highways serving Waynesboro include U.S. Route 250, U.S. Route 340, and Virginia State Route 254.

==Media==
Waynesboro&#x27;s local newspaper is &quot;The News Virginian&quot;.

==Notable people==

*Cory Alexander, NBA basketball player and ACC Network announcer
*Ann Bedsole, politician, businesswoman, community activist, and philanthropist
*Shonn Bell, a professional football player
*Kenny Brooks, head coach of the University of Kentucky women&#x27;s basketball team
*Carrie Buck, plaintiff in the United States Supreme Court case &quot;Buck v. Bell&quot; that dealt with forced sterilization
*Joseph Burns, U.S. Representative 
*Ronnie R. Campbell, politician, Virginia House of Delegates
*Jeff Ray Clark, American economist
*Mark Cline, American artist and entertainer
*Shawn Decker, writer and HIV/AIDS speaker
*Lew DeWitt, singer and songwriter, member of The Statler Brothers
*Earl Hamner Jr., television writer and producer
*John A. Harman, Confederate States Army officer, chief quartermaster of the Army of Northern Virginia.
*William Henry Harman, Confederate general
*Reggie Harris, MLB baseball player
*Mary Louise Hawkins, air evacuation flight nurse who earned the Distinguished Flying Cross during World War II
*Lejaren Hiller, composer
*Nikki Hornsby, singer and songwriter
*Mikkel Borlaug Johnson, physicist
*Kid Kash, professional wrestler
*Elizabeth Massie, American horror author
*Richards Miller, one of the founders of the Venturing (Boy Scouts of America) program
*P. Buckley Moss, artist
*William Henry Sheppard, Presbyterian missionary to Africa
*Anne Tompkins, United States Attorney
*John Wetzel, former professional basketball player and coach

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Hawke, George, &quot;A History of Waynesboro to 1900&quot;, Waynesboro Historical Commission, 1997
* Bowman, Curtis, &quot;Waynesboro Days of Yore: Volumes I and II&quot;, McClung Companies, Inc, Waynesboro, 1992

== External links ==

* Waynesboro Tourism
* Waynesboro City Public Schools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501779" start="0" end="10" title="Waynesboro, Virginia" label="Waynesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q501779" start="23" end="28" title="Waynesboro, Virginia" label="Flack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="36" end="52" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="60" end="72" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="76" end="84" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604749" start="116" end="165" title="Staunton-Waynesboro micropolitan area" label="Staunton-Waynesboro Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="196" end="213" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q285625" start="235" end="249" title="Augusta County, Virginia" label="Augusta County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="261" end="286" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="354" end="372" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="389" end="408" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="448" end="472" title="Commonwealth of Virginia" label="Commonwealth of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="496" end="507" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="512" end="532" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558721" start="714" end="725" title="Jarmans Gap" label="Jarmans Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="802" end="822" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="1056" end="1069" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237537" start="1104" end="1128" title="Fallen Timbers" label="Battle of Fallen Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="1148" end="1168" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1267" end="1279" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205388" start="1670" end="1681" title="Plumb House (Waynesboro, Virginia)" label="Plumb House"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="2124" end="2132" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="2150" end="2165" title="Charlottesville" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="2170" end="2178" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558721" start="2243" end="2260" title="Jarman&amp;#x27;s Gap" label="Jarman&amp;#x27;s Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355220" start="2318" end="2330" title="Rockfish Gap" label="Rockfish Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2560" end="2569" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q257497" start="2602" end="2616" title="Jubal A. Early" label="Jubal A. Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890377" start="2622" end="2642" title="Battle of Waynesboro, Virginia" label="Battle of Waynesboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="2693" end="2716" title="George Armstrong Custer" label="George Armstrong Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="2771" end="2788" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q355452" start="2868" end="2883" title="Philip Sheridan" label="Philip Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070560" start="3297" end="3324" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway" label="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238851" start="3344" end="3354" title="Main line (railway)" label="trunk line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494184" start="3363" end="3389" title="Shenandoah Valley Railroad (N&amp;amp;W)" label="Shenandoah Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q917079" start="3413" end="3440" title="Norfolk and Western Railway" label="Norfolk and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="3661" end="3677" title="land speculation" label="land speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q683595" start="3679" end="3687" title="land lot" label="land lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866942" start="3838" end="3856" title="Basic City, Virginia" label="Town of Basic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430175" start="3931" end="3946" title="Fairfax Hall" label="Hotel Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131106" start="4345" end="4358" title="Panic of 1896" label="Panic of 1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="4381" end="4389" title="boomtown" label="boomtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470146" start="5109" end="5131" title="List of former counties, cities, and towns of Virginia" label="lost towns of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285625" start="5219" end="5233" title="Augusta County" label="Augusta County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="5278" end="5294" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5562" end="5589" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="5690" end="5707" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332669" start="5722" end="5738" title="Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians" label="Valley and Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189710" start="5739" end="5761" title="physiographic province" label="physiographic province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568327" start="5767" end="5778" title="South River (South Fork Shenandoah River tributary)" label="South River"/>
<link wikidata="Q777907" start="5799" end="5815" title="Shenandoah River" label="Shenandoah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6135" end="6141" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="6240" end="6258" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6363" end="6368" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6376" end="6392" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6399" end="6414" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6421" end="6426" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6434" end="6450" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6462" end="6473" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6508" end="6516" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6520" end="6526" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6675" end="6690" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7496" end="7513" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7607" end="7619" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="7724" end="7730" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q330262" start="7780" end="7787" title="spandex" label="spandex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="7850" end="7862" title="textile mill" label="textile mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496384" start="8023" end="8038" title="Koch Industries" label="Koch Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041558" start="8073" end="8080" title="INVISTA" label="Invista"/>
<link wikidata="Q54621419" start="8192" end="8209" title="The Lycra Company" label="The Lycra Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955544" start="8391" end="8397" title="nTelos" label="nTelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="8468" end="8481" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="8483" end="8497" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="8499" end="8508" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="8510" end="8518" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="8524" end="8528" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073960" start="8569" end="8576" title="Shentel" label="Shentel"/>
<link wikidata="Q895856" start="8765" end="8777" title="Toy Soldiers (1991 film)" label="Toy Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q195949" start="8801" end="8814" title="Evan Almighty" label="Evan Almighty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="8898" end="8909" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653620" start="8949" end="8958" title="Swannanoa (mansion)" label="Swannanoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="8991" end="9027" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976806" start="9055" end="9063" title="Waynesboro Generals" label="Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911976" start="9071" end="9093" title="Valley Baseball League" label="Valley Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="9138" end="9156" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q911052" start="9158" end="9171" title="Skyline Drive" label="Skyline Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="9181" end="9198" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929749" start="9306" end="9323" title="Blue Ridge Tunnel" label="Blue Ridge Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553474" start="9357" end="9368" title="linear park" label="linear park"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="9425" end="9442" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="9474" end="9484" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9514" end="9524" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="9598" end="9624" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9718" end="9736" title="Independent city (United States)#Virginia" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q511935" start="9745" end="9757" title="Harrisonburg, Virginia" label="Harrisonburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="9759" end="9767" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q492355" start="9773" end="9783" title="Winchester, Virginia" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="9785" end="9794" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976807" start="10077" end="10099" title="Waynesboro High School" label="Waynesboro High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454715" start="10127" end="10152" title="Fishburne Military School" label="Fishburne Military School"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="10174" end="10182" title="Military school" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="10183" end="10198" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446385" start="10596" end="10609" title="Interstate 64 in Virginia" label="Interstate 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447647" start="10688" end="10701" title="Interstate 81 in Virginia" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818446" start="10835" end="10849" title="U.S. Route 250 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 250"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852458" start="10851" end="10865" title="U.S. Route 340 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508135" start="10871" end="10895" title="Virginia State Route 254" label="Virginia State Route 254"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753929" start="10951" end="10969" title="The News Virginian" label="The News Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318219" start="10999" end="11013" title="Cory Alexander" label="Cory Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q43371319" start="11041" end="11052" title="ACC Network" label="ACC Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979830" start="11064" end="11075" title="Ann Bedsole" label="Ann Bedsole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500424" start="11144" end="11154" title="Shonn Bell" label="Shonn Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921482" start="11188" end="11200" title="Kenny Brooks" label="Kenny Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360303" start="11220" end="11242" title="University of Kentucky" label="University of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046212" start="11273" end="11284" title="Carrie Buck" label="Carrie Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q468489" start="11286" end="11295" title="plaintiff" label="plaintiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11303" end="11330" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891943" start="11342" end="11354" title="Buck v. Bell" label="Buck v. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590563" start="11399" end="11411" title="Joseph Burns (U.S. politician)" label="Joseph Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11413" end="11432" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q60774278" start="11435" end="11453" title="Ronnie R. Campbell" label="Ronnie R. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="11467" end="11475" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="11476" end="11494" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174763" start="11496" end="11510" title="Jeff Ray Clark" label="Jeff Ray Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767089" start="11532" end="11542" title="Mark Cline" label="Mark Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491330" start="11577" end="11589" title="Shawn Decker" label="Shawn Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535964" start="11620" end="11630" title="Lew DeWitt" label="Lew DeWitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q167408" start="11665" end="11685" title="The Statler Brothers" label="The Statler Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q948870" start="11687" end="11702" title="Earl Hamner Jr." label="Earl Hamner Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q59919192" start="11736" end="11750" title="John A. Harman" label="John A. Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="11752" end="11775" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q689847" start="11812" end="11837" title="Army of Northern Virginia" label="Army of Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012020" start="11840" end="11860" title="William Henry Harman" label="William Henry Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308240" start="11883" end="11896" title="Reggie Harris" label="Reggie Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q58895605" start="11919" end="11938" title="Mary Louise Hawkins" label="Mary Louise Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="11983" end="12009" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12017" end="12029" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q899159" start="12031" end="12045" title="Lejaren Hiller" label="Lejaren Hiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="12047" end="12055" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035236" start="12057" end="12070" title="Nikki Hornsby" label="Nikki Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672856" start="12095" end="12117" title="Mikkel Borlaug Johnson" label="Mikkel Borlaug Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198583" start="12130" end="12138" title="Kid Kash" label="Kid Kash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363172" start="12163" end="12179" title="Elizabeth Massie" label="Elizabeth Massie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330297" start="12205" end="12220" title="Richards Miller" label="Richards Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920452" start="12249" end="12282" title="Venturing (Boy Scouts of America)" label="Venturing (Boy Scouts of America)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7117150" start="12292" end="12307" title="P. Buckley Moss" label="P. Buckley Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q332803" start="12317" end="12339" title="William Henry Sheppard" label="William Henry Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768851" start="12376" end="12389" title="Anne Tompkins" label="Anne Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="12391" end="12413" title="United States Attorney" label="United States Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348890" start="12415" end="12426" title="John Wetzel (basketball)" label="John Wetzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="12448" end="12458" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91238" wikidata="Q510934" url="?curid=91238" title="Warren County, Virginia">
<text>Warren County is a U.S. county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The 2020 United States census places Warren County within the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area with a population of 40,727. The county was established in 1836. The county seat is Front Royal.

== History ==

By 1672, the entire Shenandoah Valley was claimed for hunting by the Iroquois Confederation following the Beaver Wars. Some bands of the Shawnee settled in the area as client groups to the Iroquois and alternately to the Cherokee after 1721. The Iroquois formally sold their entire claim east of the Alleghenies to the Virginia Colony at the Treaty of Lancaster in 1744. Warren County was established in 1836 from Frederick and Shenandoah Counties. At that time the county had a population of 7,000 people, a quarter of which were enslaved. Wedding records show marriages of people born in the 1770s marrying in the 1800s who head households of four to eight &quot;free colored&quot; so the early demographics of the population are unclear. Joist Hite lead the &quot;Sixteen Families&quot; into the Lower Shenandoah Valley. Some consider that group the first European settlers of the area, others believe different claims. Either way, Presbyterians of Scotch-Irish lineage and Quakers followed.

Rail service was established in 1854 with the construction of the Alexandria, Orange and Manassas Gap Railroad between Manassas and Riverton. This line was soon extended to Strasburg in time to become a factor in the Battle of Front Royal on May 23, 1862, and throughout the Civil War. Lumber, agriculture, manufacturing and grain mills provided employment in the region for decades after the Civil War. The county is named for Joseph Warren. During the Civil War the Battle of Front Royal took place in the county on May 23, 1862. On September 23, 1864, William Thomas Overby and five others of then Lt. Col. John S. Mosby&#x27;s 43rd Virginia Battalion of Partisan Rangers were captured by cavalry troops under the command of then Brig. Gen. George A. Custer in Front Royal out of uniform and were executed as spies.

=== 2019 Warren County Economic Development Authority Executive Director Jennifer McDonald Scandal ===

In 2017, questions were raised about the validity of an alleged $40 million economic development deal that had been brought to the community by Curt Tran, the owner of a company called IT Federal, over the redevelopment of the Avtex Superfund site.

In 2018, Warren County Economic Development Authority executive director Jennifer McDonald was charged with filing false police reports about an alleged rock-throwing incident that she claimed had occurred at her home.

In 2019, McDonald and other parties were embroiled in a massive financial scandal that some observers have characterized as the largest embezzlement scheme in the history of the state of Virginia. The fraud scheme, which involved the alleged embezzlement of $21 million in county funds through fictitious development schemes and insider deals, was uncovered by the Virginia State Police Bureau of Criminal Investigation&#x27;s Culpeper field office.

The Virginia State Police launched a probe into the business practices of McDonald in conjunction with the Front Royal Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Sheriff McEathron, who had been indicted after it was revealed he was McDonald&#x27;s business partner, committed suicide.

Jennifer McDonald was charged with 32 felony counts for her role in the scheme. 14 current and former municipal officials were indicted and faced criminal charges, including the entire Warren County board of supervisors as well as the former Warren County Attorney and the head of the Warren County schools division.
These charges were later dropped as the judge ruled there was no basis for the allegations.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.5%) is water. The highest point is Hogback Mountain in Shenandoah National Park, along the border with Rappahannock County.

===Adjacent counties===
* Frederick County, Virginia – north
* Clarke County, Virginia – northeast
* Fauquier County, Virginia – east
* Rappahannock County, Virginia – southeast
* Page County, Virginia – southwest
* Shenandoah County, Virginia – west

===National protected areas===
* Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park (part)
* George Washington National Forest (part)
* Shenandoah National Park (part)

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 31,584 people, 12,087 households, and 8,521 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 13,299 housing units at an average density of . The demographics of the county is (2000) 92.71% White, 4.83% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.43% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 1.29% from two or more races. 1.56% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 12,087 households, out of which 32.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.60% were married couples living together, 10.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.50% were non-families. 24.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.04.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 25.60% under the age of 18, 7.60% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 23.90% from 45 to 64, and 12.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.70 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 94.90 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $42,422, and the median income for a family was $50,487. Males had a median income of $37,182 versus $25,506 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,841. About 6.00% of families and 8.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.70% of those under age 18 and 10.40% of those age 65 or over.

== Economy ==

For many years, Avtex Fibers (formerly known as the American Viscose Corporation from 1910 to 1976), was the county&#x27;s largest employer and taxpayer. At its height, it employed over 800 residents throughout Front Royal and Warren County.

Towards the late 1980s, however, the company&#x27;s main plant in Front Royal was forced to close as a result of numerous environmental violations, which eventually resulted in the site being declared a Superfund site. The county, reeling from the sudden loss of jobs and tax revenue, established the Warren County Economic Development Authority (WCEDA) to stimulate and diversify its economy as well as the economy of Town of Front Royal, its county seat. The purpose of the WCEDA is to foster and stimulate industry and economic development within Warren County and the town of Front Royal.

===Top employers===
According to the county&#x27;s comprehensive annual financial reports, the top employers by number of employees in the county are the following.

== Transportation ==

* Front Royal Area Transit (FRAT) provides weekday transit for the town of Front Royal.
* Page County Transit - the People Movers provides weekday transit for the town of Luray and weekday service between Luray and Front Royal.

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Education ==

=== College ===
* Christendom College

=== Public schools ===

* Skyline High School (9–12)
* Warren County High School (9–12)
* Warren County Middle School (6–8)
* Skyline Middle School (6–8)
* A.S. Rhodes Elementary School (K–5)
* E. Wilson Morrison Elementary School (K–5)
* Hilda J. Barbour Elementary School (PreK–5)
* Leslie Fox Keyser Elementary School (K–5)
* Ressie Jefferies Elementary School (K–5)

=== Preparatory school ===
* Randolph-Macon Academy (6–12)
==Communities==

===Town===

* Front Royal (county seat)

===Census-designated places===

* Apple Mountain Lake
* Chester Gap (mostly in Rappahannock County)
* Shenandoah Farms
* Shenandoah Shores
* Skyland Estates

===Other unincorporated communities===

* Ashby
* Bentonville
* Bethel
* Browntown
* Buckton
* Cedarville
* Happy Creek
* Howellsville
* Karo
* Limeton
* Linden
* Milldale
* Nineveh
* Overall
* Reliance
* Riverton
* Rockland
* Waterlick
==Politics==

Prior to 1952, the county was dominated by the Democratic Party like most counties in Virginia, but between then and 1976, it was a swing county. Since 1980, it has become consistently Republican.











==Notable people==
* Thomas Ashby, born in Warren County, physician and Maryland state legislator
* Thomas M. Allen, born in Warren County, clergyman and university official in Missouri

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, Virginia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510934" start="0" end="13" title="Warren County, Virginia" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19" end="23" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="24" end="30" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="46" end="58" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="62" end="70" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="76" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="134" end="208" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="278" end="289" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="293" end="304" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="342" end="359" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="391" end="413" title="Iroquois Confederation" label="Iroquois Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q856216" start="428" end="439" title="Beaver Wars" label="Beaver Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="459" end="466" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="641" end="656" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837117" start="664" end="683" title="Treaty of Lancaster" label="Treaty of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="736" end="745" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="750" end="760" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Shenandoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1257" end="1270" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="1274" end="1294" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1299" end="1306" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125491" start="1535" end="1556" title="Battle of Front Royal" label="Battle of Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q590644" start="1746" end="1759" title="Joseph Warren" label="Joseph Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1772" end="1781" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125491" start="1786" end="1807" title="Battle of Front Royal" label="Battle of Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114171" start="1928" end="1941" title="John S. Mosby" label="John S. Mosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q255087" start="1949" end="1992" title="43rd Battalion, Virginia Cavalry" label="43rd Virginia Battalion of Partisan Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188205" start="2062" end="2078" title="George A. Custer" label="George A. Custer"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="2082" end="2093" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814466" start="2501" end="2545" title="Warren County Economic Development Authority" label="Warren County Economic Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560687" start="3077" end="3098" title="Virginia State Police" label="Virginia State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="3270" end="3299" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3308" end="3339" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="3715" end="3730" title="County Attorney" label="County Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3907" end="3925" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q48802286" start="4019" end="4035" title="Hogback Mountain (Shenandoah National Park, Virginia)" label="Hogback Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="4039" end="4063" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q510920" start="4087" end="4106" title="Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Rappahannock County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="4135" end="4161" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495142" start="4172" end="4195" title="Clarke County, Virginia" label="Clarke County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="4210" end="4235" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510920" start="4245" end="4274" title="Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Rappahannock County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513818" start="4289" end="4310" title="Page County, Virginia" label="Page County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="4325" end="4352" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Shenandoah County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056652" start="4394" end="4446" title="Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park" label="Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="4456" end="4489" title="George Washington National Forest" label="George Washington National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="4499" end="4523" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4809" end="4815" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5049" end="5054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5062" end="5067" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5071" end="5087" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5095" end="5110" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5118" end="5123" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5131" end="5147" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5160" end="5171" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5236" end="5244" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5248" end="5254" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5382" end="5397" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6209" end="6226" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6322" end="6334" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511761" start="6478" end="6506" title="American Viscose Corporation" label="American Viscose Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="6872" end="6881" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q85814466" start="6970" end="7014" title="Warren County Economic Development Authority" label="Warren County Economic Development Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="7088" end="7107" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Town of Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156999" start="7314" end="7351" title="comprehensive annual financial report" label="comprehensive annual financial report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373971" start="7622" end="7627" title="Luray, Virginia" label="Luray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373971" start="7656" end="7661" title="Luray, Virginia" label="Luray"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="7666" end="7677" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q737940" start="7748" end="7767" title="Christendom College" label="Christendom College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537917" start="7795" end="7814" title="Skyline High School (Virginia)" label="Skyline High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970136" start="7824" end="7849" title="Warren County High School (Virginia)" label="Warren County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291776" start="8169" end="8191" title="Randolph-Macon Academy" label="Randolph-Macon Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="8230" end="8241" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781199" start="8291" end="8310" title="Apple Mountain Lake, Virginia" label="Apple Mountain Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093565" start="8313" end="8324" title="Chester Gap, Virginia" label="Chester Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q510920" start="8336" end="8355" title="Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Rappahannock County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126993" start="8359" end="8375" title="Shenandoah Farms, Virginia" label="Shenandoah Farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494177" start="8378" end="8395" title="Shenandoah Shores, Virginia" label="Shenandoah Shores"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130326" start="8398" end="8413" title="Skyland Estates, Virginia" label="Skyland Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804695" start="8457" end="8462" title="Ashby, Warren County, Virginia" label="Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890651" start="8465" end="8476" title="Bentonville, Virginia" label="Bentonville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8479" end="8485" title="Bethel, Warren County, Virginia" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8488" end="8497" title="Browntown, Warren County, Virginia" label="Browntown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8500" end="8507" title="Buckton, Virginia" label="Buckton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8510" end="8520" title="Cedarville, Warren County, Virginia" label="Cedarville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652607" start="8523" end="8534" title="Happy Creek, Virginia" label="Happy Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8537" end="8549" title="Howellsville, Virginia" label="Howellsville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8552" end="8556" title="Karo, Virginia" label="Karo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8559" end="8566" title="Limeton, Virginia" label="Limeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552259" start="8569" end="8575" title="Linden, Virginia" label="Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858672" start="8578" end="8586" title="Milldale, Virginia" label="Milldale"/>
<link wikidata="Q96395831" start="8589" end="8596" title="Nineveh, Virginia" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113535" start="8599" end="8606" title="Overall, Virginia" label="Overall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8609" end="8617" title="Reliance, Virginia" label="Reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15272762" start="8620" end="8628" title="Riverton, Virginia" label="Riverton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8631" end="8639" title="Rockland, Virginia" label="Rockland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8642" end="8651" title="Waterlick, Virginia" label="Waterlick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="8713" end="8729" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8851" end="8861" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324520" start="8895" end="8907" title="Thomas Ashby (doctor)" label="Thomas Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792023" start="8974" end="8989" title="Thomas M. Allen (Missouri clergyman)" label="Thomas M. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="9051" end="9059" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977760" start="9076" end="9148" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Warren County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91239" wikidata="Q49259" url="?curid=91239" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia">
<text>Virginia Beach (colloquially VB) is the most populous city in the U.S. commonwealth of Virginia. The population was 459,470 at the 2020 census. Located on the southeastern coast of Virginia, it is the sixth-most populous city in the Mid-Atlantic and the 42nd-most populous city in the U.S. Located on the Atlantic Ocean at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, Virginia Beach is a principal city in the Hampton Roads metropolitan area which has more than 1.8 million inhabitants and is the 37th-largest metropolitan area in the U.S.

Virginia Beach is a resort city with miles of beaches and hundreds of hotels, motels, and restaurants along its oceanfront. Near the point where the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean meet, Cape Henry was the site of the first landing of the English colonists who eventually settled in Jamestown; modern Virginia Beach was established in 1906. It is home to several state parks, protected beaches, and military bases. Virginia Wesleyan University, Regent University, Christian Broadcasting Network, the U.S. headquarters of Stihl, and the Association for Research and Enlightenment are based in Virginia Beach. It also hosts the annual East Coast Surfing Championships and Neptune Festival.

The city is listed in the &quot;Guinness Book of Records&quot; as having the longest pleasure beach in the world. It is located at the southern end of the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel, which was the world&#x27;s longest bridge-tunnel complex until the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau Bridge opened in 2018.

==History==

The Chesepian were the historic indigenous people of the area now known as Tidewater in Virginia at the time of European encounter. Little is known about them but archeological evidence suggests they may have been related to the Carolina Algonquian, or Pamlico people. They would have spoken one of the Algonquian languages. These were common among the numerous tribes of the coastal area, who made up the loose Powhatan Confederacy, numbering in the tens of thousands in population. The Chesepian occupied an area which is now defined as the independent cities of Norfolk, Portsmouth, Chesapeake, and Virginia Beach.

In 1607, after a voyage of 144 days, three ships headed by Captain Christopher Newport, and carrying 105 men and boys, made their first landfall in the New World on the mainland, where the southern mouth of the Chesapeake Bay meets the Atlantic Ocean. They named it Cape Henry, after Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales, the eldest son of King James I of England. These English colonists of the Virginia Company of London moved on from this area, as they were under orders to seek a site further inland, which would be more sheltered from ships of competing European countries. They created their first permanent settlement on the north side of the James River at Jamestown.

Adam Thoroughgood (1604–1640) of King&#x27;s Lynn, Norfolk, England is one of the earliest Englishmen to settle in this area, which was developed as Virginia Beach. At the age of 18, he had contracted as an indentured servant to pay for passage to the Virginia Colony in the hopes of bettering his life. He earned his freedom after several years and became a leading citizen of the area. In 1629, he was elected to the House of Burgesses for Elizabeth Cittie , one of four &quot;cities&quot; (or incorporations) which were subdivided areas established in 1619.

In 1634, the Colony was divided into the original eight shires of Virginia, soon renamed as counties. Thoroughgood is credited with using the name of his home in England when helping name &quot;New Norfolk County&quot; in 1637. The following year, New Norfolk County was split into Upper Norfolk County (soon renamed Nansemond County) and Lower Norfolk County. Thoroughgood resided after 1634 was along the Lynnhaven River, named for his home in England.

Lower Norfolk County was large when first organized, defined as from the Atlantic Ocean west past the Elizabeth River, encompassing the entire area now within the modern cities of Portsmouth, Norfolk, Chesapeake, and Virginia Beach. It attracted many entrepreneurs, including William Moseley with his family in 1648. Belonging to the Merchant Adventurers Guild of London, he immigrated from Rotterdam of the Netherlands, where he had been in international trade. He settled on land on the north side of the Elizabeth River, east of what developed as Norfolk.

Following the increased settlement, in 1691 Lower Norfolk County was divided to form Norfolk and Princess Anne counties. Princess Anne, the easternmost county in South Hampton Roads, extended from Cape Henry at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, south to what became the border of the North Carolina colony. It included all of the area fronting the Atlantic Ocean. Princess Anne County was known as a jurisdiction from 1691 to 1963, over 250 years.

In the early centuries, this area was rural and developed for plantation agriculture. In the late 19th century, the small resort area of Virginia Beach developed in Princess Anne County after the 1883 arrival of rail service to the coast. The Virginia Beach Hotel was opened and operated by the Norfolk and Virginia Beach Railroad and Improvement Company at the oceanfront, near the tiny community of Seatack. The hotel was foreclosed and the railroad was reorganized in 1887. The hotel was upgraded and reopened in 1888 as the Princess Anne Hotel.

In 1891, guests at the new hotel watched the wreck and rescue efforts of the United States Life-Saving Service for the Norwegian barque &quot;Dictator&quot;. The ship&#x27;s figurehead, which washed up on the beach several days later, was erected as a monument to the victims and rescuers. It stood along the oceanfront for more than 50 years. In the 21st century, it inspired the pair of matching Norwegian Lady Monuments, sculpted by Ørnulf Bast and installed in Virginia Beach and Moss, Norway.

The resort initially depended on railroad and electric trolley service. The completion of Virginia Beach Boulevard in 1922, which extended from Norfolk to the oceanfront, opened the route for automobiles, buses, and trucks. The passenger rail service to the oceanfront was eventually discontinued as traffic increased by vehicles. The growing resort of Virginia Beach became an incorporated town in 1906. Over the next 45 years, Virginia Beach continued to grow in popularity as a seasonal vacation spot. The casinos were replaced by amusement parks and family-oriented attractions. In 1927 The Cavalier Hotel opened and became a popular vacation spot.

Virginia Beach gained status as an independent city in 1952, although ties remained between it and Princess Anne County. In 1963, after voters in the two jurisdictions passed a supporting referendum, and with the approval of the Virginia General Assembly, the two political subdivisions were consolidated as a new, much larger independent city, retaining the better-known name of the Virginia Beach resort.

The Alan B. Shepard Civic Center (&quot;The Dome&quot;), a significant building in the city&#x27;s history because of the many famous musical acts played there, was constructed in 1958, and was dedicated to the career of former Virginia Beach resident and astronaut Alan Shepard. As the area changed, the Dome was frequently used as a bingo hall. The building was razed in 1994 to make room for a municipal parking lot and potential future development.

===Recent history===

Real estate, defense, and tourism are major sectors of the Virginia Beach economy. Many local public and private groups have maintained a vested interest in real-estate redevelopment, resulting in a number of joint public-private projects, such as commercial parks. Examples of the public-private development include the Virginia Beach Convention Center, the Oceanfront Hilton Hotel, and the Virginia Beach Town Center. The city assisted in financing the project through the use of tax increment financing: creating special tax districts and constructing associated street and infrastructure to support the developments. The Town Center opened in 2003, with related construction continuing. The Convention Center opened in 2005.

The city has begun to run out of clear land available for new construction north of the Green Line, an urban growth boundary dividing the urban northern and rural southern sections of the city. Infill and development of residential neighborhoods has placed a number of operating constraints on Naval Air Station Oceana, a major fighter jet base for the U.S. Navy. While the airbase enjoys wide support from Virginia Beach at large, the Pentagon Base Realignment and Closure commission has proposed closure of Oceana within the next decade. In 2012 a Navy jet that took off from Oceana experienced engine failure and crashed into an apartment complex.

This land crunch led to floodplain development. During Hurricane Matthew, the heavy rainfall flooded over 2000 homes and left some neighborhoods with standing water for days. Given the rising risks of flooding due to climate change and the impetus of the hurricane damage, the city rejected several further development proposals. This rejection was significant from two perspectives. First, cities reject building very rarely, demonstrating the shift in public perception. Second, these rejections led to lawsuits by the developers. The rejection of these lawsuits in the courts provides precedent for other sorts of local climate change adaptation efforts in the future. Discussing the matter, Mayor Dyer noted, &quot;It&#x27;s a confrontation with reality. Not everybody&#x27;s going to be happy.&quot;

On May 31, 2019, a shooting occurred at a municipal government building in Virginia Beach. A former employee entered the building and shot indiscriminately, killing 12 people and injuring four others before dying from a gunshot wound fired by responding officers.

==Geography==
Virginia Beach is located at .

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (49.9%) is water. It is the largest city in Virginia by total area and third-largest city by land area, and by far the largest by water area. The average elevation is above sea level. A major portion of the city drains to the Chesapeake Bay by way of the Lynnhaven River and its tributaries.

The city is located at the southeastern corner of Virginia in the Hampton Roads area bordering the Atlantic Ocean. The Hampton Roads metropolitan area (officially the Virginia Beach–Norfolk–Newport News, VA–NC Metropolitan Statistical Area) is the 37th largest in the United States, with a total population of 1.7 million. While Virginia Beach is the most populated city within the metropolitan area, it functions as a suburb.

Virginia Beach is east of Norfolk, Virginia, northeast of Chesapeake, Virginia, south of Washington, D.C., southeast of Richmond, Virginia, and northeast of Raleigh, North Carolina.

===Neighborhoods===

When the modern city of Virginia Beach was created in 1963, by the consolidation of the Princess Anne County with the City of Virginia Beach, the newly larger city was divided into seven boroughs: Bayside, Blackwater, Kempsville, Lynnhaven, Princess Anne, Pungo, and Virginia Beach.

Virginia Beach has many distinctive communities and neighborhoods within its boundaries, including: Alanton, Aragona Village, the largest sub-division in Tidewater when completed, Bay Colony, Bayside, Cape Henry, Chesapeake Beach, Croatan Beach, Great Neck Point, Green Run, Kempsville, Larkspur, London Bridge, Lynnhaven, Newtown, The North End, Oceana, Ocean Park, Pembroke Manor, Princess Anne, Pungo, Red Mill Commons, Sandbridge, Shadowlawn, Thalia, and Thoroughgood.

===Climate===

The climate of Virginia Beach is humid subtropical (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;). For the Trewartha climate classification the climate is the northern limit of &quot;Cf&quot; (subtropical).

Much of the year in Virginia Beach is mild to warm. The long summer season from late May through late September is often hot and humid, with frequent (but brief) late day thundershowers. Winters are cool with little frozen precipitation, and snowfall is light. The official weather statistics are recorded at Norfolk International Airport on the extreme northwestern border of Virginia Beach. The mean annual temperature is , with an average annual snowfall of at the airport to around in the southeastern corner around Back Bay. Average annual precipitation (the large majority rainfall) is high, ranging between at the airport to over per year at Back Bay. The wettest season is summer, specifically July to early September, with August the single wettest month, averaging over 5.5 inches of rain. From October to June, average monthly precipitation is remarkably consistent, ranging between 3.1 and 3.7 inches. Virginia Beach averages 2200 hours of sunshine annually, higher than the USA average.

The highest recorded temperature to date was in July 2010, and the lowest recorded temperature was in January 1985, both being recorded at Norfolk International Airport. The coldest daily maximum on record was in December 1917, whereas the 1991–2020 normals had a coldest maximum average of . This means that in spite of the mild normals, most years record at least one ice day, with rare exceptions. Summer nights are sometimes really hot. The all-time record warmest low temperature is from July 1942, while a normal year&#x27;s warmest night averages .

Additionally, the geographic location of the city, with respect to the principal storm tracks, is especially favorable which is why it has earned the reputation as a vacation destination. It is south of the average path of storms originating in the higher latitudes, and north of the usual tracks of hurricanes and other major tropical storms, with the exception of Hurricane Isabel in 2003. Because of the moderating effects of the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean, Virginia Beach is the northernmost location on the east coast in which many species of plants (both subtropical and tropical) will reliably grow. Spanish moss, for example is near the northernmost limit of its natural range at First Landing State Park, and is the most northerly location where it is widespread. Other plants like the Windmill Palm, Sabal palmetto, Butia odorata (in protected locations), and Oleander are successfully grown here while they succumb to the colder winter temperatures to the north and inland to the west. The hardiness zone is 8b along the coast and in Urban areas, and 8a inland and to the northwest. 

On April 30, 2023, an EF-3 tornado struck the Great Neck neighborhood in the northeastern section of the city. It was on the ground from 5:48 to 5:53 PM EST. Miraculously, no one was killed nor injured. It is the strongest tornado on record to hit the city.

==Demographics==

===2022 American Community Survey===
 American Community Survey estimates, there were people and households. The population density was . There were housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 60.3% White, 18.8% Black or African American, 7.2% Asian, 2.9% some other race, 0.3% Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and 0.3% Native American or Alaskan Native, with 10.3% from two or more races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 9.0% of the population.

Of the households, 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 29.2% had seniors 65 years or older living with them, 46.8% were married couples living together, 7.1% were couples cohabitating, 18.0% had a male householder with no partner present, and 28.1% had a female householder with no partner present. The median household size was and the median family size was .

The age distribution was 21.7% under 18, 8.7% from 18 to 24, 29.6% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 16.1% who were 65 or older. The median age was years.

The median income for a household was $, with family households having a median income of $ and non-family households $. The per capita income was $. Out of the people with a determined poverty status, 10.0% were below the poverty line. Further, 14.4% of minors and 8.8% of seniors were below the poverty line.

In the survey, residents self-identified with various ethnic ancestries. People of English descent made up 11.7% of the population of the town, followed by German at 10.6%, Irish at 9.6%, American at 6.8%, Italian at 5.1%, Sub-Saharan African at 2.4%, Polish at 2.3%, French at 1.9%, Scottish at 1.9%, Scotch-Irish at 0.9%, Caribbean (excluding Hispanics) at 0.8%, Dutch at 0.7%, Swedish at 0.6%, Norwegian at 0.6%, Welsh at 0.5%, Czech at 0.5%, Ukrainian at 0.5%, and Greek at 0.5%.

===2020 census===

===2010 census===

According to the 2010 Census, the racial composition of Virginia Beach was as follows:
* White or Caucasian: 67.7% (Non-Hispanic White: 64.5%)
* Black or African American: 19.6%
* Native American: 0.4%
* Asian: 6.1% (4.0% Filipino, 0.5% Chinese, 0.4% Indian, 0.4% Vietnamese, 0.3% Korean, 0.2% Japanese)
* Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander: 0.1%
* Some other race: 2.0%
* Two or more races: 4.0%
* Hispanic or Latino (of any race): 6.6% (2.2% Puerto Rican, 1.9% Mexican, 0.3% Dominican, 0.2% Panamanian, 0.2% Salvadoran, 0.2% Cuban, 0.2% Colombian)

As of the 2000 Census, there were 425,257 people, 154,455 households, and 110,898 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 162,277 housing units at an average density of .

There were 154,455 households, out of which 38.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.7% were married couples living together, 12.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.2% were non-families. 20.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.70 and the average family size was 3.14.

The age distribution was 27.5% under the age of 18, 10.0% from 18 to 24, 34.3% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 8.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.0 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 95.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $48,705, and the median income for a family was $53,242. Virginia Beach had the 5th highest median family income among large cities in 2003. The per capita income for the city was $22,365. About 5.1% of families and 8.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.6% of those under age 18 and 4.7% of those age 65 or over.

7.1% of the people under the age of 65 years are disabled while 8.6% people don&#x27;t have health insurance.

The city of Virginia Beach has a lower crime rate than the other regional cities of Hampton Roads, Newport News, Norfolk, and Portsmouth, which all exceed national average crime rates. In 1999 Virginia Beach experienced 12 murders giving the city a murder rate of 2.7 per 100,000 people. For 2007, Virginia Beach had 16 murders, for a murder rate of 3.7 per 100,000 people. That was lower than the national average that year of 6.9. The city&#x27;s total crime index rate for 2007 was 221.2 per 100,000 people, lower than the national average of 320.9. According to the Congressional Quarterly Press &#x27;2008 City Crime Rankings: Crime in Metropolitan America, Virginia Beach, Virginia ranks 311th in violent crime among 385 cities containing more than 75,000 inhabitants.
===Religion===

34.4% of the city&#x27;s population is affiliated with religious congregations, compared to the 50.2% nationwide figure. There are 146,402 adherents and 184 different religious congregations in the city:
* 28% Catholic Church
* 14% Southern Baptist Convention
* 13% United Methodist Church
* 12% Charismatic Churches Independent
* 33% Other

===Ethnic groups===
==Economy==

Virginia Beach is composed of a variety of industries, including national and international corporate headquarters, advanced manufacturers, defense contractors and locally owned businesses. The city&#x27;s location and business climate have made it a hub of international commerce, as nearly 200 foreign firms have established a presence, an office location or their North American headquarters in Hampton Roads. Twenty internationally based firms have their U.S. or North American headquarters in Virginia Beach, including companies like Stihl, London Bridge Trading Company, Busch Vacuum Solutions, IMS Gear, and Sanjo Corte Fino. Other major companies headquartered in Virginia Beach include Amerigroup, the Christian Broadcasting Network and Operation Blessing International. Other major employers include GEICO, VT and Navy Exchange Service Command. In addition, Virginia Beach is home to a number of small, innovative companies, such as Morphix Technologies, who cater for military industry. In September 2023, it was announced that Amazon will build 2 new operational delivery facilities in Virginia Beach. Virginia Beach was ranked at number 45 on Forbes list of best places for business and careers.

Tourism produces a large share of Virginia Beach&#x27;s economy. With an estimated $857 million spent in tourism related industries, 14,900 jobs cater to 2.75 million visitors. City coffers benefit as visitors provide $73 million in revenue. Virginia Beach opened a Convention Center in 2005 which caters to large group meetings and events. Hotels not only line the oceanfront but also cluster around Virginia Beach Town Center and other parts of the city. Restaurants and entertainment industries also directly benefit from Virginia Beach&#x27;s tourism.

Virginia Beach has a large agribusiness sector which produces $80 million for the city economy. One hundred-seventy-two farms exist in Virginia Beach, mostly below the greenline in the southern portion of the city. Farmers are able to sell their goods and products at the city&#x27;s Farmer&#x27;s Market.

Virginia Beach is home to several United States Military bases. These include the United States Navy&#x27;s NAS Oceana and Training Support Center Hampton Roads, and the Joint Expeditionary Base East located at Cape Henry.
Additionally, NAB Little Creek is located mostly within the city of Virginia Beach but carries a Norfolk address.

NAS Oceana is the largest employer in Virginia Beach; it was decreed by the 2005 BRAC Commission that NAS Oceana must close unless the city of Virginia Beach condemns houses in areas designated as &quot;Accident Potential Zones.&quot; This action has never been the position of the United States Navy; indeed, the Navy had not recommended NAS Oceana to the BRAC Commission for potential closure.

Both NAS Oceana and Training Support Center Hampton Roads are considered to be the largest of their respective kind in the world. Furthermore, located in nearby Norfolk is the central hub of the United States Navy&#x27;s Atlantic Fleet, Naval Station Norfolk.

54% of the 171,000 people working in Virginia Beach live in the city, 12% live in Chesapeake, and 10% live in Norfolk. An additional 99,600 people commute from Virginia Beach, with 35% going to Norfolk and 23% going to Chesapeake. Unemployment has been cut almost in half over the past two years going from a high of 4.2% in January 2017 to 2.8% in June 2019.

==Culture==


The city is home to several points of interest in the historical, scientific, and visual/performing arts areas, and has become a popular tourist destination in recent years. The Virginia Museum of Contemporary Art features regularly changing exhibitions in a variety of media. Exhibitions feature painting, sculpture, photography, glass, video and other visual media from internationally acclaimed artists as well as artists of national and regional renown. MOCA was born from the annual Boardwalk Art Show, which began in 1952 and is now the museum&#x27;s largest fundraiser.

The Virginia Aquarium &amp; Marine Science Center (formerly the Virginia Marine Science Museum) is a popular aquarium near the oceanfront that features various sharks, sting rays, sea turtles, jellyfish, and octopuses.

One of the world&#x27;s largest collections of World War I and World War II aircraft is located at the Military Aviation Museum in the Pungo area of Virginia Beach.

The Veterans United Home Loans Amphitheater at Virginia Beach, built in 1996, features a wide variety of popular shows and concerts. The Sandler Center, a 1200-seat performing arts theater, opened in the Virginia Beach Town Center in November 2007.

Virginia Beach is home to many sites of historical importance and has 18 sites on the National Register of Historic Places. Such sites include the Adam Thoroughgood House (one of the oldest surviving colonial homes in Virginia), the Francis Land House (a 200-year-old plantation), the Cape Henry Lights and nearby Cape Henry Light Station (a second tower), De Witt Cottage, Adam Keeling House, and others.

The Edgar Cayce Hospital for Research and Enlightenment was established in Virginia Beach in 1928 with 60 beds. The 67th street facility features a large private library of books on psychic matters and is open to the public. The traditional beach-architecture headquarters building features massage therapy by appointment. Cayce opened Atlantic University in 1930; it closed two years later but was re-opened in 1985. Atlantic University was originally intended for study of Cayce&#x27;s readings and research on spiritual subjects.

The city&#x27;s largest festival, the Neptune Festival, attracts 500,000 visitors to the oceanfront and 350,000 visitors to the air show at NAS Oceana. Celebrating the city&#x27;s heritage link with Norway, events are held in September in the oceanfront and Town Center areas. Every Labor Day Weekend, the American Music Festival provides festival attendees with live music performed on stages all over the oceanfront, including the beach on Fifth Street. The festival formerly ended with the Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Half Marathon, but no longer since the cancelation of the event in the city. Last Night On The Town is an annual New Year&#x27;s Eve celebration that takes place every December 31.

==Sports==

Since Norfolk contains the central business district of Hampton Roads, most of the major spectator sports are located there. While the Hampton Roads area has been recently considered as a viable prospect for major-league professional sports, and regional leaders have attempted to obtain Major League Baseball, NBA and NHL franchises in the recent past, no team has yet relocated to the area. Hampton Roads is the largest metropolitan area in the United States without a club in a major professional sports league.

The Norfolk Admirals won the AHL Calder Cup in 2012.

The Virginia Destroyers, a UFL franchise, played at the Virginia Beach Sportsplex until the league&#x27;s collapse in 2012. Virginia Beach Professional Baseball, LLC, was awarded an Atlantic League franchise in April 2013. Known as the Virginia Beach Neptunes, they have yet to play a game due to delays in building Wheeler Field. Two soccer teams, the Virginia Beach Piranhas, a men&#x27;s team in the USL Premier Development League, and the Hampton Roads Piranhas, a women&#x27;s team in the W-League play at the Virginia Beach Sportsplex. The Virginia Beach Sportsplex contains the central training site for the U.S. women&#x27;s national field hockey team.

The city is also home to the East Coast Surfing Championships, an annual contest of more than 100 of the world&#x27;s top professional surfers and an estimated 400 amateur surfers. This is North America&#x27;s oldest surfing contest.

There are eleven golf courses open to the public in the city, as well as four country club layouts and 36 military holes at NAS Oceana&#x27;s Aeropines course. Among the best-known public courses are Hell&#x27;s Point Golf Club and Virginia Beach National, the latter of which hosted the Virginia Beach Open, a Nationwide Tour event from 2000 to 2006. Also, the Kingsmill Resort in nearby Williamsburg hosts the Kingsmill Championship, an annual LPGA Tour tournament.

Virginia Beach is host to a Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Half Marathon each year on Labor Day weekend in conjunction with the American Music Festival. It is one of the largest Half Marathons in the world. The final are on the boardwalk. Virginia Beach also hosts the Yuengling Shamrock Marathon, founded in 1973 with over 24,000 participants. It is an annual race over St. Patrick&#x27;s Day weekend and was recognized by Runner&#x27;s World as one of the Top 20 marathons in the country in 1992.

In the mid-1980&#x27;s Virginia Beach achieved notoriety for constructing the first skateboard ramps to be funded, maintained, and operated by a municipality. As of 2024 the City of Virginia Beach Parks &amp; Recreation Department maintains three skateparks: Mount Trashmore Skatepark, Williams Farm Skatepark, and Woodstock Park Skate Plaza, which is a park constructed above a 5 million gallon underground wastewater storage facility.

==Parks and recreation==
Virginia Beach is home to 210 city parks, encompassing over , including neighborhood parks, community parks, district parks, and other open spaces.

Mount Trashmore Park is clearly visible from I-264 when traveling to the oceanfront. The hill measures high and is the highest point in Virginia Beach.
One of the major parks is Red Wing Park, a park in east-central part of the city, very close to Oceana Naval Air Station. This land became a park in 1966. A unique feature of this park is the Miyazaki Japanese Garden, which is a result of its interactions with its sister city Miyazaki, Japan.

The Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge, established in 1938, is an freshwater refuge that borders the Atlantic Ocean on the east and Back Bay on the west. It is managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

First Landing State Park and False Cape State Park are both located in coastal areas within the city&#x27;s corporate limits as well.

Munden Point Park is a rural park located in the deep southern end of the city, right on The North Landing River.
Pleasure House Point is a park of undeveloped land on the shore of the Lynnhaven River. It is also the location of the Brock Environmental Center.

Virginia Beach&#x27;s extensive park system is recognized as one of the best in the United States. In its 2013 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that Virginia Beach had the 8th best park system among the 50 most populous U.S. cities.

==Government==

Historically, Virginia Beach had been more conservative than other large independent cities in Virginia. It consistently backed Republican Party presidential candidates from 1968 to 2016, and in all but two elections from 1952 to 2016. However, the Republican edge in the city has diminished in recent years. John McCain and Donald Trump only managed to win a plurality of the city&#x27;s votes in 2008 and 2016, winning the city despite losing statewide. In 2020, Joe Biden became the first Democrat to carry Virginia Beach since 1964, and only the third to do so since Virginia Beach became an independent city. Biden became the first presidential candidate to win at least 51% of the vote in Virginia Beach since President George W. Bush in 2004.






Virginia Beach was chartered as a municipal corporation by the General Assembly of Virginia on January 1, 1963. The city currently operates under the council–manager form of government. Like all incorporated cities in Virginia, it is an independent city and does not fall under the jurisdiction of a county government.

The city&#x27;s legislative body consists of an eleven-member city council. The city manager is appointed by the council and acts as the chief executive officer. Through his staff, he implements policies established by the council.

Members of the city council normally serve four-year terms and are elected on a staggered basis in non-partisan elections. Beginning in 2008, general elections are held the first Tuesday in November in even-numbered years. In previous years, elections were held the first Tuesday in May in even-numbered years. All registered voters are eligible to vote for all council members. Three council members and the mayor serve on an at-large basis. All others are elected by district (and must live in the district they represent): Bayside, Beach, Centerville, Kempsville, Lynnhaven, Princess Anne, and Rose Hall.

The mayor is elected to a four-year term through direct election. The mayor presides over city council meetings and serves as the ceremonial head and spokesperson of the city. A vice mayor is also elected by the city council at the first meeting following a council election.

Citizens of Virginia Beach also elect five constitutional officers, and candidates for these offices are permitted to run with an affiliated political party. Three of these offices deal substantially with public safety and justice: the sheriff, commonwealth&#x27;s attorney, and the clerk of the circuit court. The two other offices are concerned with fiscal policy: the city treasurer and the commissioner of the revenue. The city provides law enforcement through the Virginia Beach Police Department and emergency services through the Virginia Beach Fire Department.

Virginia Beach is located entirely in , served by Republican Jen Kiggans.

Virginia Beach is one of the few cities in the state with laws that prohibit profanity in public spaces. The law was repealed by the State Legislature in early 2020. It is considered a Class 3 misdemeanor.

==Education==

According to the U.S. Census, 28.1% of the population over twenty-five (vs. a national average of 24%) hold a bachelor&#x27;s degree or higher, and 90.4% (vs. 80% nationally) have a high school diploma or equivalent.

Prior to 1969, separate schools were maintained for black and white students. Before 1938, black students who wished to attend school past seventh grade had to travel to Norfolk and pay tuition to attend Booker T. Washington High School. In 1938, the first high school for blacks, the Princess Anne County Training School was built. In 1961, in order to avoid the stigma of the term &quot;training school&quot;, the school was renamed Union Kempsville High School at the request of the black community. When the public schools integrated in 1969, Union Kempsville was closed.

The city of Virginia Beach is home to Virginia Beach City Public Schools, one of the largest school systems in the state (based on student enrollment). Virginia Beach City Public Schools currently serves 69,735 students, and includes 56 elementary schools, 14 middle schools, 12 high schools which include Landstown, Princess Anne, Green Run, Green Run Collegiate, Cox, Tallwood, Salem, First Colonial, Kellam, Kempsville,
Bayside, and Ocean Lakes High Schools as well as a number of secondary/post-secondary specialty schools and centers such as the Advanced Technology Center (ATC).

There are also a number of private, independent schools in the city, including Chesapeake Bay Academy and Tidewater Collegiate Academy (both on the campus of Virginia Wesleyan University), Our Lady of Mount Carmel Catholic School and Parish, Strelitz International Academy (formerly the Hebrew Academy of Tidewater), Cape Henry Collegiate School, Catholic High School (formerly Bishop Sullivan Catholic and, before that, Norfolk Catholic), Baylake Pines School, (closed in 2014), and Virginia Beach Friends School.


Virginia Beach is home to three universities and branch centers for several other universities. Atlantic University a for-profit holistic learning institution is located in Virginia Beach and was founded in 1930. Regent University, a private university founded by Christian evangelist and leader Pat Robertson, has historically focused on graduate education but has recently established an undergraduate program as well. Virginia Wesleyan University is a private university in Virginia Beach, Virginia, that was founded in 1961 by Methodist minister Joseph Shackford Johnston.

Old Dominion University and Norfolk State University are in nearby Norfolk but operate a joint Center in Virginia Beach. Both the University of Virginia and Virginia Tech operate satellite campuses in Virginia Beach. Tidewater Community College, a major junior college, also has its largest campus located in the city. ECPI University, a for-profit career college, has its headquarters in Virginia Beach. Additional institutions of higher education are located in other communities of greater Hampton Roads.

The Virginia Beach Public Library System provides free access to accurate and current information and materials to all individuals and promotes reading as a critical life skill. The library system has a collection of more than 1 million items including special subject collections. VBPL has 10 main library branches, not including their bookmobile.

==Media==
&quot;The Virginian-Pilot&quot;, based in Norfolk, is the daily newspaper for Virginia Beach. Other papers include &quot;Veer&quot; and the &quot;New Journal and Guide&quot;. &quot;Inside Business&quot; focuses on local business news.

The Hampton Roads/Norfolk/Portsmouth/Virginia Beach area is served by a variety of radio stations on the AM and FM bands, with towers located around the Hampton Roads area.

Virginia Beach is also served by several television stations. The Norfolk-Portsmouth-Newport News designated market area (DMA) is the 42nd largest in the U.S. with 712,790 homes (0.64% of the total U.S.). The major network television affiliates are WTKR 3 (CBS), WAVY-TV 10 (NBC), WVEC 13 (ABC), WTPC-TV 21 (Trinity Broadcasting Network), WGNT 27 (CW), WTVZ-TV 33 (MyNetworkTV), WVBT 43 (Fox), and WPXV 49 (ION Television). The Public Broadcasting Service station is WHRO-TV 15. Virginia Beach residents also can receive independent station WSKY broadcasting on channel 4 from Camden County, North Carolina. Some can also receive PBS affiliate WUND 2 (UNC-TV), Home Shopping Network affiliate W14DC-D from Portsmouth, Daystar Network religious television station WVAD-LD TV 25 from Chesapeake and RTV affiliate WGBS-LD broadcasting on channel 7 from Hampton. Virginia Beach is served by Cox Cable. DirecTV and Dish Network are also popular as an alternative to cable television in Virginia Beach. In addition a large portion of the city is served by Verizon FIOS.

Virginia Beach serves as the headquarters for the Christian Broadcasting Network, located adjacent to Regent University. CBN&#x27;s most notable program, &quot;The 700 Club&quot; originates from the Virginia Beach studios. In 2008, Virginia Beach became the home to the Reel Dreams Film Festival.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===

Virginia Beach is primarily served by the Norfolk International Airport, which is now the region&#x27;s major commercial airport. The airport is located near Chesapeake Bay, along the city limits straddling neighboring Norfolk. Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport also provides commercial air service for the Hampton Roads area.&lt;ref name=&quot;Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Chesapeake Regional Airport provides general aviation services and is located outside the city limits.

Virginia Beach Airport is a small, grass runway facility catering to private aircraft owners.

Rail-wise, Virginia Beach is served by Amtrak through the Norfolk and Newport News stations, via connecting buses. A high-speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor are also under study.

Greyhound/Trailways provides service from a central bus terminal in adjacent Norfolk. The Greyhound station in Virginia Beach is located on Laskin Road, about a mile west of the oceanfront. Bus services to New York City via the Chinatown bus, Today&#x27;s Bus, is located on Newtown Road.

The city is connected to I-64 via I-264, which runs from the oceanfront, intersects with I-64 on the east side of Norfolk, and continues through downtown Norfolk and Portsmouth until rejoining I-64 at the terminus of both roads in Chesapeake where Interstate 664 completes the loop which forms the Hampton Roads Beltway. Other major roads include Virginia Beach Boulevard (U.S. Route 58), Shore Drive (U.S. Route 60), which connects to Atlantic Avenue at the oceanfront, Northampton Blvd (U.S. Route 13), Princess Anne Road (State Route 165), Indian River Road (former State Route 603), Lynnhaven Parkway, Independence Boulevard, General Booth Boulevard, and Nimmo Parkway.

The city is also connected to Virginia&#x27;s Eastern Shore region via the Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel (CBBT), which is the longest bridge-tunnel complex in the world and known as one of the Seven Engineering Wonders of the Modern World. The CBBT, a tolled facility, carries U.S. Route 13.

Transportation within the city, as well as the rest of Hampton Roads is served by a regional bus service, Hampton Roads Transit. An extension of The Tide light rail system from Norfolk to the oceanfront is currently being studied.

====Walkability====
A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Virginia Beach the 39th most walkable of the fifty largest U.S. cities. A 2021 study by Walk Score ranked Virginia Beach as the 45th most walkable large city in the United States.

===Utilities===
Water and sewer services are provided by the City&#x27;s Department of Utilities. Virginia Beach receives its electricity from Dominion Virginia Power which has local sources including the Chesapeake Energy Center (a gas power plant), coal-fired plants in Chesapeake and Southampton County, and the Surry Nuclear Power Plant. Norfolk headquartered Virginia Natural Gas, a subsidiary of AGL Resources, distributes natural gas to the city from storage plants in James City County and Chesapeake.

Currently, water for the Tidewater area is pumped from Lake Gaston, which straddles the Virginia-North Carolina border along with the Blackwater and Nottoway rivers.

The city provides wastewater services for residents and transports wastewater to the regional Hampton Roads Sanitation District treatment plants.

Broadband internet service is provided by Cox Communications throughout the majority of the city. Verizon also provides its Fios internet service, but in limited areas as of 2021.

===Healthcare===

Virginia Beach is served by Sentara Virginia Beach General Hospital and Sentara Princess Anne Hospital. The former Sentara Bayside Hospital, now known as Sentara Independence, has been modified to a stand alone Emergency Department and outpatient treatment center. Sentara Leigh Hospital is just across the city line in Norfolk. Beach Health clinic offers basic medical services for uninsured residents of Virginia Beach.

==Sister cities==
Virginia Beach&#x27;s sister Cities are:
* Bangor, County Down, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom (2001)
* Miyazaki, Japan (1992)
* Moss, Norway (1974)
* Olongapo, Philippines (2015)
* Waiblingen, Germany (2016)

===Friendly cities===
Virginia Beach has friendly relations with:
* San Juan del Sur, Nicaragua (1974)

==Notable people==
==In popular culture==
The &quot;Monopoly Here and Now: The US&quot; edition (2015) of the game, released in honor of the game&#x27;s 80th birthday, included Virginia Beach as a property that could be bought, sold and traded. The city was included after Hasbro held an online vote in order to determine which cities would make it into an updated version of the game. Virginia Beach received the fourth highest number of votes in the online contest, earning it a green spot on the board. The top Boardwalk spot went to Pierre, South Dakota.

In the television series, &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; (2015–2019), which is set in an alternate 1960s, Virginia Beach is mentioned as being the site of a D-Day style invasion by Nazi Germany, which led to the defeat of the United States and its occupation.

Popular rapper Drake named a track off of his album For All The Dogs on Virginia Beach, due to his performance at the city during his Drake vs. Lil Wayne tour in 2014.

==See also==

* National Register of Historic Places listings in Virginia Beach, Virginia
* Norwegian Lady Statues
* Virginia Beach Department of EMS
* Virginia Beach Fire Department
* Virginia Beach Volunteer Rescue Squad
* Wash Woods at False Cape 
* East Coast of the United States 
* Southeastern United States 
* Southern United States

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Convention and Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="0" end="14" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="29" end="31" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="VB"/>
<link wikidata="Q919529" start="40" end="58" title="List of cities in Virginia" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="66" end="83" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="U.S. commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="87" end="95" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="131" end="142" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="233" end="245" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="254" end="288" title="List of United States cities by population" label="42nd-most populous city in the U.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="305" end="319" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="340" end="354" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="398" end="411" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="485" end="515" title="Metropolitan statistical area" label="37th-largest metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q317548" start="549" end="560" title="resort city" label="resort city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934136" start="641" end="651" title="Virginia Beach Oceanfront" label="oceanfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640805" start="722" end="732" title="Cape Henry" label="Cape Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453179" start="753" end="766" title="First Landing State Park" label="first landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="818" end="827" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934661" start="950" end="978" title="Virginia Wesleyan University" label="Virginia Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q502352" start="980" end="997" title="Regent University" label="Regent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079074" start="999" end="1029" title="Christian Broadcasting Network" label="Christian Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q239372" start="1056" end="1061" title="Stihl" label="Stihl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809513" start="1071" end="1113" title="Association for Research and Enlightenment" label="Association for Research and Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328148" start="1168" end="1200" title="East Coast Surfing Championships" label="East Coast Surfing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q9127145" start="1205" end="1221" title="Neptune Festival" label="Neptune Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1256" end="1280" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="1379" end="1407" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456378" start="1444" end="1457" title="bridge-tunnel" label="bridge-tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191515" start="1476" end="1505" title="Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau Bridge" label="Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macau Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445752" start="1540" end="1549" title="Chesepian" label="Chesepian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="1611" end="1620" title="Tidewater (geographic term)" label="Tidewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536013" start="1765" end="1784" title="Carolina Algonquian" label="Carolina Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1839" end="1859" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849523" start="1948" end="1968" title="Powhatan Confederacy" label="Powhatan Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086874" start="2222" end="2241" title="Christopher Newport" label="Christopher Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q82631" start="2439" end="2471" title="Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2496" end="2514" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="2547" end="2573" title="London Company" label="Virginia Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="2801" end="2812" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="2816" end="2825" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679895" start="2828" end="2845" title="Adam Thoroughgood" label="Adam Thoroughgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="2861" end="2877" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="2879" end="2886" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="3035" end="3053" title="indentured servant" label="indentured servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="3080" end="3095" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="3247" end="3265" title="House of Burgesses" label="House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362582" start="3270" end="3286" title="Elizabeth City (Virginia Company)" label="Elizabeth Cittie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460109" start="3446" end="3464" title="shires of Virginia" label="shires of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="3482" end="3490" title="county" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108047" start="3584" end="3602" title="New Norfolk County" label="New Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898824" start="3672" end="3692" title="Upper Norfolk County" label="Upper Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982388" start="3707" end="3723" title="Nansemond County, Virginia" label="Nansemond County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693666" start="3729" end="3749" title="Lower Norfolk County" label="Lower Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709461" start="3797" end="3812" title="Lynnhaven River" label="Lynnhaven River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051265" start="3948" end="3963" title="Elizabeth River (Virginia)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="4237" end="4246" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4254" end="4265" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051265" start="4353" end="4368" title="Elizabeth River (Virginia)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="4396" end="4403" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051012" start="4491" end="4498" title="Norfolk County, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244542" start="4503" end="4516" title="Princess Anne County, Virginia" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441982" start="5255" end="5262" title="Seatack, Virginia" label="Seatack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550739" start="5481" end="5514" title="United States Life-Saving Service" label="United States Life-Saving Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061162" start="5802" end="5826" title="Norwegian Lady" label="Norwegian Lady Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q4568087" start="5840" end="5851" title="Ørnulf Bast" label="Ørnulf Bast"/>
<link wikidata="Q109021" start="5888" end="5900" title="Moss, Norway" label="Moss, Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5936" end="5944" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4459608" start="5949" end="5965" title="electric trolley" label="electric trolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934130" start="5993" end="6017" title="Virginia Beach Boulevard" label="Virginia Beach Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="6095" end="6105" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="6108" end="6111" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="6119" end="6124" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="6281" end="6298" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150802" start="6498" end="6512" title="Cavalier Hotel" label="Cavalier Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="6786" end="6811" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q174979" start="7231" end="7243" title="Alan Shepard" label="Alan Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713454" start="7833" end="7859" title="Virginia Beach Town Center" label="Virginia Beach Town Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900123" start="8274" end="8295" title="urban growth boundary" label="urban growth boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="8465" end="8489" title="NAS Oceana" label="Naval Air Station Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886428" start="8616" end="8644" title="Base Realignment and Closure" label="Base Realignment and Closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17616278" start="8787" end="8794" title="2012 Virginia Beach F/A-18 crash" label="crashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058656" start="8878" end="8895" title="Hurricane Matthew" label="Hurricane Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090475" start="9040" end="9054" title="climate change in Virginia" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="9446" end="9471" title="climate change adaptation" label="climate change adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64214898" start="9648" end="9656" title="2019 Virginia Beach shooting" label="shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9957" end="9984" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="10082" end="10090" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="10211" end="10220" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="10264" end="10278" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709461" start="10293" end="10308" title="Lynnhaven River" label="Lynnhaven River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="10397" end="10410" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="10579" end="10591" title="List of United States metropolitan statistical areas by population" label="37th largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="10750" end="10756" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="10785" end="10802" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49222" start="10817" end="10837" title="Chesapeake, Virginia" label="Chesapeake, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="10848" end="10864" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="10879" end="10897" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="10916" end="10939" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708291" start="11347" end="11354" title="Alanton, Virginia" label="Alanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874817" start="11439" end="11446" title="Bayside, Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Bayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092846" start="11460" end="11476" title="Chesapeake Beach, Virginia" label="Chesapeake Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187030" start="11478" end="11491" title="Croatan Beach, Virginia" label="Croatan Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599613" start="11493" end="11509" title="Great Neck Point" label="Great Neck Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603170" start="11511" end="11520" title="Green Run, Virginia" label="Green Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387128" start="11522" end="11532" title="Kempsville, Virginia" label="Kempsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862469" start="11534" end="11542" title="Larkspur, Virginia" label="Larkspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669882" start="11544" end="11557" title="London Bridge, Virginia" label="London Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709456" start="11559" end="11568" title="Lynnhaven, Virginia" label="Lynnhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076163" start="11594" end="11600" title="Oceana, Virginia" label="Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161963" start="11614" end="11628" title="Pembroke Manor, Virginia" label="Pembroke Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244540" start="11630" end="11643" title="Princess Anne, Virginia" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260169" start="11645" end="11650" title="Pungo, Virginia" label="Pungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304600" start="11652" end="11668" title="Red Mill Commons" label="Red Mill Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416042" start="11670" end="11680" title="Sandbridge Beach, Virginia" label="Sandbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="11769" end="11786" title="humid subtropical" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11788" end="11794" title="Köppen-Geiger climate classification system" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="11822" end="11854" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="11908" end="11919" title="Subtropics" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q166468" start="13847" end="13863" title="Hurricane Isabel" label="Hurricane Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q311524" start="14099" end="14111" title="Spanish moss" label="Spanish moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453179" start="14180" end="14204" title="First Landing State Park" label="First Landing State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q158383" start="14287" end="14300" title="Windmill Palm" label="Windmill Palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088471" start="14302" end="14316" title="Sabal palmetto" label="Sabal palmetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16539451" start="14318" end="14331" title="Butia odorata" label="Butia odorata"/>
<link wikidata="Q155833" start="14362" end="14370" title="Oleander" label="Oleander"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="14493" end="14507" title="hardiness zone" label="hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="14615" end="14622" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="14903" end="14928" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="14978" end="14996" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="15296" end="15316" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanics or Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="16030" end="16047" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="16128" end="16140" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="16300" end="16307" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="16373" end="16379" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="16390" end="16395" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="16405" end="16413" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="16423" end="16430" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="16440" end="16458" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189552" start="16469" end="16475" title="Polish American" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369944" start="16485" end="16491" title="French American" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476361" start="16501" end="16509" title="Scottish American" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="16519" end="16531" title="Scotch-Irish American" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985442" start="16541" end="16572" title="Caribbean American" label="Caribbean (excluding Hispanics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058496" start="16582" end="16587" title="Dutch American" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="16597" end="16604" title="Swedish American" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="16614" end="16623" title="Norwegian American" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094841" start="16633" end="16638" title="Welsh American" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q518188" start="16648" end="16653" title="Czech American" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505231" start="16663" end="16672" title="Ukrainian American" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150312" start="16686" end="16691" title="Greek American" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="16757" end="16768" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="16829" end="16847" title="White American" label="White or Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="16856" end="16874" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="Non-Hispanic White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="16885" end="16910" title="African American" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="16920" end="16935" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="16944" end="16949" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="17046" end="17088" title="Pacific Islander American" label="Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="17121" end="17138" title="Multiracial American" label="Two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="17147" end="17165" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="17309" end="17320" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="17614" end="17629" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="18421" end="18438" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="18530" end="18542" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="18811" end="18824" title="Hampton Roads, Virginia" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="18826" end="18838" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="18840" end="18847" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="18853" end="18863" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q239372" start="20432" end="20437" title="Stihl" label="Stihl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377372" start="20439" end="20468" title="London Bridge Trading Company" label="London Bridge Trading Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20494" end="20502" title="IMS Gear" label="IMS Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745709" start="20588" end="20598" title="Amerigroup" label="Amerigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079074" start="20604" end="20634" title="Christian Broadcasting Network" label="Christian Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335257" start="20639" end="20671" title="Operation Blessing International" label="Operation Blessing International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498689" start="20703" end="20708" title="GEICO" label="GEICO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506669" start="20710" end="20712" title="VT Group" label="VT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981952" start="20717" end="20746" title="Naval Supply Systems Command" label="Navy Exchange Service Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146451" start="20836" end="20856" title="Morphix Chameleon" label="Morphix Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="20932" end="20938" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="21687" end="21699" title="agribusiness" label="agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="22001" end="22023" title="United States Military" label="United States Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="22049" end="22067" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="22075" end="22085" title="Naval Air Station Oceana" label="NAS Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832957" start="22090" end="22127" title="Training Support Center Hampton Roads" label="Training Support Center Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269192" start="22137" end="22166" title="Joint Expeditionary Base East" label="Joint Expeditionary Base East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337215" start="22204" end="22220" title="Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek" label="NAB Little Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="22923" end="22937" title="U.S. Atlantic Fleet" label="Atlantic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627684" start="22939" end="22960" title="Naval Station Norfolk" label="Naval Station Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934425" start="23516" end="23551" title="Virginia Museum of Contemporary Art" label="Virginia Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805718" start="23826" end="23844" title="Boardwalk Art Show" label="Boardwalk Art Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934109" start="23920" end="23965" title="Virginia Aquarium" label="Virginia Aquarium &amp;amp; Marine Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="24076" end="24081" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328202" start="24084" end="24093" title="sting ray" label="sting ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851970" start="24239" end="24263" title="Military Aviation Museum" label="Military Aviation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260169" start="24271" end="24276" title="Pungo, Virginia" label="Pungo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435470" start="24306" end="24363" title="Veterans United Home Loans Amphitheater at Virginia Beach" label="Veterans United Home Loans Amphitheater at Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799516" start="24439" end="24453" title="Sandler Center for the Performing Arts" label="Sandler Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713454" start="24506" end="24532" title="Virginia Beach Town Center" label="Virginia Beach Town Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="24638" end="24674" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679897" start="24699" end="24722" title="Adam Thoroughgood House" label="Adam Thoroughgood House"/>
<link wikidata="Q109103687" start="24837" end="24853" title="Cape Henry Light" label="Cape Henry Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829095" start="24909" end="24924" title="De Witt Cottage" label="De Witt Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679318" start="24926" end="24944" title="Adam Keeling House" label="Adam Keeling House"/>
<link wikidata="Q310920" start="24963" end="24974" title="Edgar Cayce" label="Edgar Cayce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816580" start="25295" end="25314" title="Atlantic University" label="Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9127145" start="25531" end="25547" title="Neptune Festival" label="Neptune Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="26123" end="26142" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="26492" end="26513" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="26515" end="26518" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="26523" end="26526" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438735" start="26724" end="26740" title="Norfolk Admirals (AHL)" label="Norfolk Admirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q464995" start="26749" end="26752" title="American Hockey League" label="AHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q577288" start="26753" end="26763" title="Calder Cup" label="Calder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081575" start="26778" end="26797" title="Virginia Destroyers" label="Virginia Destroyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q778946" start="26801" end="26804" title="United Football League (2009–2012)" label="UFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934143" start="26830" end="26855" title="Virginia Beach Sportsplex" label="Virginia Beach Sportsplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986549" start="27010" end="27033" title="Virginia Beach Neptunes" label="Virginia Beach Neptunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878620" start="27090" end="27103" title="Wheeler Field (Virginia Beach)" label="Wheeler Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27109" end="27115" title="football (soccer)" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782921" start="27127" end="27150" title="Virginia Beach Piranhas" label="Virginia Beach Piranhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="27177" end="27207" title="USL Premier Development League" label="USL Premier Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646289" start="27217" end="27239" title="Hampton Roads Piranhas" label="Hampton Roads Piranhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574327" start="27268" end="27276" title="USL W-League (1995–2015)" label="W-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934143" start="27289" end="27314" title="Virginia Beach Sportsplex" label="Virginia Beach Sportsplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934143" start="27320" end="27345" title="Virginia Beach Sportsplex" label="Virginia Beach Sportsplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="27416" end="27428" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328148" start="27465" end="27497" title="East Coast Surfing Championships" label="East Coast Surfing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048525" start="27688" end="27700" title="golf courses" label="golf courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086715" start="27959" end="27978" title="Virginia Beach Open" label="Virginia Beach Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777663" start="27982" end="27997" title="Nationwide Tour" label="Nationwide Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712673" start="28033" end="28049" title="Kingsmill Resort" label="Kingsmill Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413370" start="28083" end="28105" title="Kingsmill Championship" label="Kingsmill Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27650" start="28117" end="28126" title="LPGA Tour" label="LPGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q847120" start="28717" end="28733" title="Half-pipe" label="skateboard ramps"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="29041" end="29051" title="wastewater" label="wastewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924182" start="29245" end="29265" title="Mount Trashmore Park" label="Mount Trashmore Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="29662" end="29673" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q204308" start="29674" end="29689" title="Miyazaki, Miyazaki" label="Miyazaki, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839062" start="29696" end="29729" title="Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge" label="Back Bay National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="29867" end="29897" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453179" start="29900" end="29924" title="First Landing State Park" label="First Landing State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432631" start="29929" end="29950" title="False Cape State Park" label="False Cape State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709461" start="30220" end="30235" title="Lynnhaven River" label="Lynnhaven River"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874095" start="30268" end="30294" title="Brock Environmental Center" label="Brock Environmental Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770573" start="30427" end="30452" title="Trust for Public Land" label="The Trust for Public Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="30877" end="30888" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="30893" end="30905" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519467" start="31027" end="31031" title="2020 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="31033" end="31042" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="31294" end="31308" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="31474" end="31508" title="Council–manager government" label="council–manager form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="31561" end="31577" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="31624" end="31630" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="31706" end="31718" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="31724" end="31736" title="city manager" label="city manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="32286" end="32291" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="32304" end="32312" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278288" start="32999" end="33006" title="Sheriffs in the United States" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="33008" end="33036" title="commonwealth&amp;#x27;s attorney" label="commonwealth&amp;#x27;s attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="33046" end="33051" title="Court clerk" label="clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960472" start="33059" end="33072" title="Virginia Circuit Court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123468" start="33134" end="33148" title="city treasurer" label="city treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934138" start="33232" end="33264" title="Virginia Beach Police Department" label="Virginia Beach Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934133" start="33300" end="33330" title="Virginia Beach Fire Department" label="Virginia Beach Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q83119566" start="33394" end="33405" title="Jen Kiggans" label="Jen Kiggans"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="33541" end="33558" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="33593" end="33612" title="Misdemeanor" label="Class 3 misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="33647" end="33658" title="United States Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943203" start="34052" end="34084" title="Booker T. Washington High School (Norfolk, Virginia)" label="Booker T. Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60764069" start="34133" end="34169" title="Princess Anne County Training School" label="Princess Anne County Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934131" start="34463" end="34497" title="Virginia Beach City Public Schools" label="Virginia Beach City Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="34662" end="34680" title="elementary schools" label="elementary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="34685" end="34699" title="middle schools" label="middle schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="34704" end="34716" title="high schools" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485223" start="34731" end="34740" title="Landstown High School" label="Landstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244544" start="34742" end="34755" title="Princess Anne High School" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603173" start="34757" end="34766" title="Green Run High School" label="Green Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490136" start="34790" end="34793" title="Frank W. Cox High School" label="Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680194" start="34795" end="34803" title="Tallwood High School" label="Tallwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404118" start="34805" end="34810" title="Salem High School (Virginia Beach, Virginia)" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452754" start="34812" end="34826" title="First Colonial High School" label="First Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462424" start="34828" end="34834" title="Floyd E. Kellam High School" label="Kellam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387129" start="34836" end="34846" title="Kempsville High School" label="Kempsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874836" start="34848" end="34855" title="Bayside High School (Virginia Beach, Virginia)" label="Bayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076023" start="34861" end="34872" title="Ocean Lakes High School" label="Ocean Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092827" start="35090" end="35112" title="Chesapeake Bay Academy" label="Chesapeake Bay Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934661" start="35169" end="35197" title="Virginia Wesleyan University" label="Virginia Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712126" start="35328" end="35356" title="Cape Henry Collegiate School" label="Cape Henry Collegiate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917721" start="35358" end="35378" title="Catholic High School (Virginia)" label="Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934135" start="35495" end="35524" title="Virginia Beach Friends School" label="Virginia Beach Friends School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816580" start="35624" end="35643" title="Atlantic University" label="Atlantic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q502352" start="35741" end="35758" title="Regent University" label="Regent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="35824" end="35837" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934661" start="35949" end="35977" title="Virginia Wesleyan University" label="Virginia Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959569" start="36078" end="36103" title="Joseph Shackford Johnston" label="Joseph Shackford Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="36106" end="36129" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q632506" start="36134" end="36158" title="Norfolk State University" label="Norfolk State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="36236" end="36258" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q65379" start="36263" end="36276" title="Virginia Tech" label="Virginia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800875" start="36323" end="36350" title="Tidewater Community College" label="Tidewater Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322728" start="36425" end="36440" title="ECPI University" label="ECPI University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934139" start="36619" end="36655" title="Virginia Beach Public Library System" label="Virginia Beach Public Library System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772825" start="36981" end="37000" title="The Virginian-Pilot" label="The Virginian-Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982561" start="37121" end="37142" title="New Journal and Guide" label="New Journal and Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885097" start="37156" end="37171" title="Inside Business (newspaper)" label="Inside Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="37483" end="37505" title="designated market area" label="designated market area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956237" start="37634" end="37638" title="WTKR" label="WTKR"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="37642" end="37645" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946847" start="37648" end="37655" title="WAVY-TV" label="WAVY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="37660" end="37663" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564820" start="37666" end="37670" title="WVEC" label="WVEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="37675" end="37678" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956355" start="37681" end="37688" title="WTPC-TV" label="WTPC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778016" start="37693" end="37721" title="Trinity Broadcasting Network" label="Trinity Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949861" start="37724" end="37728" title="WGNT" label="WGNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="37733" end="37735" title="The CW" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956489" start="37738" end="37745" title="WTVZ-TV" label="WTVZ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="37750" end="37761" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956766" start="37764" end="37768" title="WVBT" label="WVBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="37773" end="37776" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954574" start="37783" end="37787" title="WPXV" label="WPXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="37792" end="37806" title="ION Television" label="ION Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="37813" end="37840" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950404" start="37852" end="37859" title="WHRO-TV" label="WHRO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955731" start="37926" end="37930" title="WSKY-TV" label="WSKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708186" start="38037" end="38043" title="UNC-TV" label="UNC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q452340" start="38046" end="38067" title="Home Shopping Network" label="Home Shopping Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38103" end="38118" title="Daystar Network" label="Daystar Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568623" start="38148" end="38155" title="WVAD-LD" label="WVAD-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077724" start="38182" end="38185" title="Retro Television Network" label="RTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949676" start="38196" end="38203" title="WGBS-LD" label="WGBS-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179879" start="38272" end="38281" title="Cox Cable" label="Cox Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="38283" end="38290" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199757" start="38295" end="38307" title="Dish Network" label="Dish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="38346" end="38362" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143420" start="38435" end="38447" title="Verizon FIOS" label="Verizon FIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079074" start="38500" end="38530" title="Christian Broadcasting Network" label="Christian Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q502352" start="38552" end="38569" title="Regent University" label="Regent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711975" start="38610" end="38622" title="The 700 Club" label="The 700 Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432196" start="38832" end="38861" title="Norfolk International Airport" label="Norfolk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="39009" end="39016" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586790" start="39018" end="39065" title="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport" label="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="39111" end="39124" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708129" start="39223" end="39250" title="Chesapeake Regional Airport" label="Chesapeake Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934128" start="39327" end="39349" title="Virginia Beach Airport" label="Virginia Beach Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="39461" end="39467" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050982" start="39480" end="39487" title="Norfolk (Amtrak station)" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018931" start="39492" end="39504" title="Newport News (Amtrak station)" label="Newport News"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="39590" end="39608" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569345" start="39617" end="39651" title="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor" label="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="39881" end="39894" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q94388" start="39990" end="39994" title="Interstate 64" label="I-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453682" start="40213" end="40227" title="Interstate 664" label="Interstate 664"/>
<link wikidata="Q409923" start="40338" end="40351" title="U.S. Route 58 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818466" start="40367" end="40380" title="U.S. Route 60 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818361" start="40454" end="40467" title="U.S. Route 13 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507936" start="40490" end="40505" title="State Route 165 (Virginia)" label="State Route 165"/>
<link wikidata="Q32286" start="40686" end="40699" title="Eastern Shore of Virginia" label="Eastern Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070563" start="40715" end="40743" title="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel" label="Chesapeake Bay Bridge-Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="40891" end="40906" title="toll road" label="tolled facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q407619" start="40916" end="40929" title="U.S. Route 13" label="U.S. Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646293" start="41038" end="41059" title="Hampton Roads Transit" label="Hampton Roads Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q646388" start="41077" end="41085" title="Tide Light Rail" label="The Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="41200" end="41210" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962040" start="41306" end="41316" title="Walk Score" label="Walk Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q677464" start="41542" end="41565" title="Dominion Virginia Power" label="Dominion Virginia Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q337915" start="41686" end="41704" title="Southampton County, Virginia" label="Southampton County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41763" end="41783" title="AGL Resources#Virginia Natural Gas" label="Virginia Natural Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25796" start="41801" end="41814" title="AGL Resources" label="AGL Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="41828" end="41839" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="41875" end="41892" title="James City County" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q732199" start="41965" end="41976" title="Lake Gaston" label="Lake Gaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="42224" end="42242" title="Broadband internet" label="Broadband internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451179" start="42451" end="42490" title="Sentara Virginia Beach General Hospital" label="Sentara Virginia Beach General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451179" start="42495" end="42525" title="Sentara Princess Anne Hospital" label="Sentara Princess Anne Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451179" start="42688" end="42710" title="Sentara Leigh Hospital" label="Sentara Leigh Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="42743" end="42750" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875718" start="42752" end="42771" title="Beach Health clinic" label="Beach Health clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="42886" end="42899" title="sister Cities" label="sister Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q806551" start="42907" end="42926" title="Bangor, County Down" label="Bangor, County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q204308" start="42970" end="42978" title="Miyazaki (city)" label="Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q109021" start="42995" end="42999" title="Moss, Norway" label="Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q56759" start="43017" end="43025" title="Olongapo" label="Olongapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140" start="43048" end="43058" title="Waiblingen" label="Waiblingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q240247" start="43144" end="43160" title="San Juan del Sur" label="San Juan del Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="43232" end="43240" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q501476" start="43453" end="43459" title="Hasbro" label="Hasbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="43717" end="43737" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844750" start="43766" end="43804" title="The Man in the High Castle (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Man in the High Castle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="43837" end="43846" title="alternate history" label="alternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="43905" end="43910" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="43929" end="43941" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q33240" start="44024" end="44029" title="Drake (musician)" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q123144306" start="44038" end="44043" title="Virginia Beach (song)" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q120487897" start="44061" end="44077" title="For All the Dogs" label="For All The Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159480" start="44143" end="44162" title="Drake vs. Lil Wayne" label="Drake vs. Lil Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977724" start="44194" end="44267" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Virginia Beach, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061162" start="44270" end="44292" title="Norwegian Lady Statues" label="Norwegian Lady Statues"/>
<link wikidata="Q23138890" start="44295" end="44327" title="Virginia Beach Department of Emergency Medical Services" label="Virginia Beach Department of EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934133" start="44330" end="44360" title="Virginia Beach Fire Department" label="Virginia Beach Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934141" start="44363" end="44400" title="Virginia Beach Volunteer Rescue Squad" label="Virginia Beach Volunteer Rescue Squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971420" start="44403" end="44413" title="Wash Woods, Virginia" label="Wash Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432631" start="44417" end="44427" title="False Cape State Park" label="False Cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="44431" end="44462" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="44466" end="44492" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="44496" end="44518" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91245" wikidata="Q341755" url="?curid=91245" title="Stafford County, Virginia">
<text>Stafford County is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. It is approximately south of Washington, D.C. It is part of the Northern Virginia region, and the D.C area. It is one of the fastest growing and highest-income counties in America. As of the 2020 United States census, the population sits at 156,927. Its county seat is Stafford.

Located across the Rappahannock River from the City of Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania County, Stafford County is part of the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area. In 2006, and again in 2009, Stafford was ranked by &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine as the 11th highest-income county in the United States. According to a Census Bureau report released in 2019, Stafford County is currently the sixth highest-income county in America.

==History==
For thousands of years, various native cultures succeeded each other in their territories along the Potomac River and its tributaries. By the time of English colonization, there were 32 Algonquian-speaking American Indian tribes in the present-day coastal Tidewater Virginia area, including those of the Patawomeck and numerous tribes that were part of the Powhatan Confederacy. The former small tribe, still centered in Stafford County, was recognized by the state of Virginia in 2010.

The Indians&#x27; first recorded encounter with Europeans in this area was in 1608, with John Smith of the Jamestown Settlement. During a time of recurring tension between the early English colonists and local natives, the colonists led by Samuel Argall captured Chief Powhatan&#x27;s daughter, Pocahontas, while she was living with her husband, Kocoum, at the Patawomeck town of Passapatanzy. The colonists took her from Passapatanzy, located in the eastern part of what is now Stafford County, to a secondary English settlement, known as Henricus (or Henrico Town). During her captivity there, Alexander Whitaker converted Pocahontas to Christianity. She took the name &quot;Rebecca&quot; at her baptism. Rebecca/Pocahontas married English colonist John Rolfe on April 5, 1614, in Jamestown. Their mixed-race descendants were among the First Families of Virginia.

The English colonial government of Virginia imposed its own order on the land and peoples. In 1664 it established Stafford County from territory previously part of Westmoreland County (which had been created from Northumberland County in 1653). It was named after Staffordshire, England.
As originally delineated, Stafford County included a much larger area than its current borders. As population grew, the following counties and jurisdictions were created: Arlington, Fairfax, and Prince William counties, and the City of Alexandria. It is part of the area now considered Northern Virginia.

George Washington spent much of his childhood in the lower part of the county at his family&#x27;s home Ferry Farm (which at the time was part of King George County), along the Rappahannock River across from Fredericksburg. Colonial Forge High School was built on a tract of land owned in colonial times by his father Augustine Washington. George Mason, another Founding Father, also lived in Stafford during his formative years.

Aquia Church, built in 1757, is unusual among local structures for having been designed on the plan of a Greek cross rather than the more standard Roman Cross design. In addition, Aquia Church has a rare three-tiered pulpit; it has been designated as a National Historic Landmark. The Episcopal church continues to be active today.

Stafford County industry and resources were important to the colony and early nation. During the Revolutionary War, the Stafford ironworks furnished arms for the colonial rebel soldiers. Aquia Creek sandstone, quarried from Government Island, was used to build the White House and the U.S. Capitol.

During the American Civil War, the county was part of the battlegrounds, occupied repeatedly by more than 100,000 troops for several years. In 1862, before and after the Battle of Fredericksburg, some 10,000 slaves left area plantations and city households to cross the Rappahannock River, reaching the Union lines and gaining freedom. This exodus and Trail of Freedom is commemorated by historical markers on both sides of the river, in Fredericksburg and in Stafford County. The Battle of Aquia Creek took place in the Aquia Harbour area. Both the Union Army and Confederate Army struggled to control the strategic Potomac Creek Bridge at various times during the war.

Falmouth, a town bordering Fredericksburg, was the home of late-19th century American Impressionist artist Gari Melchers. His house, Belmont, still stands and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

===20th century to present===

Stafford County has developed to be one of the core counties of the Washington metropolitan area and Northern Virginia, the seat of government and numerous major defense installations. Marine Corps Base Quantico occupies northern areas of this county. The FBI Academy, FBI National Laboratory and NCIS HQ are located on the Stafford side of MCBQ. Many residents commute north to work there and in other defense and federal facilities, as well as private companies, in Washington and its environs on Interstate Highway 95, U.S. Route 1, and by Virginia Railway Express. Stafford County is a suburban county and home to many Washington D.C. commuters and workers which work for the Federal Government. It is also home to many military families due to its proximity to MCBQ. These facts contribute to the high-income of families in Stafford County, and the high amount of home-ownership, and college graduates. Stafford County is also one of the few counties in America where black households make more than white households. In recent years Stafford County has experienced major suburbanization, and growth as more and more workers move to the suburbs for their families. Thus, many developers are currently active in Stafford County in housing and retail projects.

In the early morning hours of May 9, 2008, a tornado touched down in the southern part of the county, severely damaging about 140 suburban homes.

The county was severely affected by &quot;Snowmageddon,&quot; the massive blizzards of December 2009 and February 2010. Stafford received some of the heaviest snow in the D.C. metropolitan area, with about 25 inches of snow in December, and 19 inches in February.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.9%) is water. The independent city of Fredericksburg developed at the fall line of the Rappahannock, supporting mills run by water power. To the northwest of there is the Piedmont area. Aquia Creek empties into the tidal segment of the Potomac River at Brent Point. Due to its location and proximity to Washington D.C. many federal government workers and commuters live in Stafford County. Stafford County&#x27;s location close to Washington, D.C. and MCB Quanico are one of the major reasons of the suburbanization and growth of the county.

===Major bodies of water===
* Rappahannock River
* Potomac River
* Aquia Creek

===Adjacent counties and independent city===

==Government and politics==

The county is divided into seven magisterial districts: George Washington, Hartwood, Falmouth, Griffis-Widewater, Aquia, Garrisonville, and Rockhill. The magisterial districts, roughly equal in population, each elect one supervisor to the Board of Supervisors which governs Stafford County. The county operates under the county form of the County Executive system of government, with an elected Board of Supervisors. The Board hires a professional, nonpartisan County Administrator to manage government agencies. The current County Administrator is Thomas C. Foley. Stafford County is currently a battleground county politically which leans Republican. Due to its rapid suburbanization and growth of families, and Federal Government employees from D.C. and being a part of Northern Virginia it has trended Democratic however has stayed Republican at the state and local level. The Board of Supervisors currently has a Republican majority, that is also true of the Stafford School Board (although they are elected on a bipartisan basis). In 2020, Joe Biden became the first Democratic candidate to carry Stafford County since Jimmy Carter in 1976.

Stafford County is represented by Congressman Eugene Vindman of Virginia&#x27;s 7th congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives. On the state level, it is represented by Republican Tara Durant and Democrat Jeremy McPike in the Virginia State Senate. Democrats Candi King, Joshua G. Cole and Republican Paul Milde in the Virginia House of Delegates.

===County-Wide Commonwealth&#x27;s Officials===
===Current Partisan Composition of the Board of Supervisors===
===Past composition of the Board===
====2003-2005====

Republican incumbent Robert Gibbons from the Rockhill District won re-election after a failed state legislature race in which he lost in the primary. Democrat Peter Fields from the George Washington district won re-election to his second term. Independent Jack Cavilier ran for re-election and won in the Griffis-Widewater district, keeping the Board of Supervisors at a gridlock 3-3-1 partisan split.
====2005-2007====

Growth being a main concern of residents four incumbents lost re-election bids. Gary Snelings, a Republican from the Hartwood district lost re-election by 36 votes to Independent Joe Brito. Republican incumbent Mark Osborn lost re-election in the Falmouth district for a second term, to Democratic political newcomer George Schwartz. Democrats in the northern part of the county were replaced by Republicans. Gary Pash, a Democrat representing the Garrisonville District and Kandy Hillard a Democrat representing the Aquia District were replaced by Republicans Mark Dudenhefer and Paul Milde, respectively.
====2007-2009====

Peter Fields, the Democratic incumbent from the George Washington District declined to run for a third term. Harry Crisp, a Democrat who ran for the George Washington District beat, Tom Coen a Republican who also ran last election cycle against Peter Fields. Jack Cavilier, an Independent incumbent from the Griffis-Widewater district ran for re-election as a Republican and lost to Democratic newcomer Bob Woodson. Woodson made history as being the first black American ever elected to the Stafford County Board of Supervisors. Republican Incumbent Robert Gibbons declined to run for another term. Republican Cord Sterling who worked for Senator John McCain (R-AZ) ran for the Rockhill District and won against a Democrat.
====2009-2011====

Independent incumbent Joe Brito lost a rematch with Republican Gary Snellings in a three-way race with another independent. Democratic incumbent George Schwartz from the Falmouth District, declined to run for re-election. Former Republican Supervisor Mark Osborn ran for the seat as an independent, in a three race against Democrat Doug Filler, and Republican Susan Stimpson who ultimately won. Republican Mark Dudenhefer won re-election against Democrat Laura Sellers and Republican Paul Milde won re-election against two Independents in a three-way race.
====2011-2013====

Republican incumbent Mark Dudenhefer from the Garrisonville District ran for state legislature and won. Republican Ty Schieber was named Interim supervisor and won a special election to finish out Mark Dudenhefer&#x27;s term. Democratic Incumbent Bob Woodson from the Griffis-Widewater district declined to run for a second term. In a three-way race former Independent Supervisor Jack Caviler won. Republican incumbent Cord Sterling won re-election in the Rockhill district. In the George Washington District Harry Crisp declined time run for re-election. Bob Thomas, a Republican won the race against a Democrat in the George Washington District.
====2013-2015====

The Republican incumbent from the Falmouth District Susan Stimson sought the Republican nomination for Lieutenant Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia and lost. Meg Bohmke, a Republican representing the district in the school board ran to represent the Falmouth District in the Board of Supervisors and won. Incumbent Republican Ty Schieber lost re-election in the Garrisonville District against Democrat Laura Sellers who ran in 2009 against Mark Dudenhefer and lost. Republican incumbent Gary Snelings from the Hartwood District won re-election. Republican incumbent Paul Milde from the Aquia District also won re-election. 
====2015-2017====

Independent Jack Cavilier ran for re-election as a Republican and won in the Griffis-Widewater District. Cord Sterling declined to run for re-election. Wendy Maurer a Republican won the Republican primary, then won a three-way race against a Democrat, and longtime former Republican Supervisor Robert Gibbons who ran as an independent and won in the Rockhill District and won. Republican incumbent Bob Thomas won re-election in the George Washington District.
====2017-2019====

Republican Supervisor Bob Thomas from the George Washington District decided to run for state legislature. In a competitive Republican Primary he beat Supervisor Paul Milde from the Aquia District, and former Supervisor Susan Stimpson from the Falmouth District. Tom Coen, a Republican candidate who ran twice for the seat was named Interim Supervisor and won a special election as an Independent to finish out Bob Thomas’ term. Incumbent Republican Supervisor Meg Bohmke won re-election in the Falmouth District against a Democrat. Cindy Shelton, a Republican, beat a Democrat and an independent in a three-way race in one of the most Democratic districts in Stafford County. Democratic Incumbent Laura Sellers from the Garrisonville District ran for re-election against Mark Dudenhefer who declined to run for re-election for state legislature. In a rematch Mark Dudenhefer won again to reclaim his seat by 13 votes. Gary Snelings, the Republican incumbent from the Hartwood District won re-election.
===Stafford County School Board===

Though the school board in Stafford County, and the Commonwealth of Virginia is officially nonpartisan, candidates are endorsed by parties and tend to hold views similar to these parties.
===Law enforcement===

The Stafford County Sheriff&#x27;s Office (SCSO) is the primary law enforcement agency in Stafford County. According to the department, it is the first agency in Virginia to use drones solely for law enforcement purposes.
===Presidential elections===















==Demographics==
===2020 Census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 128,961 people, 38,237 households, and 24,481 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 31,405 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 72.5% White, 15.6% African American, 0.4% Native American, 2.8% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 3.2% from other races, and 4.0% from two or more races. 9.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. Due to the rapid suburbanization of the county the demographics have increasingly changed in the past 20 years and will continue to change in the near future as Stafford County continues to grow.

By 2005, Stafford County&#x27;s population was 72.8% non-Hispanic whites. black Americans were 17.0% of the total population. Native Americans were 0.4% of the county total, Asians 2.3%, and Native Hawai&#x27;ians and other Pacific islanders 0.2%. Latinos were 6.4% of the population. This was higher than the total for all of Virginia.

As of 2000 there were 38,187 households, out of which 46.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.00% were married couples living together, 9.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.90% were non-families. 13.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.01 and the average family size was 3.32.

In the county, the age distribution of the population shows 31.60% under the age of 18, 7.80% from 18 to 24, 33.70% from 25 to 44, 21.10% from 45 to 64, and 5.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.10 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.50 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $75,546, and the median income for a family was $78,575 (these figures had risen to $85,793 and $95,433 respectively as of a 2007 estimate). Males had a median income of $47,080 versus $31,469 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,762. About 2.40% of families and 3.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.30% of those under age 18 and 5.30% of those age 65 or over. Stafford County is also one of the seven counties in America where black households make more than white households. Between 2010 and 2014 the typical black household made $105,628 in the county. The highest out of all the seven counties, while white households made an average $99,533.

==Media==

Stafford County being a part of the D.C. area and Northern Virginia is covered by D.C. cable news stations. These include FOX 5(WTTG), NBC 4(WRC-TV), ABC 7(WJLA-TV), CBS 9(WUSA), and PBS 26(WETA-TV). Stafford County is covered by northern Virginia newspapers and Fredericksburg newspapers.

===Newspapers===
* &quot;The Free Lance–Star&quot;
* &quot;InsideNoVa - North Stafford&quot;
* &quot;The Washington Post&quot;
* &quot;Potomac Local&quot;

==Education==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="0" end="15" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="21" end="27" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="43" end="55" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="59" end="67" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="98" end="114" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="133" end="150" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="260" end="285" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="323" end="334" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051585" start="338" end="346" title="Stafford, Virginia" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="404" end="418" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q506202" start="423" end="442" title="Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="475" end="549" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="608" end="614" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622417" start="642" end="684" title="Highest-income counties in the United States" label="highest-income county in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="926" end="939" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="948" end="959" title="tributaries" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1012" end="1022" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1032" end="1047" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="1082" end="1091" title="Tidewater (geographic term)" label="Tidewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124697" start="1130" end="1140" title="Patawomeck" label="Patawomeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849523" start="1183" end="1203" title="Powhatan Confederacy" label="Powhatan Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="1403" end="1413" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12346147" start="1421" end="1441" title="Jamestown Settlement" label="Jamestown Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640499" start="1554" end="1567" title="Samuel Argall" label="Samuel Argall"/>
<link wikidata="Q578878" start="1577" end="1591" title="Chief Powhatan" label="Chief Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="1609" end="1619" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124697" start="1675" end="1685" title="Patawomeck" label="Patawomeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056649" start="1694" end="1706" title="Passapatanzy" label="Passapatanzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715850" start="1854" end="1862" title="Henricus" label="Henricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q280766" start="1910" end="1928" title="Alexander Whitaker" label="Alexander Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="2065" end="2075" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="2097" end="2106" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="2114" end="2124" title="mixed-race" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452987" start="2152" end="2178" title="First Families of Virginia" label="First Families of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="2345" end="2364" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505292" start="2394" end="2415" title="Northumberland County, Virginia" label="Northumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="2445" end="2458" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="2640" end="2649" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="2651" end="2658" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183263" start="2664" end="2678" title="Prince William County, Virginia" label="Prince William"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="2697" end="2715" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="City of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="2755" end="2772" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="2775" end="2792" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408127" start="2879" end="2889" title="Ferry Farm" label="Ferry Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="2952" end="2970" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="2983" end="2997" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148319" start="2999" end="3025" title="Colonial Forge High School" label="Colonial Forge High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q768342" start="3093" end="3113" title="Augustine Washington" label="Augustine Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="3115" end="3127" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="3137" end="3152" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782877" start="3206" end="3218" title="Aquia Church" label="Aquia Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19894479" start="3311" end="3322" title="Greek cross" label="Greek cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="3459" end="3485" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="3491" end="3500" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3636" end="3653" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832530" start="3668" end="3677" title="ironworks" label="ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782879" start="3726" end="3747" title="Aquia Creek sandstone" label="Aquia Creek sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257513" start="3763" end="3780" title="Public Quarry at Government Island" label="Government Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="3804" end="3815" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="3824" end="3836" title="United States Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3850" end="3868" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="4009" end="4033" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="Battle of Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="4109" end="4127" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q774532" start="4320" end="4341" title="Battle of Aquia Creek" label="Battle of Aquia Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375988" start="4360" end="4373" title="Aquia Harbour, Virginia" label="Aquia Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="4389" end="4399" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="4404" end="4420" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235050" start="4456" end="4476" title="Potomac Creek Bridge" label="Potomac Creek Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375083" start="4511" end="4519" title="Falmouth, Virginia" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387035" start="4618" end="4631" title="Gari Melchers" label="Gari Melchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523265" start="4644" end="4651" title="Gari Melchers Home" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="4687" end="4723" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="4825" end="4853" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="4942" end="4968" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Marine Corps Base Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q170781" start="5300" end="5324" title="Virginia Railway Express" label="Virginia Railway Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840752" start="6067" end="6074" title="Mid-May 2008 tornado outbreak sequence" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548660" start="6211" end="6223" title="Snowmageddon" label="Snowmageddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="6465" end="6483" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191545" start="6713" end="6721" title="Piedmont region of Virginia" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782878" start="6728" end="6739" title="Aquia Creek" label="Aquia Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="6866" end="6884" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="6994" end="7005" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="MCB Quanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="7042" end="7057" title="suburbanization" label="suburbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="7115" end="7133" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="7136" end="7149" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782878" start="7152" end="7163" title="Aquia Creek" label="Aquia Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519467" start="8280" end="8284" title="2020 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="8286" end="8295" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="8365" end="8377" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148365" start="8381" end="8385" title="1976 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610369" start="8434" end="8448" title="Eugene Vindman" label="Eugene Vindman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934064" start="8452" end="8494" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8502" end="8531" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q109395021" start="8585" end="8596" title="Tara Durant" label="Tara Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263568" start="8610" end="8623" title="Jeremy McPike" label="Jeremy McPike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="8631" end="8652" title="Virginia State Senate" label="Virginia State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105130536" start="8664" end="8674" title="Candi King" label="Candi King"/>
<link wikidata="Q79348667" start="8676" end="8690" title="Joshua G. Cole" label="Joshua G. Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q123387124" start="8706" end="8716" title="Paul Milde (politician)" label="Paul Milde"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="8724" end="8751" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="14510" end="14516" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15111" end="15116" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15124" end="15140" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15169" end="15174" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15182" end="15198" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15210" end="15221" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15284" end="15292" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15296" end="15302" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="16893" end="16910" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="17006" end="17018" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735200" start="17708" end="17727" title="The Free Lance–Star" label="The Free Lance–Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="17784" end="17803" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91246" wikidata="Q506202" url="?curid=91246" title="Spotsylvania County, Virginia">
<text>Spotsylvania County is a county in the Commonwealth of Virginia. It is a distant suburb approximately 60 miles (90km) south of D.C. It is a part of the Northern Virginia region and the D.C. area. As of 2024, Spotsylvania County is the 14th most populated county in Virginia with 149,588 residents. Its county seat is Spotsylvania Courthouse.

Located along the Rappahannock River bordering the City of Fredericksburg and Stafford County, Spotsylvania County is part of the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area. Since 2010, the population has increased by 19.3%; for comparison, Virginia&#x27;s population has only increased 7.7% in that time period. Spotsylvania County is currently the 74th highest-income county in America.

==History==

At the time of European encounter, the inhabitants of the area that became Spotsylvania County were a Siouan-speaking tribe called the Manahoac.

As the colonial population increased, Spotsylvania County was established in 1721 from parts of Essex, King and Queen, and King William counties. The county was named in Latin for Lieutenant Governor of Virginia Alexander Spotswood who incidentally was also the second great-grandfather of Robert E. Lee.

Many major battles were fought in this county during the Civil War, including the Battle of Chancellorsville, Battle of the Wilderness, Battle of Fredericksburg, and Battle of Spotsylvania Court House. The war resulted in widespread disruption and opportunity: some 10,000 African-American slaves left area plantations and city households to cross the Rappahannock River, reaching the Union lines and gaining freedom. This exodus is commemorated by historical markers on both sides of the river.

General Stonewall Jackson was shot and seriously wounded by friendly fire in Spotsylvania County during the Battle of Chancellorsville. A group of Confederate soldiers from North Carolina were in the woods and heard General Jackson&#x27;s party returning from reconnoitering the Union lines. They mistook them for a Federal patrol and fired on them, wounding Jackson in both arms. His left arm was amputated. General Jackson died a few days later from pneumonia at nearby Guinea Station. He and other Confederate wounded were being gathered there for evacuation to hospitals to the south and further away from enemy lines.

==Geography==
It is bounded on the north by the Rappahannock and Rapidan rivers, the independent city of Fredericksburg (all of which were part of the area&#x27;s early history), and the counties of Stafford and Culpeper; on the south by the North Anna River and its impoundment, Lake Anna, and by the counties of Hanover and Louisa; on the west by Orange County and Culpeper County; and on the east by Caroline County.

===Adjacent counties and independent city===
* Culpeper County, Virginia – north
* Stafford County, Virginia – northeast
* City of Fredericksburg, Virginia – northeast
* Caroline County, Virginia – southeast
* Hanover County, Virginia – south
* Louisa County, Virginia – southwest
* Orange County, Virginia – west and northwest

===National protected area===
* Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park (part)

=== Points of interest ===
* Lake Anna State Park
* Spotsylvania County Public Schools
* Spotsylvania Courthouse
* Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park
* Spotsylvania Towne Centre
* Central Rappahannock Regional Library
* Dominion Raceway

=== Communities ===
There are no incorporated towns or cities in Spotsylvania County. Unincorporated communities in the county include:

==== Census-designated places ====
* Lake Wilderness
* Spotsylvania Courthouse

==== Other unincorporated communities ====

* Alsop
* Arcadia
* Artillery Ridge
* Bells Crossroad
* Belmont
* Blades Corner
* Brandon
* Brockroad
* Brokenburg
* Carters Store
* Chancellor
* Chancellor Green, a local Hispanic enclave
* Chancellorsville
* Chewnings Corner
* Cookstown
* Cosner&#x27;s Corner
* Dunavant
* Five Mile Fork
* Four Mile Fork
* Granite Springs
* Lanes Corner
* Leavells
* Lewiston
* Margo
* Marye
* Massaponax
* McHenry
* Old Trap
* Olivers Corner
* Partlow
* Paytes
* Post Oak
* Shady Grove Corner
* Snell
* Stubbs
* Thornburg
* Todds Tavern
Many areas of the county have Fredericksburg addresses.

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

== Governance ==

===County government===
Spotsylvania County&#x27;s highest level of management is that of County Administrator. This post oversees all county departments and agencies and serves as the Spotsylvania County&#x27;s Board of Supervisors&#x27; liaison to state and regional agencies.

====Board of Supervisors====
Spotsylvania is governed by a Board of Supervisors. The board consists of seven members (one from each district within the county). The Board of Supervisors sets county policies, adopts ordinances, appropriates funds, approves land rezoning and special exceptions to the zoning ordinance, and carries out other responsibilities set forth by the county code.

The following is the current list of supervisors and districts which they represent:

===County wide offices===
===State representation===


===Federal representation===
Spotsylvania residents are represented by Eugene Vindman (D-7th District) in the House of Representatives. The current U.S. senators from the Commonwealth of Virginia are Mark Warner (D) and Tim Kaine (D).













==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 122,397 people, 31,308 households, and 24,639 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 33,329 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was:
* 78.4% White
* 15.8% Black or African American
* 0.4% Native American
* 2.4% Asian
* 0.05% Pacific Islander
* 2.8% from other races, and
* 1.88% from two or more races.

7.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 31,308 households, out of which 42.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.80% were married couples living together, 9.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.30% were non-families. 16.40% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.87 and the average family size was 3.22.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 30.00% under the age of 18, 7.30% from 18 to 24, 32.20% from 25 to 44, 22.20% from 45 to 64, and 8.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.10 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 93.00 males.

The 2021 median income for a household in the county was $98,973 compared to $69,021 for the United States; the median income for a family was $87,922. Males had a median income of $49,166 versus $38,076 for females. The per capita income for the county was $37,212. 6.6% of the population lives below the poverty line, including 6.70% of those under age 18 and 5.20% of those age 65 or over.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Emergency services ===
Fire and rescue services in Spotsylvania County are provided by a combination of career and volunteer organizations. The career staff of the Department of Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Management provide fire and rescue services 24/7/365 at all 11 stations, 1 (Courthouse), 2 (Brokenburg), 3 (Partlow), 4 (Four Mile Fork), 5 (Chancellor), 6 (Salem Church), 7 (Wilderness), 8 (Thornburg), 9 (Belmont), 10 (Salem Fields), 11 (Crossroads). Volunteers provide additional staffing nights and weekends at Stations 1, 2, 4, and 8. The volunteer organizations include The Spotsylvania Volunteer Fire Department, and The Spotsylvania Volunteer Rescue Squad.

== Education ==

===Public schools===
===Private schools===
* Fredericksburg Academy
* Fredericksburg Christian School
* The Summit Academy
* Odyssey Montessori School
* Saint Patrick School
* Saint Michael the Archangel High School
* Faith Baptist Christian School
* Mount Hope Academy

===Colleges and universities===
Germanna Community College is part of the Virginia Community College System and serves the City of Fredericksburg, and the counties of Stafford, Spotsylvania, Orange, Culpeper, and King George.

The University of Mary Washington located in neighboring Fredericksburg, Virginia, is a four-year university and graduate school that also serves the area.

==Notable people==
* John Day Andrews (1795–1882), Mayor of Houston
* Thomas Dickens Arnold, United States Congressman from Virginia
* Francis Asbury (1745–1816), one of the first two bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church
* Caressa Cameron, Miss Virginia 2009 and Miss America 2010
* Elijah Craig, Baptist minister arrested in Fredericksburg for preaching without a license from the Anglican Church before the American Revolution
* Evelyn Magruder DeJarnette (1842–1914), author
* Rahman &quot;Rock&quot; Harper, chef, television personality, and restaurateur
* Alexander Holladay (1811–1877), U. S. Representative
* Danny McBride, actor
* Phil Short, former member of the Louisiana State Senate and United States Marine Corps officer
* Matthew Fontaine Maury, father of modern oceanography

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Spotsylvania County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==

* Spotsylvania County Official Website
* Spotsylvania County Department of Economic Development
* Fredericksburg.com, site of &quot;The Free Lance-Star&quot;
* Spotsylvania County Virginia Zip Codes
* Spotsylvania County Sheriff&#x27;s Office</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q506202" start="0" end="19" title="Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="25" end="31" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="55" end="63" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="152" end="169" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="302" end="313" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374853" start="317" end="340" title="Spotsylvania Courthouse, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="402" end="416" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="473" end="547" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="880" end="886" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513639" start="913" end="921" title="Manahoac" label="Manahoac"/>
<link wikidata="Q182112" start="1020" end="1025" title="Essex County, Virginia" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q337067" start="1027" end="1041" title="King and Queen County, Virginia" label="King and Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q337204" start="1047" end="1059" title="King William County, Virginia" label="King William"/>
<link wikidata="Q931202" start="1104" end="1135" title="Lieutenant Governor of Virginia" label="Lieutenant Governor of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="1136" end="1155" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1214" end="1227" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1287" end="1296" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="1312" end="1338" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Battle of Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425882" start="1340" end="1364" title="Battle of the Wilderness" label="Battle of the Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q751186" start="1366" end="1390" title="Battle of Fredericksburg" label="Battle of Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538874" start="1396" end="1430" title="Battle of Spotsylvania Court House" label="Battle of Spotsylvania Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="1735" end="1752" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="1787" end="1800" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q745979" start="1835" end="1861" title="Battle of Chancellorsville" label="Battle of Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1900" end="1914" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="2179" end="2188" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="2399" end="2411" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063025" start="2416" end="2423" title="Rapidan River" label="Rapidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="2436" end="2452" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="2456" end="2470" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="2550" end="2558" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="2563" end="2571" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344100" start="2593" end="2609" title="North Anna River" label="North Anna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474784" start="2631" end="2640" title="Lake Anna" label="Lake Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q341679" start="2665" end="2672" title="Hanover County, Virginia" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q515166" start="2677" end="2683" title="Louisa County, Virginia" label="Louisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q506225" start="2700" end="2713" title="Orange County, Virginia" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q341708" start="2754" end="2769" title="Caroline County, Virginia" label="Caroline County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="2819" end="2844" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="2855" end="2880" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="2903" end="2927" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341708" start="2942" end="2967" title="Caroline County, Virginia" label="Caroline County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q341679" start="2982" end="3006" title="Hanover County, Virginia" label="Hanover County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515166" start="3017" end="3040" title="Louisa County, Virginia" label="Louisa County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506225" start="3055" end="3078" title="Orange County, Virginia" label="Orange County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181893" start="3133" end="3187" title="Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park" label="Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712682" start="3225" end="3245" title="Lake Anna State Park" label="Lake Anna State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580098" start="3248" end="3282" title="Spotsylvania County Public Schools" label="Spotsylvania County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374853" start="3285" end="3308" title="Spotsylvania Courthouse" label="Spotsylvania Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q181893" start="3311" end="3365" title="Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park" label="Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580106" start="3368" end="3393" title="Spotsylvania Towne Centre" label="Spotsylvania Towne Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230499" start="3396" end="3433" title="Central Rappahannock Regional Library" label="Central Rappahannock Regional Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877925" start="3436" end="3452" title="Dominion Raceway" label="Dominion Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886694" start="3628" end="3643" title="Lake Wilderness, Virginia" label="Lake Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374853" start="3646" end="3669" title="Spotsylvania Courthouse, Virginia" label="Spotsylvania Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735829" start="3717" end="3722" title="Alsop, Virginia" label="Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785111" start="3725" end="3732" title="Arcadia, Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801144" start="3735" end="3750" title="Artillery Ridge, Virginia" label="Artillery Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884147" start="3753" end="3768" title="Bells Crossroad, Virginia" label="Bells Crossroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884305" start="3771" end="3778" title="Belmont, Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="Belmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923758" start="3781" end="3794" title="Blades Corner, Virginia" label="Blades Corner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3797" end="3804" title="Brandon, Virginia" label="Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972859" start="3807" end="3816" title="Brockroad, Virginia" label="Brockroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973526" start="3819" end="3829" title="Brokenburg, Virginia" label="Brokenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070766" start="3848" end="3858" title="Chancellor, Virginia" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477875" start="3906" end="3922" title="Chancellorsville, Virginia" label="Chancellorsville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3925" end="3941" title="Chewnings Corner, Virginia" label="Chewnings Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167204" start="3944" end="3953" title="Cookstown, Virginia" label="Cookstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174655" start="3956" end="3976" title="Cosner&amp;#x27;s Corner" label="Cosner&amp;#x27;s Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314099" start="3979" end="3987" title="Dunavant, Virginia" label="Dunavant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456012" start="3990" end="4004" title="Five Mile Fork, Virginia" label="Five Mile Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475335" start="4007" end="4021" title="Four Mile Fork, Virginia" label="Four Mile Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595926" start="4024" end="4039" title="Granite Springs, Virginia" label="Granite Springs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4042" end="4054" title="Lanes Corner, Virginia" label="Lanes Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510650" start="4057" end="4065" title="Leavells, Virginia" label="Leavells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537383" start="4068" end="4076" title="Lewiston, Virginia" label="Lewiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760613" start="4079" end="4084" title="Margo, Virginia" label="Margo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781170" start="4087" end="4092" title="Marye, Virginia" label="Marye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784535" start="4095" end="4105" title="Massaponax, Virginia" label="Massaponax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801554" start="4108" end="4115" title="McHenry, Virginia" label="McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085324" start="4118" end="4126" title="Old Trap, Virginia" label="Old Trap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4129" end="4143" title="Olivers Corner, Virginia" label="Olivers Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140683" start="4146" end="4153" title="Partlow, Virginia" label="Partlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156922" start="4156" end="4162" title="Paytes, Virginia" label="Paytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233666" start="4165" end="4173" title="Post Oak, Virginia" label="Post Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460928" start="4176" end="4194" title="Shady Grove Corner, Virginia" label="Shady Grove Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547608" start="4197" end="4202" title="Snell, Virginia" label="Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627360" start="4205" end="4211" title="Stubbs, Virginia" label="Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796320" start="4214" end="4223" title="Thornburg, Virginia" label="Thornburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812748" start="4226" end="4238" title="Todds Tavern, Virginia" label="Todds Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q112610369" start="5225" end="5239" title="Eugene Vindman" label="Eugene Vindman"/>
<link wikidata="Q453893" start="5354" end="5365" title="Mark Warner" label="Mark Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="5374" end="5383" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5679" end="5685" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5918" end="5923" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5932" end="5937" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5941" end="5957" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5965" end="5980" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5988" end="5993" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6002" end="6018" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6031" end="6042" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6109" end="6117" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6121" end="6127" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6255" end="6270" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499193" start="8055" end="8077" title="Fredericksburg Academy" label="Fredericksburg Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="8143" end="8160" title="Montessori education" label="Montessori School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401920" start="8186" end="8225" title="Saint Michael the Archangel High School (Fredericksburg, Virginia)" label="Saint Michael the Archangel High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551972" start="8313" end="8339" title="Germanna Community College" label="Germanna Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934204" start="8355" end="8388" title="Virginia Community College System" label="Virginia Community College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q657374" start="8512" end="8541" title="University of Mary Washington" label="University of Mary Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q116063620" start="8686" end="8702" title="John Day Andrews" label="John Day Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641461" start="8735" end="8756" title="Thomas Dickens Arnold" label="Thomas Dickens Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8758" end="8783" title="United States Congressman" label="United States Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q145140" start="8800" end="8814" title="Francis Asbury" label="Francis Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="8864" end="8890" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q684037" start="8893" end="8908" title="Caressa Cameron" label="Caressa Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878007" start="8910" end="8923" title="Miss Virginia" label="Miss Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859054" start="8933" end="8950" title="Miss America 2010" label="Miss America 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360904" start="8953" end="8965" title="Elijah Craig" label="Elijah Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q51622810" start="9101" end="9127" title="Evelyn Magruder DeJarnette" label="Evelyn Magruder DeJarnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q27671729" start="9150" end="9180" title="Rahman &amp;quot;Rock&amp;quot; Harper" label="Rahman &amp;quot;Rock&amp;quot; Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427922" start="9216" end="9228" title="restaurateur" label="restaurateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642295" start="9231" end="9249" title="Alexander Holladay" label="Alexander Holladay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="9263" end="9283" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U. S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q336400" start="9286" end="9299" title="Danny McBride (actor)" label="Danny McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182405" start="9309" end="9319" title="Phil Short" label="Phil Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689290" start="9342" end="9364" title="Louisiana State Legislature" label="Louisiana State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="9369" end="9395" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q114385" start="9406" end="9428" title="Matthew Fontaine Maury" label="Matthew Fontaine Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977513" start="9476" end="9554" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Spotsylvania County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Spotsylvania County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91247" wikidata="Q337915" url="?curid=91247" title="Southampton County, Virginia">
<text>Southampton County is a county located on the southern border of the Commonwealth of Virginia. North Carolina is to the south. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 17,996. Its county seat is Courtland.

==History==
In the early 17th century, the explorer Captain John Smith founded the settlement of Jamestown; in the next decades of the colony&#x27;s history, Jamestown settlers explorer and began settling the regions adjacent to Hampton Roads. The Virginia Colony was divided into eight shires (or counties) with a total population of approximately 5,000 inhabitants in 1634. Most of Southampton County was originally part of Warrosquyoake Shire. The shires were soon to be called counties. In 1637 Warrosquyoake Shire was renamed Isle of Wight County.

In 1749, the portion of Isle of Wight County west of the Blackwater River was organized as Southampton County. Later, part of Nansemond County, which is now the Independent City of Suffolk, was added to Southampton County. This area was cultivated for tobacco and later for mixed crops, dependent on the labor of enslaved African Americans after a relatively short period when many white indentured servants came to the colony.
In August 1831, an enslaved preacher named Nat Turner led a slave rebellion in Southampton County against local white residents, killing about 60 people (mainly women and children). The rebellion was crushed, and Turner and his rebels were tried, convicted, and executed. Meanwhile, white mobs had seized and lynched nearly 200 black residents of Southampton County, most of them enslaved.

Southampton County may have been named by Virginian settlers for Southampton, a major port city in Hampshire. Alternatively, it may have been named for Henry Wriothesley, one of the founders of the Virginia Company.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.

Southampton County is bounded by the Blackwater River on the east and the Meherrin River on the west. The Nottoway River flows through the center of the county. All three rivers are tributaries of the Chowan River, which flows south into Albemarle Sound, North Carolina. The Blackwater River separates Southampton County from Isle of Wight County, and the Meherrin River separates it from Greensville County.

===Adjacent counties===

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 18,570 people, 6,279 households, and 4,502 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,058 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 60.4% White, 37.2% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. 1.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 6,279 households, out of which 30.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.10% were married couples living together, 13.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.30% were non-families. 24.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.02.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 22.70% under the age of 18, 8.80% from 18 to 24, 29.20% from 25 to 44, 25.00% from 45 to 64, and 14.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 111.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 112.50 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $33,995, and the median income for a family was $41,324. Males had a median income of $32,436 versus $20,831 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,930. About 11.70% of families and 14.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.90% of those under age 18 and 14.50% of those age 65 or over.

== Public service ==
Blackwater Regional Library is the regional library system that provides services to the citizens of Southampton.

==Communities==
===Towns===
* Boykins
* Branchville
* Capron
* Courtland
* Ivor
* Newsoms

===Census-designated places===
* Sedley
* Southampton Meadows

===Other unincorporated communities===
* Berlin
* Black Creek
* Drewryville
* Vicksville

==Politics==










==Notable people==
* Bill Bailey, tap dancer who was the first person recorded doing the moonwalk dance and older brother of actress and singer Pearl Bailey
* John Brown, fugitive slave
* Samuel Butts, US Army officer
* Anthony W. Gardiner, ninth president of Liberia, established as a US colony in West Africa for free blacks; emigrated there from Southampton County
* S. Bernard Goodwyn, chief justice of the Supreme Court of Virginia
* William Mahone, railroad builder, U.S. Senator, and Confederate general
* Dred Scott, slave immortalized by the Dred Scott Decision of the US Supreme Court, which limited the rights of African Americans
* George Henry Thomas, US Army general 
* Nat Turner, leader of a rebellion of enslaved people

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Southampton County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==
* Southampton County Website
* Hampton Roads Economic Development Alliance – serving Southampton County
* Newsoms Peanut Shop
* Turtle Creek Horse Transportation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337915" start="0" end="18" title="Southampton County, Virginia" label="Southampton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="24" end="30" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="69" end="81" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="85" end="93" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="137" end="162" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="195" end="206" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376759" start="210" end="219" title="Courtland, Virginia" label="Courtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="274" end="292" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="Captain John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="319" end="328" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="451" end="464" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="470" end="485" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="509" end="514" title="shire" label="shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="520" end="528" title="County (United States)" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970850" start="648" end="667" title="Warrosquyoake Shire" label="Warrosquyoake Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q338052" start="753" end="773" title="Isle of Wight County, Virginia" label="Isle of Wight County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905609" start="833" end="849" title="Blackwater River (Virginia)" label="Blackwater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982388" start="902" end="918" title="Nansemond County, Virginia" label="Nansemond County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="937" end="953" title="Independent city (United States)" label="Independent City"/>
<link wikidata="Q342428" start="957" end="964" title="Suffolk, Virginia" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="1089" end="1115" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q329730" start="1247" end="1257" title="Nat Turner" label="Nat Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967898" start="1264" end="1279" title="Nat Turner&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="1513" end="1520" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="1660" end="1671" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="1694" end="1703" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q743492" start="1747" end="1764" title="Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton" label="Henry Wriothesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152507" start="1793" end="1809" title="Virginia Company" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1843" end="1861" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905609" start="1972" end="1988" title="Blackwater River (Chowan River)" label="Blackwater River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809486" start="2009" end="2023" title="Meherrin River" label="Meherrin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063766" start="2041" end="2055" title="Nottoway River" label="Nottoway River"/>
<link wikidata="Q841782" start="2136" end="2148" title="Chowan River" label="Chowan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441345" start="2173" end="2188" title="Albemarle Sound" label="Albemarle Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="2190" end="2204" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q338052" start="2261" end="2281" title="Isle of Wight County, Virginia" label="Isle of Wight County"/>
<link wikidata="Q340605" start="2324" end="2342" title="Greensville County, Virginia" label="Greensville County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2678" end="2684" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2785" end="2803" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2910" end="2915" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2923" end="2928" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2932" end="2948" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2955" end="2970" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2977" end="2982" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2989" end="3005" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3017" end="3028" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3091" end="3099" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3103" end="3109" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3236" end="3251" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4064" end="4081" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4179" end="4191" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230531" start="4290" end="4317" title="Blackwater Regional Library" label="Blackwater Regional Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373531" start="4435" end="4442" title="Boykins, Virginia" label="Boykins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376117" start="4445" end="4456" title="Branchville, Virginia" label="Branchville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373916" start="4459" end="4465" title="Capron, Virginia" label="Capron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376759" start="4468" end="4477" title="Courtland, Virginia" label="Courtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378367" start="4480" end="4484" title="Ivor, Virginia" label="Ivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374254" start="4487" end="4494" title="Newsoms, Virginia" label="Newsoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445350" start="4529" end="4535" title="Sedley, Virginia" label="Sedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132825" start="4538" end="4557" title="Southampton Meadows, Virginia" label="Southampton Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4600" end="4606" title="Berlin, Virginia" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4609" end="4620" title="Black Creek, Virginia" label="Black Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307327" start="4623" end="4634" title="Drewryville, Virginia" label="Drewryville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4637" end="4647" title="Vicksville, Virginia" label="Vicksville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907999" start="4693" end="4704" title="Bill Bailey (dancer)" label="Bill Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204050" start="4761" end="4769" title="moonwalk (dance)" label="moonwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q462118" start="4816" end="4828" title="Pearl Bailey" label="Pearl Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181130" start="4831" end="4841" title="John Brown (fugitive slave)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411028" start="4860" end="4872" title="Samuel Butts" label="Samuel Butts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="4874" end="4881" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q574100" start="4892" end="4911" title="Anthony W. Gardiner" label="Anthony W. Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="4932" end="4939" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387393" start="5042" end="5060" title="S. Bernard Goodwyn" label="S. Bernard Goodwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398783" start="5083" end="5108" title="Supreme Court of Virginia" label="Supreme Court of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="5111" end="5125" title="William Mahone" label="William Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5127" end="5135" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="5163" end="5174" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q480427" start="5185" end="5195" title="Dred Scott" label="Dred Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q690462" start="5223" end="5242" title="Dred Scott v. Sandford" label="Dred Scott Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q740330" start="5316" end="5335" title="George Henry Thomas" label="George Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q329730" start="5356" end="5366" title="Nat Turner" label="Nat Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063373" start="5425" end="5502" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Southampton County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Southampton County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91248" wikidata="Q378896" url="?curid=91248" title="Smyth County, Virginia">
<text>Smyth County is a county located in the U.S. state of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 29,800. Its county seat is Marion.

==History==
Smyth County was formed on February 23, 1832, from Washington and Wythe counties. The county is named after Alexander Smyth, a general during the War of 1812 who was elected to the state Senate, House of Delegates, and as a Representative to the United States Congress.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water. Smyth County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of &quot;Greater Appalachia&quot; by Colin Woodard in his book &quot;American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America&quot;.

===Adjacent counties===
* Russell County – northwest
* Tazewell County – north
* Bland County – northeast
* Wythe County – east
* Grayson County – south
* Washington County – southwest

===National protected areas===
* Jefferson National Forest (part)
* Mount Rogers National Recreation Area (part)

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 33,081 people, 13,493 households, and 9,607 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 15,111 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.86% White, 1.87% Black or African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.18% Asian, 0.32% from other races, and 0.60% from two or more races. 0.86% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 13,493 households, out of which 29.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 55.70% were married couples living together, 11.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.80% were non-families. 26.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.50% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.83.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 21.60% under the age of 18, 8.00% from 18 to 24, 28.10% from 25 to 44, 26.00% from 45 to 64, and 16.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 93.80 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 90.50 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $30,083, and the median income for a family was $36,392. Males had a median income of $26,698 versus $19,712 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,105. About 9.90% of families and 13.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.20% of those under age 18 and 14.00% of those age 65 or over.

==Tourism==
The Smyth County Tourism Association was formed in April 2006 to promote sustainable tourism development and manages the operation of the state-certified H.L. Bonham Regional Development and Tourism Center. The organization markets the area through https://visitsmythcountyva.com/

==Education==

=== Public high schools ===
* Chilhowie High School, Chilhowie
* Marion Senior High School, Marion
* Northwood High School, Saltville

===Job Corps===
* Blue Ridge Job Corps, Marion

==Communities==

===Towns===
* Chilhowie
* Marion
* Saltville (partly in Washington County)

===Census-designated places===
* Adwolfe
* Atkins
* McMullin
* Seven Mile Ford
* Sugar Grove

===Other unincorporated communities===
* Groseclose
* Rich Valley

==Politics==










==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Smyth County, Virginia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q378896" start="0" end="12" title="Smyth County, Virginia" label="Smyth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="18" end="24" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="40" end="50" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="54" end="62" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="74" end="85" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="118" end="129" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373794" start="133" end="139" title="Marion, Virginia" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="205" end="215" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q513950" start="220" end="225" title="Wythe County, Virginia" label="Wythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557973" start="262" end="277" title="Alexander Smyth" label="Alexander Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="281" end="288" title="general" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="300" end="311" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="335" end="347" title="Virginia Senate" label="state Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="349" end="367" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="378" end="392" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="400" end="422" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="456" end="474" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="601" end="632" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371958" start="732" end="814" title="American Nations" label="American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q507117" start="849" end="863" title="Russell County, Virginia" label="Russell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506197" start="878" end="893" title="Tazewell County, Virginia" label="Tazewell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495112" start="904" end="916" title="Bland County, Virginia" label="Bland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513950" start="931" end="943" title="Wythe County, Virginia" label="Wythe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502207" start="953" end="967" title="Grayson County, Virginia" label="Grayson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="978" end="995" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="1042" end="1067" title="Jefferson National Forest" label="Jefferson National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923260" start="1077" end="1114" title="Mount Rogers National Recreation Area" label="Mount Rogers National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1431" end="1437" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1539" end="1557" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1666" end="1671" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1679" end="1684" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1688" end="1704" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1712" end="1727" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1735" end="1740" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1753" end="1764" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1829" end="1837" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1841" end="1847" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1975" end="1990" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2802" end="2819" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2916" end="2928" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344240" start="3091" end="3110" title="sustainable tourism" label="sustainable tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373435" start="3368" end="3377" title="Chilhowie, Virginia" label="Chilhowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373794" start="3407" end="3413" title="Marion, Virginia" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374247" start="3439" end="3448" title="Saltville, Virginia" label="Saltville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373794" start="3490" end="3496" title="Marion, Virginia" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373435" start="3529" end="3538" title="Chilhowie, Virginia" label="Chilhowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373794" start="3541" end="3547" title="Marion, Virginia" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374247" start="3550" end="3559" title="Saltville, Virginia" label="Saltville"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="3571" end="3588" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376124" start="3624" end="3631" title="Adwolfe, Virginia" label="Adwolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376326" start="3634" end="3640" title="Atkins, Virginia" label="Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007990" start="3643" end="3651" title="McMullin, Virginia" label="McMullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457340" start="3654" end="3669" title="Seven Mile Ford, Virginia" label="Seven Mile Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374358" start="3672" end="3683" title="Sugar Grove, Virginia" label="Sugar Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712413" start="3726" end="3736" title="Groseclose, Smyth County, Virginia" label="Groseclose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323467" start="3739" end="3750" title="Rich Valley, Virginia" label="Rich Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977475" start="3790" end="3861" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Smyth County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Smyth County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91249" wikidata="Q510947" url="?curid=91249" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia">
<text>Shenandoah County (formerly Dunmore County) is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 44,186. Its county seat is Woodstock. It is part of the Shenandoah Valley region of Virginia.

==History==
The Senedos, possibly an Iroquoian group, are thought to have occupied the area at one time, until they were said to have been slaughtered by the Catawba in the latter 17th century. The name of the Valley, and of the county, is most likely connected with this Native American group. It has also been attributed to General George Washington naming it in honor of John Skenandoa, an Oneida chief from New York who helped gain support of Oneida and Tuscarora warriors to aid the rebel colonists during the American Revolutionary War.

Colonial Governor Gooch formally purchased the entire Shenandoah Valley from the Six Nations of the Iroquois by the Treaty of Lancaster in 1744. The Iroquois had controlled the valley as a hunting ground, but European settlement had begun by that time. During Pontiac&#x27;s War (1763–1766), Shawnee efforts to repel the white intruders reached as far east as the current county.

The county was established in 1772 as &#x27;Dunmore County&#x27; for Virginia Colonial Governor John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore. Woodstock was designated the county seat. Dunmore was Virginia&#x27;s last royal governor, and was forced from office during the American Revolution. During the war (1778), the rebels renamed the county &#x27;Shenandoah.&#x27;

During the Civil War, the Battle of New Market took place in the county on May 15, 1864.

==Geography==
According to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.7%) is water. Fort Valley and the western slopes of the Massanutten Mountain are located within the county boundary.

===Adjacent counties===

* Hardy County, West Virginia – northwest
* Frederick County – northeast
* Warren County – east
* Page County – southeast
* Rockingham County – southwest
===National protected areas===
* Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park (part)
* George Washington National Forest (part)

== Transportation ==
* Shenandoah Valley Commuter Bus Service offers weekday commuter bus service from the Northern Shenandoah Valley including Shenandoah County and Warren County to Northern Virginia and Washington, D.C., including Arlington County and Fairfax County. Origination points in Shenandoah County include Woodstock. Origination points in Warren County include Front Royal and Linden.

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
As of the 2010 United States Census, there were 41,993 people in the county. 93.0% were White, 1.7% Black or African American, 0.5% Asian, 0.2% Native American, 2.8% of some other race and 1.6% of two or more races. 6.1% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race). 26.4% were of American, 22.0% German, 10.3% English and 7.6% Irish ancestry.

===2000 Census===
As of the 2000 United States Census, there were 35,075 people, 14,296 households, and 10,064 families in the county. The population density was . There were 16,709 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.60% White, 1.17% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.35% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.79% from other races, and 0.89% from two or more races. 3.40% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 14,296 households, out of which 28.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.00% were married couples living together, 9.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.60% were non-families. 25.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.86.

The county population contained 22.30% under the age of 18, 6.60% from 18 to 24, 27.60% from 25 to 44, 26.20% from 45 to 64, and 17.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 94.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.80 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $39,173, and the median income for a family was $45,080. Males had a median income of $29,952 versus $22,312 for females. The per capita income for the county was $19,755. About 5.80% of families and 8.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.10% of those under age 18 and 8.80% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==

===Private===

====Secondary institutions====
* Shenandoah Valley Academy
* Massanutten Military Academy

====Primary institutions====
* Shenandoah Valley Adventist Elementary School
* Valley Baptist Christian School

===Public===

====High schools====
* Stonewall Jackson High School (Shenandoah County, Virginia)
* Strasburg High School
* Central High School (Woodstock)

====Elementary and middle schools====

* W.W. Robinson Elementary School (Woodstock)
* Peter Muhlenberg Middle School (Woodstock)
* Ashby-Lee Elementary School (Quicksburg)
* North Fork Middle School (Quicksburg)
* Sandy Hook Elementary School (Strasburg)
* Signal Knob Middle School (Strasburg)
====Other====
* Triplett Tech (Mount Jackson)
* Massanutten Regional Governor&#x27;s School (High School level, in Mount Jackson)

==Communities==

=== Towns ===

* Edinburg (pop. 1,041)
* Mount Jackson (pop. 1,994)
* New Market (pop. 2,155)
* Strasburg (pop. 7,083)
* Toms Brook (pop. 258)
* Woodstock (pop. 5,097)
===Census-designated places===
* Basye (pop. 1,374)
* Bowmans Crossing
* Clary
* Columbia Furnace
* Conicville
* Fishers Hill
* Forestville
* Lebanon Church
* Locust Grove
* Hudson Crossroads
* Maurertown
* Mount Clifton
* Mount Olive
* Orkney Springs (pop. 58)
* Quicksburg
* Saumsville

===Other unincorporated communities===

* Alonzaville
* Bedford
* Borden
* Calvary
* Carmel
* Coleytown
* Detrick
* Hamburg
* Harrisville
* Hawkinstown
* Hepners
* Jadwyn
* Jerome
* Kings Crossing
* Lantz Mill
* Macanie
* Moore&#x27;s Store
* Mount Hermon
* Oak Grove
* Oranda
* Saint Luke
* Silver City
* Swover Creek
* Valley View
* Walkers Chapel
* Wesley Chapel
* Wheatfield
* Williamsville
* Zepp
==Law enforcement==

The Shenandoah County Sheriff&#x27;s Office (SCSO) is the primary law enforcement agency in Shenandoah County. The SCSO was created on May 26, 1772, when the position of High Sheriff position was created; its main duty was to collect taxes.

The SCSO was accredited by the Virginia Law Enforcement Professional Standards Commission between 2006, when it first became accredited, and 2022, when it lost accreditation following an evaluation.

==Politics==
Politically, Shenandoah County is one of the most consistently Republican counties in Virginia, a trend that predates the rest of western Virginia moving away from the Democratic Party. It was first won by a Republican presidential nominee in 1896, and has voted Republican in every presidential election since 1936, and in all but one election since 1920. Nearly solidly Democratic before 1900, the county began voting Republican in statewide elections around the beginning of the 20th century but was a swing county. In the 1920s it became solidly Republican at a statewide level, with the exception of Democratic local hero Harry F. Byrd and his son. This early swing to the GOP came from the county’s rural voters being overwhelmingly German American Republicans, which overpowered the conservative Southern Democrat vote in the county population centers of New Market, Woodstock, and Strasburg. Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1902 was vehemently opposed by the counties of western Virginia due to the impact on racial equality and perceived disenfranchisement of the many poor whites of the region. The once strong Democratic county turned Republican due to this convention, which, according to the Shenandoah Herald, was the “…death knell of the Democratic party in the Valley counties.” The Democrats of the county were of the Jacksonian, small government stock; leading them to vote Republican after the perceived injustice by the state convention in the creation of a new constitution, which was not ratified by popular vote. The county briefly returned to its Southern Democrat roots at the state level during the civil rights movement.

In 1856, Shenandoah County was the only county in Virginia to record votes in favor of the candidate of the newly formed Republican Party, John C. Frémont.










==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Shenandoah County, Virginia
* New Market Airport
* Shenandoah County Sheriff’s Office
* Shenandoah Local History Collection at James Madison University&#x27;s Special Collections
* Shenandoah Valley Miscellaneous Ledgers, Minute Books and Registers collection at James Madison University&#x27;s Special Collections
* The Stone and Holt Weeks Foundation

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="0" end="17" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Shenandoah County"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="28" end="42" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Dunmore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="49" end="55" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="71" end="83" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="87" end="95" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="107" end="132" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="165" end="176" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375409" start="180" end="189" title="Woodstock, Virginia" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="209" end="226" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="264" end="271" title="Senedos" label="Senedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="406" end="413" title="Catawba people" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="520" end="535" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="582" end="599" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534542" start="627" end="636" title="Skenandoa" label="Skenandoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="641" end="647" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="763" end="789" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529611" start="792" end="815" title="Sir William Gooch, 1st Baronet" label="Colonial Governor Gooch"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="873" end="884" title="Iroquois Confederacy" label="Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837117" start="908" end="927" title="Treaty of Lancaster" label="Treaty of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="1052" end="1070" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="1084" end="1091" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="1242" end="1268" title="Colonial Governor of Virginia" label="Virginia Colonial Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="1269" end="1301" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375409" start="1303" end="1312" title="Woodstock, Virginia" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="1332" end="1343" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1432" end="1451" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1542" end="1551" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237043" start="1557" end="1577" title="Battle of New Market" label="Battle of New Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1652" end="1668" title="United States Census Bureau" label="US Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472210" start="1741" end="1752" title="Fort Valley, Virginia" label="Fort Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784529" start="1783" end="1803" title="Massanutten Mountain" label="Massanutten Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q370310" start="1872" end="1899" title="Hardy County, West Virginia" label="Hardy County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="1914" end="1930" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick County"/>
<link wikidata="Q510934" start="1945" end="1958" title="Warren County, Virginia" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513818" start="1968" end="1979" title="Page County, Virginia" label="Page County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513919" start="1994" end="2011" title="Rockingham County, Virginia" label="Rockingham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056652" start="2057" end="2109" title="Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park" label="Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="2119" end="2152" title="George Washington National Forest" label="George Washington National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="2277" end="2294" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q510934" start="2327" end="2340" title="Warren County, Virginia" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="2344" end="2361" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2366" end="2382" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="2394" end="2410" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="2415" end="2429" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375409" start="2479" end="2488" title="Woodstock, Virginia" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q510934" start="2512" end="2525" title="Warren County, Virginia" label="Warren County"/>
<link wikidata="Q508358" start="2534" end="2545" title="Front Royal, Virginia" label="Front Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552259" start="2550" end="2556" title="Linden, Virginia" label="Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2869" end="2894" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="2947" end="2952" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="2959" end="2984" title="African American" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="2991" end="2996" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3003" end="3018" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="3053" end="3073" title="Multiracial American" label="of two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="3085" end="3103" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="3133" end="3141" title="American ethnicity" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="3149" end="3155" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="3163" end="3170" title="English American" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="3180" end="3185" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3225" end="3250" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3336" end="3354" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3463" end="3468" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3476" end="3481" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3485" end="3501" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3509" end="3524" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3532" end="3537" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3545" end="3561" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3574" end="3585" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3650" end="3658" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3662" end="3668" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3796" end="3811" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4602" end="4619" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4715" end="4727" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494180" start="4867" end="4892" title="Shenandoah Valley Academy" label="Shenandoah Valley Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177842" start="4895" end="4923" title="Massanutten Military Academy" label="Massanutten Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619365" start="5074" end="5133" title="Stonewall Jackson High School (Shenandoah County, Virginia)" label="Stonewall Jackson High School (Shenandoah County, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5136" end="5157" title="Strasburg, Virginia#Education" label="Strasburg High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061208" start="5160" end="5191" title="Central High School (Woodstock, Virginia)" label="Central High School (Woodstock)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375136" start="5654" end="5662" title="Edinburg, Virginia" label="Edinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376596" start="5678" end="5691" title="Mount Jackson, Virginia" label="Mount Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374174" start="5707" end="5717" title="New Market, Virginia" label="New Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373665" start="5733" end="5742" title="Strasburg, Virginia" label="Strasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374263" start="5758" end="5768" title="Toms Brook, Virginia" label="Toms Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375409" start="5782" end="5791" title="Woodstock, Virginia" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q578494" start="5838" end="5843" title="Basye, Virginia" label="Basye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951343" start="5859" end="5875" title="Bowmans Crossing, Virginia" label="Bowmans Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127781" start="5878" end="5883" title="Clary, Virginia" label="Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149691" start="5886" end="5902" title="Columbia Furnace, Virginia" label="Columbia Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161041" start="5905" end="5915" title="Conicville, Virginia" label="Conicville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454941" start="5918" end="5930" title="Fishers Hill, Virginia" label="Fishers Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469298" start="5933" end="5944" title="Forestville, Virginia" label="Forestville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511065" start="5947" end="5961" title="Lebanon Church, Virginia" label="Lebanon Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q116687664" start="5964" end="5976" title="Locust Grove, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Locust Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q116824622" start="5979" end="5996" title="Hudson Crossroads, Virginia" label="Hudson Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792787" start="5999" end="6009" title="Maurertown, Virginia" label="Maurertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920177" start="6012" end="6025" title="Mount Clifton, Virginia" label="Mount Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922523" start="6028" end="6039" title="Mount Olive, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Mount Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102961" start="6042" end="6056" title="Orkney Springs, Virginia" label="Orkney Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271770" start="6069" end="6079" title="Quicksburg, Virginia" label="Quicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427422" start="6082" end="6092" title="Saumsville, Virginia" label="Saumsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734524" start="6136" end="6147" title="Alonzaville, Virginia" label="Alonzaville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6150" end="6157" title="Bedford / Readus, Virginia" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6160" end="6166" title="Borden, Virginia" label="Borden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024128" start="6169" end="6176" title="Calvary, Virginia" label="Calvary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043242" start="6179" end="6185" title="Carmel, Virginia" label="Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6188" end="6197" title="Coleytown / Taylortown, Virginia" label="Coleytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265810" start="6200" end="6207" title="Detrick, Virginia" label="Detrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733919" start="6210" end="6217" title="Hamburg, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6220" end="6231" title="Harrisville, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Harrisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712511" start="6234" end="6245" title="Hawkinstown, Virginia" label="Hawkinstown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6248" end="6255" title="Hepners, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Hepners"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6258" end="6264" title="Jadwyn, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Jadwyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6267" end="6273" title="Jerome, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6276" end="6290" title="Kings Crossing, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Kings Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6293" end="6303" title="Lantz Mill, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Lantz Mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6306" end="6313" title="Macanie, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Macanie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6316" end="6334" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s Store, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s Store"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6337" end="6349" title="Mount Hermon, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Mount Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6352" end="6361" title="Oak Grove / Topnot, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Oak Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099458" start="6364" end="6370" title="Oranda, Virginia" label="Oranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401750" start="6373" end="6383" title="Saint Luke, Virginia" label="Saint Luke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6386" end="6397" title="Silver City, Virginia" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6400" end="6412" title="Swover Creek / Hat, Virginia" label="Swover Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6415" end="6426" title="Valley View, Virginia" label="Valley View"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6429" end="6443" title="Walkers Chapel, Virginia" label="Walkers Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6446" end="6459" title="Wesley Chapel, Virginia" label="Wesley Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991860" start="6462" end="6472" title="Wheatfield, Virginia" label="Wheatfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6475" end="6488" title="Williamsville, Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Williamsville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6491" end="6495" title="Zepp,Virginia" label="Zepp"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7035" end="7045" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7140" end="7156" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q699201" start="7215" end="7219" title="1896 United States presidential election" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="7283" end="7287" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="7323" end="7327" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="7599" end="7612" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry F. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268711" start="7617" end="7624" title="Harry F. Byrd Jr." label="his son"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="7711" end="7726" title="German Americans" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="7775" end="7792" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374174" start="7834" end="7844" title="New Market, Virginia" label="New Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375409" start="7846" end="7855" title="Woodstock, Virginia" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373665" start="7861" end="7870" title="Strasburg, Virginia" label="Strasburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230828" start="7872" end="7914" title="Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1902" label="Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="8251" end="8261" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="8313" end="8323" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="8603" end="8624" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q169011" start="8766" end="8781" title="John C. Frémont" label="John C. Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977454" start="8808" end="8884" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Shenandoah County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010031" start="8887" end="8905" title="New Market Airport" label="New Market Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="8908" end="8942" title="Shenandoah County Sheriff’s Office (Virginia)" label="Shenandoah County Sheriff’s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766624" start="9174" end="9209" title="The Stone and Holt Weeks Foundation" label="The Stone and Holt Weeks Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91250" wikidata="Q505834" url="?curid=91250" title="Scott County, Virginia">
<text>Scott County is a county located in the far southwestern part of the U.S. state of Virginia, on the border with Tennessee. As of the 2020 census, the population was 21,576. Its county seat is Gate City. Scott County was formed by an act of the General Assembly on November 24, 1814, from parts of Washington, Lee, and Russell counties and was named for Virginia-born General Winfield Scott. Scott County is part of the Kingsport–Bristol–Bristol, TN-VA Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is a component of the Johnson City–Kingsport–Bristol, TN-VA Combined Statistical Area, commonly known as the &quot;Tri-Cities&quot; region. The current County Administrator is Freda Russell Starnes.

==History==
The area was occupied for thousands of years by indigenous Native Americans. Early Anglo-European settlers found evidence of a former native village at the mouth of Stony Creek on the Clinch River. Bands of Cherokee lived in the area.

In 1769 Thomas McCulloch was the first white settler in what was later organized as the county. Daniel Boone commanded several forts located here in 1774 during Dunmore&#x27;s War, and several more were built in successive years.

Increased settlement of colonial Americans encroached on Cherokee territory. A group known by the settlers as the Chickamauga Cherokee (but they were not a separate tribe), was led by Bob Benge. They had armed confrontations with settlers during the Cherokee–American wars. Benge was killed in 1794, years after the United States gained independence in the American Revolution.

By the time houses were built in the 1790s, the largely Scots-Irish population had increased. They were mostly yeomen farmers who had moved into the backcountry where land was more available. They were served by the Wilderness Road which brought traders to the area. After Scott County was formed in 1814, the first court took place in 1815.

The first public schools were not established here until 1870, years after the American Civil War and during the Reconstruction era in Virginia and other former Confederate states. The wealthy planters of Virginia paid for their own children&#x27;s education but nothing for the rest of the white people.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water. Scott County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of &quot;Greater Appalachia&quot; by Colin Woodard in his book &quot;American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America&quot;.

===Adjacent counties===
* Wise County - north
* Russell County - northeast
* Washington County - east
* Sullivan County, Tennessee - south
* Hawkins County, Tennessee - south
* Hancock County, Tennessee - southwest
* Lee County - west

===National protected area===
* Jefferson National Forest (part)

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
As of the 2010 United States Census, there were 23,177 people living in the county. 97.9% were White, 0.6% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.4% of some other race and 0.7 of two or more races. 1.0% were Hispanic or Latino (of any race).

As of the census of 2000, there were 23,403 people, 9,795 households, and 7,023 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 11,355 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 98.51% White, 0.59% Black or African American, 0.14% Native American, 0.07% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.15% from other races, and 0.52% from two or more races. 0.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 9,795 households, out of which 27.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.40% were married couples living together, 9.00% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.30% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.82.

In the county, 20.60% of the population was under the age of 18, 7.50% was from 18 to 24, 27.30% from 25 to 44, 26.80% from 45 to 64, and 17.80% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.30 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.70 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $27,339, and the median income for a family was $33,163. Males had a median income of $28,328 versus $20,553 for females. The per capita income for the county was $15,073. About 13.00% of families and 16.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.10% of those under age 18 and 20.50% of those age 65 or over.

== Education ==

=== Public secondary schools ===
* Gate City High School, Gate City
* Rye Cove High School, Rye Cove
* Twin Springs High School, Nickelsville

=== Public intermediate schools ===
* Gate City Middle School, Gate City
* Rye Cove Intermediate School, Rye Cove

=== Public primary schools ===
* Dungannon Elementary School, Dungannon
* Duffield Primary School, Duffield
* Fort Blackmore Center, Fort Blackmore
* Hilton Elementary School, Hiltons
* Nickelsville Elementary School, Nickelsville
* Shoemaker Elementary School, Gate City
* Weber City Elementary School, Weber City
* Yuma Elementary School, Yuma

=== Technical schools ===
* Scott County Career and Technical Center, Gate City

=== Private schools ===
* Gate City Christian School (United Pentecostal affiliation), Gate City

=== Former schools ===
* Clinchport Elementary School, Clinchport (Destroyed by flood, 1977)
* Cleveland High School, Yuma (Closed, 1956) (Demolished)
* Dungannon High School, Dungannon (Closed, 1968)
* Fairview School, Fairview (Closed, 1990)
* Hilton High School, Hiltons (Closed, 1956) (Demolished)
* Midway School, Midway (Closed, 1968) (Demolished)
* Manville School, Manville (Closed, 1972)
* Nickelsville High School, Nickelsville (Closed, 1968) (Demolished)
* Old Rye Cove School, Rye Cove (Destroyed by tornado, 1929)
* Old Shoemaker Elementary School, Gate City (Destroyed by fire, 1957)
* Prospect Elementary School, Gate City (Closed, 1965) (Demolished)

==Communities==

===Towns===
* Clinchport
* Duffield
* Dungannon
* Gate City
* Nickelsville
* Weber City

===Unincorporated communities===
* Antioch
* Copper Creek
* Daniel Boone
* Fairview
* Fort Blackmore
* Fulkerson
* Glenita
* Hill Station
* Hiltons
* Kermit
* Ketrontown
* Mabe
* Maces Spring
* Manville
* Midway
* Nottingham
* Pattonsville
* Rye Cove
* Slabtown
* Slant
* Snowflake
* Speers Ferry
* Stanleytown
* Sunbright
* Wadlow Gap
* Wood
* Yuma

==Notable people==
* June Carter Cash
* The Carter Family
* Claude M. Hilton
* Jerry Kilgore
* Riley Franklin McConnell (USS McConnell)
* Mac McClung
* Terry Kilgore

==Politics==










==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Scott County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==
* Scott County, Virginia&#x27;s Official Website
* Scott County, Virginia&#x27;s Public Safety/GIS page
* Scott County Place Names</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505834" start="0" end="12" title="Scott County, Virginia" label="Scott County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="18" end="24" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="44" end="56" title="Southwest Virginia" label="southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="69" end="79" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="83" end="91" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="112" end="121" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="133" end="144" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="177" end="188" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="192" end="201" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="375" end="389" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q241814" start="419" end="428" title="Kingsport, Tennessee" label="Kingsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="429" end="436" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q503366" start="437" end="444" title="Bristol, Virginia" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="446" end="448" title="Tennessee" label="TN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413399" start="452" end="481" title="Kingsport-Bristol-Bristol, TN-VA MSA" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q770571" start="511" end="523" title="Johnson City, Tennessee" label="Johnson City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="549" end="574" title="Combined Statistical Area" label="Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255586" start="604" end="614" title="Tri-Cities, Tennessee" label="Tri-Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101503" start="885" end="897" title="Clinch River" label="Clinch River"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="908" end="916" title="Cherokee people" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="1033" end="1045" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632175" start="1098" end="1116" title="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s War" label="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q472747" start="1282" end="1302" title="Chickamauga Cherokee" label="Chickamauga Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931792" start="1352" end="1361" title="Bob Benge" label="Bob Benge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="1418" end="1440" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="Cherokee–American wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="1603" end="1614" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scots-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2003" end="2021" title="Reconstruction era (United States)" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2227" end="2245" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="2372" end="2403" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371958" start="2503" end="2585" title="American Nations" label="American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q513982" start="2620" end="2631" title="Wise County, Virginia" label="Wise County"/>
<link wikidata="Q507117" start="2642" end="2656" title="Russell County, Virginia" label="Russell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="2671" end="2688" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501918" start="2698" end="2724" title="Sullivan County, Tennessee" label="Sullivan County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q502400" start="2735" end="2760" title="Hawkins County, Tennessee" label="Hawkins County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q495059" start="2771" end="2796" title="Hancock County, Tennessee" label="Hancock County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q514008" start="2811" end="2821" title="Lee County, Virginia" label="Lee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="2862" end="2887" title="Jefferson National Forest" label="Jefferson National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3204" end="3229" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="3289" end="3294" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="3301" end="3326" title="African American" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="3333" end="3348" title="native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="3355" end="3360" title="Asian American" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349057" start="3367" end="3383" title="Pacific Islands American" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="3417" end="3437" title="Multiracial American" label="of two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="3449" end="3467" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3494" end="3500" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3726" end="3731" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3739" end="3744" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3748" end="3764" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3772" end="3787" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3795" end="3800" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3808" end="3824" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3837" end="3848" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3913" end="3921" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3925" end="3931" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4058" end="4073" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4869" end="4886" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4984" end="4996" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526980" start="5126" end="5147" title="Gate City High School" label="Gate City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="5149" end="5158" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073421" start="5183" end="5191" title="Rye Cove, Virginia" label="Rye Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858304" start="5194" end="5218" title="Twin Springs High School" label="Twin Springs High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376653" start="5220" end="5232" title="Nickelsville, Virginia" label="Nickelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="5297" end="5306" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073421" start="5339" end="5347" title="Rye Cove, Virginia" label="Rye Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q383910" start="5411" end="5420" title="Dungannon, Virginia" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373555" start="5448" end="5456" title="Duffield, Virginia" label="Duffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470819" start="5482" end="5496" title="Fort Blackmore, Virginia" label="Fort Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764765" start="5525" end="5532" title="Hiltons, Virginia" label="Hiltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376653" start="5567" end="5579" title="Nickelsville, Virginia" label="Nickelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="5611" end="5620" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376608" start="5653" end="5663" title="Weber City, Virginia" label="Weber City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5690" end="5694" title="Yuma, Virginia" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="5766" end="5775" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164722" start="5831" end="5849" title="United Pentecostal" label="United Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="5864" end="5873" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373864" start="5930" end="5940" title="Clinchport, Virginia" label="Clinchport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5993" end="5997" title="Yuma, Virginia" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q383910" start="6051" end="6060" title="Dungannon, Virginia" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6095" end="6103" title="Fairview, Scott County, Virginia" label="Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764765" start="6141" end="6148" title="Hiltons, Virginia" label="Hiltons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6194" end="6200" title="Midway, Scott County, Virginia" label="Midway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6248" end="6256" title="Manville, Virginia" label="Manville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376653" start="6300" end="6312" title="Nickelsville, Virginia" label="Nickelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073421" start="6364" end="6372" title="Rye Cove, Virginia" label="Rye Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562461" start="6374" end="6394" title="1929 Rye Cove tornado outbreak" label="Destroyed by tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="6437" end="6446" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="6503" end="6512" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373864" start="6573" end="6583" title="Clinchport, Virginia" label="Clinchport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373555" start="6586" end="6594" title="Duffield, Virginia" label="Duffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q383910" start="6597" end="6606" title="Dungannon, Virginia" label="Dungannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373690" start="6609" end="6618" title="Gate City, Virginia" label="Gate City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376653" start="6621" end="6633" title="Nickelsville, Virginia" label="Nickelsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376608" start="6636" end="6646" title="Weber City, Virginia" label="Weber City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6683" end="6690" title="Antioch, Scott County, Virginia" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6693" end="6705" title="Copper Creek, Scott County, Virginia" label="Copper Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6708" end="6720" title="Daniel Boone, Virginia" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6723" end="6731" title="Fairview, Scott County, Virginia" label="Fairview"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470819" start="6734" end="6748" title="Fort Blackmore, Virginia" label="Fort Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879928" start="6751" end="6760" title="Fulkerson, Virginia" label="Fulkerson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6763" end="6770" title="Glenita, Virginia" label="Glenita"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6773" end="6785" title="Hill Station, Virginia" label="Hill Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764765" start="6788" end="6795" title="Hiltons, Virginia" label="Hiltons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6798" end="6804" title="Kermit, Virginia" label="Kermit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6807" end="6817" title="Ketrontown, Virginia" label="Ketrontown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23136276" start="6820" end="6824" title="Mabe, Virginia" label="Mabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723262" start="6827" end="6839" title="Maces Spring, Virginia" label="Maces Spring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6842" end="6850" title="Manville, Virginia" label="Manville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6853" end="6859" title="Midway, Scott County, Virginia" label="Midway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6862" end="6872" title="Nottingham, Scott County, Virginia" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19987467" start="6875" end="6887" title="Pattonsville, Virginia" label="Pattonsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073421" start="6890" end="6898" title="Rye Cove, Virginia" label="Rye Cove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6901" end="6909" title="Slabtown, Scott County, Virginia" label="Slabtown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6912" end="6917" title="Slant, Virginia" label="Slant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548616" start="6920" end="6929" title="Snowflake, Virginia" label="Snowflake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6932" end="6944" title="Speers Ferry, Virginia" label="Speers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23138218" start="6947" end="6958" title="Stanleytown, Scott County, Virginia" label="Stanleytown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6961" end="6970" title="Sunbright, Virginia" label="Sunbright"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6973" end="6983" title="Wadlow Gap, Virginia" label="Wadlow Gap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6986" end="6990" title="Wood, Virginia" label="Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6993" end="6997" title="Yuma, Virginia" label="Yuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233253" start="7020" end="7036" title="June Carter Cash" label="June Carter Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="7039" end="7056" title="The Carter Family" label="The Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128944" start="7059" end="7075" title="Claude M. Hilton" label="Claude M. Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183877" start="7078" end="7091" title="Jerry Kilgore (politician)" label="Jerry Kilgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871640" start="7094" end="7118" title="Riley Franklin McConnell" label="Riley Franklin McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7871640" start="7120" end="7133" title="USS McConnell" label="USS McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q47272609" start="7137" end="7148" title="Mac McClung" label="Mac McClung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704615" start="7151" end="7164" title="Terry Kilgore" label="Terry Kilgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977424" start="7204" end="7275" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Scott County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Scott County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91251" wikidata="Q502230" url="?curid=91251" title="Salem, Virginia">
<text>Salem is an independent city in the U.S. commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 25,346. It is the county seat of Roanoke County, although the two are separate jurisdictions. The Bureau of Economic Analysis combines the city of Salem with Roanoke County, which surrounds both Salem and the neighboring City of Roanoke, for statistical purposes. Salem has its own courthouse and sheriff&#x27;s office, but shares a jail with Roanoke County, which is located in the Roanoke County Courthouse complex in Salem. The Roanoke County Sheriff&#x27;s Office and Roanoke County Department of Social Services are also located within Salem, though the county administrative offices are located in unincorporated Cave Spring.

Roanoke College is located in the city. Salem is also the home to a minor league baseball team, the Salem Red Sox.

== History ==
The earliest history of Salem exists as archaeological evidence of Native American tribes from as far back as 8,000 BCE until the middle of the 18th century. Europeans first explored the area of Salem in 1671, when the Siouan-speaking Totero people had a village nearby. Explorers Thomas Batts and Robert Fallam gave the area its first recorded name: Totero Town, after this tribe, who supplied them with a guide to help with further exploration. Fort Lewis, named for General Andrew Lewis, of what is now Roanoke County, was built west of the town in 1752. Salem&#x27;s Andrew Lewis Middle School (formerly Andrew Lewis High School) was named after General Lewis. Salem became a small settlement serving travelers on the Great Road (roughly the same path followed by US-11 and later Interstate 81 today) and was officially founded in 1802, receiving its charter in 1806. It is not known why the town was named Salem; the most widely accepted explanation is that it was named to honor William Bryan, a prominent citizen, who had moved from Salem, New Jersey.

Salem was attacked twice by the Union Army during the American Civil War, but its Salem Flying Artillery is said to have fired the last Confederate shot at Appomattox Court House prior to Robert E. Lee&#x27;s surrender.

One of the city&#x27;s four elementary schools is named after African American scientist G. W. Carver. Before integration, this was the high school for African Americans in Salem.

Salem annexed South Salem in 1953 and also an eastern tract in 1960, giving it a population of 16,058 – making it Virginia&#x27;s largest &quot;town&quot; at the time. Salem officially became a city on December 31, 1967, to avoid the possibility of annexation into the city of Roanoke. Per the Virginia constitution, it was separated from Roanoke County. However, it remains the official county seat, although the Roanoke County Administrative Building is located in the Cave Spring area of the county.

Salem has been the home of two colleges. In 1847, the Virginia Institute, a boy&#x27;s preparatory school, moved to Salem from Staunton. It received a college charter in 1853 and was renamed Roanoke College for the Roanoke Valley. The college is located in central Salem, one block north of Main Street. Roanoke Women&#x27;s College, later named Elizabeth College, operated between 1912 and 1922. The college burned in late 1921 and did not reopen. Like Roanoke College, it was affiliated with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. The Elizabeth College campus is now the site of residence halls and athletic fields that belong to Roanoke College.

Salem is home to the Salem Red Sox, a Class-A affiliate to the Boston Red Sox.

The Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, the NCAA Division III Football Championship game was held at Salem Football Stadium between 1993 and 2016. Salem&#x27;s success in holding that event led the NCAA to also move the NCAA Men&#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship and NCAA Division III women&#x27;s volleyball tournament to the Salem Civic Center and the NCAA Division II softball tournament and the NCAA Division III softball tournament to the James I. Moyer Sports Complex.

In August 2007, the Salem Football Stadium also hosted the Southwestern Virginia Educational Classic. This game is played annually in the Roanoke Valley and consists of two football teams from Historically Black Colleges and Universities. The city hosts several other statewide, regional, and national sporting events at its facilities. These events are attracted by the city&#x27;s hospitality, modern facilities and overall support. Salem High School, is also known for its athletic programs, particularly the football team which has won ten state championships since 1996, and also the forensics team, which has won eighteen consecutive state championships.

==Geography==
Salem is located at (37.286895, -80.055836).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.7%) is water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 24,747 people, 9,954 households, and 6,539 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 10,403 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 91.88% White, 5.88% African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.97% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.25% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.83% of the population.

There were 9,954 households, out of which 28.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.9% were married couples living together, 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.3% were non-families. 29.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.84.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 20.9% under the age of 18, 11.7% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 16.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 85.5 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $38,997, and the median income for a family was $47,174. Males had a median income of $32,472 versus $23,193 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,091. About 4.3% of families and 6.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 8.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Government ==





Salem is governed by a five-member council. The council elects a mayor and vice mayor from among its members. The members of council are Mayor Renée Ferris Turk, Vice Mayor James “Jim” Wallace III, Byron “Randy” Foley, William “Bill” Jones, and Hunter H. Holliday.

Day-to-day operations are run by the City Manager, Chris Dorsey.

==Notable people==

*Mark Byington, current head men&#x27;s basketball coach at Vanderbilt University
*Leslie D. Carter, U.S. Army major general.
*Dennis Haley, former NFL Linebacker for the Baltimore Ravens, New York Jets, and San Francisco 49ers.
*John McAfee, computer programmer and businessman.
*Marcus Parker, former Virginia Tech and NFL, Cincinnati Bengals running back.
*Ruth Painter Randall, biographer
*Billy Sample, former Major League baseball outfielder for the Texas Rangers, New York Yankees and Atlanta Braves; broadcaster and writer
*David C. Shanks, US Army major general
*Leander J. Shaw, Jr., Chief Justice of the Florida Supreme Court, was born in Salem.
*Adam Ward, photojournalist killed on live television while reporting for WDBJ7.

==See also==
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Virginia

==References==
==External links==
*
*Roanoke College
* Community history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502230" start="0" end="5" title="Salem, Virginia" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="12" end="28" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="57" end="65" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="77" end="88" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="127" end="138" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q513968" start="142" end="156" title="Roanoke County, Virginia" label="Roanoke County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="207" end="234" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="338" end="345" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374740" start="728" end="739" title="Cave Spring, Virginia" label="Cave Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339779" start="742" end="757" title="Roanoke College" label="Roanoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="810" end="831" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404166" start="842" end="855" title="Salem Red Sox" label="Salem Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="988" end="991" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="1091" end="1097" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757507" start="1107" end="1113" title="Tutelo people" label="Totero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757757" start="1349" end="1361" title="Andrew Lewis (soldier)" label="Andrew Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q513968" start="1378" end="1392" title="Roanoke County" label="Roanoke County"/>
<link wikidata="Q407534" start="1640" end="1645" title="US-11" label="US-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q94877" start="1656" end="1669" title="Interstate 81" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088317" start="1912" end="1929" title="Salem, New Jersey" label="Salem, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="1964" end="1974" title="Union Army" label="Union Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1986" end="2004" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744652" start="2088" end="2110" title="Appomattox Court House National Historical Park" label="Appomattox Court House"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="2120" end="2133" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q296898" start="2242" end="2254" title="George Washington Carver" label="G. W. Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374740" start="2805" end="2816" title="Cave Spring, Virginia" label="Cave Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="2965" end="2973" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339779" start="3029" end="3044" title="Roanoke College" label="Roanoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339810" start="3053" end="3067" title="Roanoke Valley" label="Roanoke Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362613" start="3184" end="3201" title="Elizabeth College, Virginia" label="Elizabeth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="3336" end="3374" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339779" start="3475" end="3490" title="Roanoke College" label="Roanoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404166" start="3514" end="3527" title="Salem Red Sox" label="Salem Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="3556" end="3570" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952917" start="3577" end="3649" title="NCAA Division III national football championship" label="Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, the NCAA Division III Football Championship game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404099" start="3662" end="3684" title="Salem Football Stadium" label="Salem Football Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="3759" end="3763" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653937" start="3781" end="3833" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship" label="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division III Basketball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154204" start="3838" end="3890" title="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball tournament" label="NCAA Division III women&amp;#x27;s volleyball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404070" start="3898" end="3916" title="Salem Civic Center" label="Salem Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971698" start="3925" end="3961" title="NCAA Division II softball tournament" label="NCAA Division II softball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971720" start="3970" end="4007" title="NCAA Division III softball tournament" label="NCAA Division III softball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q128483371" start="4015" end="4044" title="James I. Moyer Sports Complex" label="James I. Moyer Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404117" start="4482" end="4499" title="Salem High School (Salem, Virginia)" label="Salem High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163284" start="4636" end="4645" title="Individual events (speech)" label="forensics"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4786" end="4813" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5162" end="5168" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="5267" end="5285" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5392" end="5397" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5405" end="5421" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5429" end="5444" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5452" end="5457" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5465" end="5481" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5494" end="5505" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5541" end="5549" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5553" end="5559" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5713" end="5728" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6527" end="6544" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6636" end="6648" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209540" start="7096" end="7109" title="Mark Byington" label="Mark Byington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103322" start="7124" end="7145" title="Vanderbilt Commodores men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="7155" end="7176" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q117246010" start="7178" end="7194" title="Leslie D. Carter" label="Leslie D. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258476" start="7222" end="7234" title="Dennis Haley" label="Dennis Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q45864" start="7325" end="7336" title="John McAfee" label="John McAfee"/>
<link wikidata="Q56865780" start="7455" end="7475" title="Ruth Painter Randall" label="Ruth Painter Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913277" start="7489" end="7501" title="Billy Sample" label="Billy Sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q39929558" start="7627" end="7642" title="David C. Shanks" label="David C. Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q21761439" start="7667" end="7687" title="Leander J. Shaw, Jr." label="Leander J. Shaw, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3001105" start="7710" end="7731" title="Florida Supreme Court" label="Florida Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873020" start="7753" end="7762" title="Adam Ward (murder victim)" label="Adam Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063309" start="7848" end="7912" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Salem, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91252" wikidata="Q507117" url="?curid=91252" title="Russell County, Virginia">
<text>Russell County () is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 25,781. Its county seat is Lebanon.

==History==

On January 2, 1786, Russell County was established from a section of Washington County. L.P. Summers, a Washington County historian later wrote, &quot;Washington County lost a great extent of country and many valuable citizens when Russell County was formed.&quot; The county was named for Culpeper County native Colonel William Russell.

The first court met in May 1786 in the Castle&#x27;s Woods settlement (present-day Castlewood) in the house of William Robinson. Later, a new place was built to house the County Seat. The structure used as a courthouse still stands, and is referred to as &quot;The Old Courthouse.&quot; The present Courthouse, located in Lebanon, has been in use since 1874. Once vast, Russell County was split several times, giving rise to Tazewell County, Lee County, Scott County, Wise County, Buchanan County and Dickenson County.

Among Russell County&#x27;s most famous politicians were Daniel Boone, Governor H.C. Stuart, State Representative Boyd C. Fugate and State Senator Macon M. Long. The largest cattle farm East of the Mississippi River, and one of the oldest corporations in the country, Stuart Land &amp; Cattle, remains headquartered at Rosedale in Russell County.

Much of the county&#x27;s history has been documented by Clinch Valley Times, the Tazewell Republican, the Abingdon Virginian, and the Lebanon News.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water. Russell County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of &quot;Greater Appalachia&quot; by Colin Woodard in his book &quot;American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America&quot;.

The county has the fourth highest peak in Virginia, Beartown Mountain.

===Adjacent counties===
* Dickenson County – northwest
* Buchanan County – north
* Tazewell County – east
* Smyth County – southeast
* Washington County – south
* Scott County – southwest
* Wise County – west

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
The 2010 census showed a population decline, with only 28,897 residing in Russell County.

As of the census of 2000, there were 30,308 people, 11,789 households, and 8,818 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 13,191 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.07% White, 3.08% Black or African American, 0.11% Native American, 0.05% Asian, 0.28% from other races, and 0.40% from two or more races. 0.78% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 11,789 households, out of which 31.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.90% were married couples living together, 10.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.20% were non-families. 23.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.87.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 21.20% under the age of 18, 8.60% from 18 to 24, 30.90% from 25 to 44, 26.00% from 45 to 64, and 13.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females there were 102.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 103.30 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $26,834, and the median income for a family was $31,491. Males had a median income of $26,950 versus $20,108 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,863. About 13.00% of families and 16.30% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.30% of those under age 18 and 16.90% of those age 65 or over.

== Education ==

=== Public high schools ===
* Castlewood High School, Castlewood
* Honaker High School, Honaker
* Lebanon High School, Lebanon

==Fire and rescue services==
* Castlewood Fire and Rescue
* Lebanon Lifesaving Crew
* New Garden Rescue
* Lebanon Fire
* Honaker Fire
* Dante Rescue
* Dante Fire
* Copper Creek Fire
* Belfast Fire
* Saint Paul Fire
* Cleveland Volunteer Fire Department
* Cleveland Lifesaving Crew

==Communities==
===Towns===
* Cleveland
* Honaker
* Lebanon
* St. Paul (partially in Wise County)

===Census-designated places===
* Castlewood
* Dante (partially in Dickenson County)
* Raven (mostly in Tazewell County)

===Other unincorporated communities===
* Belfast
* Carbo
* Copper Creek
* Dickensonville
* Drill
* Hamlin
* Rosedale
* Sun
* Swords Creek
* Willis
* Hansonville

==Politics==










==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Russell County, Virginia
* Russell County History

==References==
==External links==
* Russell County, Virginia&#x27;s Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q507117" start="0" end="14" title="Russell County, Virginia" label="Russell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="23" end="29" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="61" end="69" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="81" end="92" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="125" end="136" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375466" start="140" end="147" title="Lebanon, Virginia" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="232" end="249" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="453" end="468" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017849" start="484" end="499" title="William Russell (Virginia)" label="William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374586" start="585" end="595" title="Castlewood, Virginia" label="Castlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263854" start="763" end="781" title="Old Russell County Courthouse" label="The Old Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q506197" start="927" end="942" title="Tazewell County, Virginia" label="Tazewell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q514008" start="944" end="954" title="Lee County, Virginia" label="Lee County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505834" start="956" end="968" title="Scott County, Virginia" label="Scott County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513982" start="970" end="981" title="Wise County, Virginia" label="Wise County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495181" start="983" end="998" title="Buchanan County, Virginia" label="Buchanan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495169" start="1003" end="1019" title="Dickenson County, Virginia" label="Dickenson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="1079" end="1091" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q749220" start="1102" end="1113" title="Henry Carter Stuart" label="H.C. Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005801" start="1136" end="1150" title="Boyd C. Fugate" label="Boyd C. Fugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368154" start="1341" end="1349" title="Rosedale, Virginia" label="Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1551" end="1569" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="1698" end="1729" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371958" start="1829" end="1911" title="American Nations" label="American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876800" start="1972" end="1989" title="Beartown Mountain" label="Beartown Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q495169" start="2018" end="2034" title="Dickenson County, Virginia" label="Dickenson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495181" start="2049" end="2064" title="Buchanan County, Virginia" label="Buchanan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506197" start="2075" end="2090" title="Tazewell County, Virginia" label="Tazewell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q378896" start="2100" end="2112" title="Smyth County, Virginia" label="Smyth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q510915" start="2127" end="2144" title="Washington County, Virginia" label="Washington County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505834" start="2155" end="2167" title="Scott County, Virginia" label="Scott County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513982" start="2182" end="2193" title="Wise County, Virginia" label="Wise County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2604" end="2610" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2712" end="2730" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2839" end="2844" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2852" end="2857" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2861" end="2877" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2885" end="2900" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2908" end="2913" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2926" end="2937" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3002" end="3010" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3014" end="3020" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3148" end="3163" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3976" end="3993" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4091" end="4103" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050667" start="4228" end="4250" title="Castlewood High School" label="Castlewood High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374586" start="4252" end="4262" title="Castlewood, Virginia" label="Castlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891995" start="4265" end="4284" title="Honaker High School" label="Honaker High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374035" start="4286" end="4293" title="Honaker, Virginia" label="Honaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511097" start="4296" end="4315" title="Lebanon High School (Virginia)" label="Lebanon High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375466" start="4317" end="4324" title="Lebanon, Virginia" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375342" start="4638" end="4647" title="Cleveland, Virginia" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374035" start="4650" end="4657" title="Honaker, Virginia" label="Honaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375466" start="4660" end="4667" title="Lebanon, Virginia" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989543" start="4670" end="4678" title="St. Paul, Virginia" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q513982" start="4693" end="4704" title="Wise County, Virginia" label="Wise County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374586" start="4740" end="4750" title="Castlewood, Virginia" label="Castlewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221139" start="4753" end="4758" title="Dante, Virginia" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q495169" start="4773" end="4789" title="Dickenson County, Virginia" label="Dickenson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374713" start="4793" end="4798" title="Raven, Virginia" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q506197" start="4810" end="4825" title="Tazewell County, Virginia" label="Tazewell County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4879" end="4884" title="Carbo, Virginia" label="Carbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168720" start="4887" end="4899" title="Copper Creek, Virginia" label="Copper Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514042" start="4902" end="4916" title="Dickensonville, Virginia" label="Dickensonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153578" start="4919" end="4924" title="Drill, Virginia" label="Drill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4927" end="4933" title="Hamlin, Virginia" label="Hamlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368154" start="4936" end="4944" title="Rosedale, Virginia" label="Rosedale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4947" end="4950" title="Sun, Virginia" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659343" start="4953" end="4965" title="Swords Creek, Virginia" label="Swords Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022007" start="4968" end="4974" title="Willis, Russell County, Virginia" label="Willis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4977" end="4988" title="Hansonville, Russell County, Virginia" label="Hansonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063302" start="5028" end="5101" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Russell County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Russell County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91253" wikidata="Q513919" url="?curid=91253" title="Rockingham County, Virginia">
<text>Rockingham County is a county located in the U.S. state of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 83,757. Its county seat is the independent city of Harrisonburg.

Along with Harrisonburg, Rockingham County forms the Harrisonburg, VA, Metropolitan Statistical Area. It is also home of the Rockingham County Baseball League.

==History==
Settlement of the county began in 1727, when Adam Miller (Mueller) staked out a claim on the south fork of the Shenandoah River, near the line that now divides Rockingham County from Page County. On a trip through eastern Virginia, the German-born Miller had heard reports about a lush valley to the west which had been discovered by Governor Alexander Spotswood&#x27;s legendary Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition, and then moved his family down from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. In 1741, Miller purchased , including a large lithia spring, near Elkton, Virginia, and lived on this property for the remainder of his life.

Much-increased settlement of this portion of the Colony of Virginia by Europeans began in the 1740s and 1750s. Standing between the Tidewater and Piedmont regions to the east in Virginia and the Shenandoah Valley and the area beyond (known in old Virginia as the &quot;Transmountaine&quot;) were the Blue Ridge Mountains. Rather than cross such a formidable physical barrier, most early settlers came southerly up the valley across the Potomac River from Maryland and Pennsylvania. Many followed the Great Wagon Trail, also known as the Valley Pike (U.S. Route 11 in modern times).

Rockingham County was established in 1778 from Augusta County. Harrisonburg was named as the county seat and incorporated as a town in 1780. Harrisonburg was incorporated as a city in 1916 and separated from Rockingham County (all cities in Virginia are independent of any county), but it remains the county seat.

The county is named for Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham, a British statesman (1730–1782). He was Prime Minister of Great Britain twice, and a keen supporter of constitutional rights for the colonists. During his first term, he brought about the repeal of the Stamp Act of 1765, reducing the tax burden on the colonies. Appointed again in 1782, upon taking office, he backed the claim for the independence of the Thirteen Colonies, initiating an end to British involvement in the American Revolutionary War. However, he died after only 14 weeks in office. By 1778, it was unusual to honor British officials in Virginia, fighting for its independence. The same year, immediately to the north of Rockingham County, Dunmore County, named for Virginia&#x27;s last Royal Governor, John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, an unpopular figure, was renamed. The new name, Shenandoah County, used a Native American name. However, long their political supporter in the British Parliament, the Marquess of Rockingham was a popular figure with the citizens of the new United States. Also named in his honor were Rockingham County, New Hampshire, Rockingham County, North Carolina, and the City of Rockingham in Richmond County, North Carolina.

Rockingham County is the birthplace of Thomas Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s father. In 1979 when the Adolf Coors Brewing Company came to Rockingham County it caused an uproar; some citizens thought it would corrupt the morals of the area while others wanted the new jobs.

In 2018, a series of strikes and protests were held in Dayton&#x27;s Cargill plant.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water. It is the third-largest county in Virginia by land area. Large portions of the county fall within the Shenandoah National Park to the east and George Washington National Forest to the west, and therefore are subject to development restrictions. The county stretches west to east from the peaks of easternmost Allegheny Mountains to the peaks of the Blue Ridge Mountains, encompassing the entire width of the Shenandoah Valley. Rockingham is bisected by another geographic formation, Massanutten Mountain, which stretches from just east of Harrisonburg, VA to a few miles southwest of Front Royal, VA in Warren County, VA. Massanutten Mountain splits the central Shenandoah Valley, as the German River and the North Fork Shenandoah River flow on its western side and the South Fork flows on the eastern.

===Adjacent counties===

===National protected areas===
* George Washington National Forest (part)
* Shenandoah National Park (part)

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===Census 2000===
As of the census of 2000, 67,725 people, 25,355 households, and 18,889 families resided in the county. The population density was . There were 27,328 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 96.58% White, 1.36% Black or African American, 0.13% Native American, 0.29% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.90% from other races, and 0.73% from two or more races. About 3.28% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of 25,355 households, 32.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.40% were married couples living together, 7.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.50% were not families. About 21.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.02.

In the county, the population was distributed as 24.60% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 28.90% from 25 to 44, 23.80% from 45 to 64, and 13.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.00 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 94.30 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $40,748, and for a family was $46,262. Males had a median income of $30,618 versus $21,896 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,795. About 5.30% of families and 8.20% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.10% of those under age 18 and 9.70% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
===Colleges and universities===
* Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Virginia
* Eastern Mennonite University, Harrisonburg, Virginia
* James Madison University, Harrisonburg, Virginia

==Transportation==

=== Railroads ===
Rockingham County is principally served by Norfolk Southern Railway, a (major) Class 1 railroad and additionally, by the Shenandoah Valley Railroad, a short-line railroad.

===Highways===

Interstate 81 runs north–south and meets east–west Interstate 64 near Staunton to the south in adjacent Augusta County.

There are three major Primary State Highways in the county. (A primary road provides service which is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, high operating speed and high mobility importance). Interstate highways and primary highways in Virginia are maintained by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT).

These primary state highways are:
* U.S. Route 11 a north–south roadway which Interstate 81 parallels, U.S. Route 11 follows an old Native American trail, later known as the Valley Turnpike.
* U.S. Route 33 is an east–west road which extends from a mountain ridge border with West Virginia across the Shenandoah Valley through Harrisonburg and Elkton. East of there, it climbs the western slope of the Blue Ridge Mountains to reach Swift Run Gap, a wind gap located at an elevation of . The bucolic Skyline Drive, which is part of Shenandoah National Park, has an entry point at Swift Run Gap and the Appalachian Trail also passes through nearby. The mountain ridge forms the border between Rockingham County and Greene County. (U.S. 33 continues east to Richmond).
* U.S. Route 340 in a north–south roadway which runs along the western slope of the Blue Ridge Mountains in the Valley.

Secondary roads: As provided by the Byrd Road Act of 1932, secondary roads in Rockingham County are also maintained by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT).

==Communities==

(Population according to the 2020 United States census)
=== Independent city ===
Since becoming an independent city in 1916, Harrisonburg is no longer politically located in Rockingham County, despite its status as the county seat.

==Law enforcement==
The Rockingham County Sheriff&#x27;s Office (RCSO) is the primary law enforcement agency in Rockingham County, and also serves Harrisonburg. The agency is currently headed by Sheriff Bryan F. Hutcheson. On May 26, 2005, the RCSO was accredited by the Virginia Law Enforcement Professional Standards Commission (VLEPSC). On September 9, 2021, the VLEPSC Executive Board granted re-accreditation status to the Rockingham County Sheriff&#x27;s Office.

Since the establishment of the Rockingham County Sheriff&#x27;s Office, two deputies have died while on duty.
==Politics==











==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockingham County, Virginia
* Rockingham County Fair
* Rockingham County Sheriff&#x27;s Office

==References==
==External links==

* Rockingham County
* Harrisonburg-Rockingham Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q513919" start="0" end="17" title="Rockingham County, Virginia" label="Rockingham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="23" end="29" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="45" end="55" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="59" end="67" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="79" end="90" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="123" end="134" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="142" end="158" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q511935" start="162" end="174" title="Harrisonburg, Virginia" label="Harrisonburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666217" start="248" end="277" title="Harrisonburg metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355384" start="302" end="335" title="Rockingham County Baseball League" label="Rockingham County Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257852" start="395" end="406" title="Adam Miller (pioneer)" label="Adam Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q777907" start="461" end="477" title="Shenandoah River" label="Shenandoah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q513818" start="533" end="544" title="Page County, Virginia" label="Page County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="572" end="580" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108" start="693" end="712" title="Alexander Spotswood" label="Alexander Spotswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422513" start="730" end="772" title="Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition" label="Knights of the Golden Horseshoe Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q142369" start="810" end="840" title="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375226" start="908" end="924" title="Elkton, Virginia" label="Elkton, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="1034" end="1052" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="1117" end="1126" title="Tidewater region of Virginia" label="Tidewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191545" start="1131" end="1139" title="Piedmont region of Virginia" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="1180" end="1197" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="1285" end="1305" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="1440" end="1448" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="1453" end="1465" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600130" start="1485" end="1502" title="Great Wagon Road" label="Great Wagon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912166" start="1522" end="1533" title="Valley Pike" label="Valley Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818350" start="1535" end="1548" title="U.S. Route 11 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q285625" start="1615" end="1629" title="Augusta County, Virginia" label="Augusta County"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="1661" end="1672" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="1907" end="1959" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="2163" end="2180" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act of 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="2316" end="2333" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2383" end="2409" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="2616" end="2630" title="Dunmore County, Virginia" label="Dunmore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q336639" start="2679" end="2711" title="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore" label="John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q510947" start="2761" end="2778" title="Shenandoah County, Virginia" label="Shenandoah County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="2856" end="2874" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q54438" start="2997" end="3029" title="Rockingham County, New Hampshire" label="Rockingham County, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q505422" start="3031" end="3064" title="Rockingham County, North Carolina" label="Rockingham County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029773" start="3074" end="3092" title="Rockingham, North Carolina" label="City of Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q507870" start="3096" end="3127" title="Richmond County, North Carolina" label="Richmond County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525359" start="3169" end="3183" title="Thomas Lincoln" label="Thomas Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316617" start="3426" end="3446" title="2018 Cargill strike" label="strikes and protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375454" start="3460" end="3466" title="Dayton, Virginia" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036056" start="3474" end="3481" title="Cargill" label="Cargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3521" end="3539" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784529" start="4234" end="4254" title="Massanutten Mountain" label="Massanutten Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551217" start="4300" end="4312" title="German River" label="German River"/>
<link wikidata="Q777907" start="4321" end="4348" title="North Fork Shenandoah River" label="North Fork Shenandoah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q777907" start="4382" end="4392" title="South Fork Shenandoah River" label="South Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="4474" end="4507" title="George Washington National Forest" label="George Washington National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="4517" end="4541" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4827" end="4833" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="4924" end="4942" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5051" end="5056" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5064" end="5069" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5073" end="5089" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5097" end="5112" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5120" end="5125" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5133" end="5149" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5162" end="5173" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5244" end="5252" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5256" end="5262" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="5369" end="5384" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6181" end="6198" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6294" end="6306" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966838" start="6430" end="6449" title="Bridgewater College" label="Bridgewater College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278210" start="6475" end="6503" title="Eastern Mennonite University" label="Eastern Mennonite University"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="6530" end="6554" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="6661" end="6685" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="6697" end="6713" title="Class 1 railroad" label="Class 1 railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494185" start="6739" end="6765" title="Shenandoah Valley Railroad (short-line)" label="Shenandoah Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="6769" end="6788" title="short-line railroad" label="short-line railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447647" start="6807" end="6820" title="Interstate 81 in Virginia" label="Interstate 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446385" start="6858" end="6871" title="Interstate 64 in Virginia" label="Interstate 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q502250" start="6877" end="6885" title="Staunton, Virginia" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508279" start="6950" end="6972" title="List of primary state highways in Virginia" label="Primary State Highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934247" start="7244" end="7281" title="Virginia Department of Transportation" label="Virginia Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818350" start="7327" end="7340" title="U.S. Route 11 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="7423" end="7438" title="Native Americans of the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912166" start="7465" end="7480" title="Valley Turnpike" label="Valley Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818418" start="7484" end="7497" title="U.S. Route 33 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="7567" end="7580" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="7693" end="7713" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656084" start="7723" end="7736" title="Swift Run Gap" label="Swift Run Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972304" start="7740" end="7748" title="wind gap (geographical feature)" label="wind gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q911052" start="7790" end="7803" title="Skyline Drive" label="Skyline Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="7822" end="7846" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q620648" start="7892" end="7909" title="Appalachian Trail" label="Appalachian Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q163097" start="8004" end="8017" title="Greene County, Virginia" label="Greene County"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="8046" end="8054" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852458" start="8059" end="8073" title="U.S. Route 340 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 340"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004230" start="8214" end="8227" title="Byrd Road Act" label="Byrd Road Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="8394" end="8419" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="8464" end="8480" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q511935" start="8490" end="8502" title="Harrisonburg, Virginia" label="Harrisonburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="8584" end="8595" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063288" start="9217" end="9293" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockingham County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockingham County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355386" start="9296" end="9318" title="Rockingham County Fair" label="Rockingham County Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q513919" start="9321" end="9360" title="Rockingham County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Rockingham County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91254" wikidata="Q513805" url="?curid=91254" title="Rockbridge County, Virginia">
<text>Rockbridge County is a county in the Shenandoah Valley on the western edge of the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 22,650. Its county seat is the city of Lexington. Rockbridge County completely surrounds the independent cities of Buena Vista and Lexington. The Bureau of Economic Analysis combines the independent cities of Buena Vista and Lexington with Rockbridge County for statistical purposes.

==History==
The Monacan Indian Nation inhabited the area for thousands of years before American settlers arrived in the area. Multiple mounds were constructed near the modern towns of Rockbridge and Rockbridge Baths.

Rockbridge County was established in October 1777, from parts of now neighboring Augusta and Botetourt counties, and the first county elections were held in May 1778. Rockbridge County was named for Natural Bridge, a notable landmark in the southern portion of the county. Rockbridge County was formed during an act of assembly intended to reduce the distance that residents had to travel to the nearest courthouse, and to ensure trials were held fairly, and among neighbors rather than strangers. The first court session in Rockbridge County was held at the home of Samuel Wallace on April 7, 1778. 

Because there were many subsistence farmers in the area, residents held fewer enslaved African Americans in Rockbridge County than in many parts of Virginia. The anti-slavery movement was stronger in Rockbridge than in the Tidewater or Piedmont regions. Several faculty members at Washington College (now Washington and Lee University) vigorously opposed slavery. 

But, many of the wealthiest residents of Rockbridge County were planters and large landowners; they held numerous slaves and bequeathed them as property to their widows and children, or gave them as wedding gifts.

Cyrus McCormick grew up on his father&#x27;s plantation in Raphine. His father held 41 enslaved African Americans and was a major property owner in real estate as well. McCormick invented the mechanical reaper near Steele&#x27;s Tavern at the northern end of the county.

==Geography==
The hilly terrain of Rockbridge County was densely wooded in the eighteenth century. Its more level areas have now been cleared and turned to agriculture. The county is bordered by high ridges along its NW and SE borders, with the crests running NE-SW. The terrain&#x27;s highest point ( ASL) is Rocky Mountain on its SE border with Amherst County.
According to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water. Rockbridge County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of &quot;Greater Appalachia&quot; by Colin Woodard in his book &quot;American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America&quot;.

===Adjacent counties===

* Bath County – northwest
* Augusta County – northeast
* Nelson County – east
* Amherst County – southeast
* Bedford County – south
* Botetourt County – southwest
* Alleghany County – west


===National protected areas===

* Blue Ridge Parkway (part)
* George Washington National Forest (part)
* Jefferson National Forest (part)
* United States National Radio Quiet Zone (part)
===Major highways===
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the 2000 United States census, there were 20,808 people, 8,486 households, and 6,075 families in the county. The population density was . There were 9,550 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.42% White, 2.97% Black or African American, 0.26% Native American, 0.44% Asian, 0.12% from other races, and 0.78% from two or more races. 0.58% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 8,486 households, out of which 29.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.50% were married couples living together, 9.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.40% were non-families. 23.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.90% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.84.

The county population contained 22.20% under the age of 18, 7.90% from 18 to 24, 27.20% from 25 to 44, 27.10% from 45 to 64, and 15.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 100.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.00 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $36,035, and the median income for a family was $41,324. Males had a median income of $28,217 versus $19,946 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,356. About 6.60% of families and 9.60% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.40% of those under age 18 and 9.60% of those age 65 or over.

==Media==
* The Rockbridge Advocate (monthly magazine)
* The News-Gazette (weekly newspaper)
* The Rockbridge Report (weekly broadcast and website, Washington &amp; Lee University journalism students)
* EyeOnVirginia.com (videos and interviews with Rockbridge area newsmakers)
* Radio - 96.7 3WZ and 100.3 The Big Dawg

==Communities==
The independent cities of Buena Vista and Lexington (incorporated 1892 and 1966 respectively) are enclaves within the boundaries of Rockbridge County, and are not a part of the county. Lexington is the county seat, despite its independent status, and shares three constitutional officers with Rockbridge County: Sheriff, Clerk of the Circuit Court and Commonwealth&#x27;s Attorney. Buena Vista does not share constitutional officers with either Rockbridge County or Lexington.

===Towns===
* Glasgow
* Goshen

===Census-designated places===
* East Lexington
* Fairfield

===Unincorporated communities===

* Brownsburg
* Collierstown
* Gilmore Mills
* Marlbrook 
* Mechanicsville
* Natural Bridge
* Natural Bridge Station
* Raphine
* Rockbridge Baths
* Steeles Tavern
* Vesuvius
==Notable people==

* Robert H. Adams (1792–1832), born in Rockbridge County, United States Senator from Mississippi
* John Allen (1771–1813), born in Rockbridge County, a Kentucky political figure and colonel of militia, killed in the War of 1812
* Adam Rankin Alexander (1781–1848), born in Rockbridge County, United States Congressman from Tennessee
* Archibald Alexander (1772–1851), born in Rockbridge County, noted Presbyterian clergyman, president of Hampden–Sydney College, and one of the founders of and the first professor of Princeton Theological Seminary
* Samuel Dale (1772–1841), born in Rockbridge County, American frontiersman, known as the &quot;Daniel Boone of Alabama&quot; and a veteran of the Creek War of 1813–1814
* Pierre Daura (1896–1976), Spanish/Catalan painter, naturalized American who lived in the county
*Jessie Benton Frémont (1824–1902), born in Rockbridge County, American writer and political activist
* William C. Friday (1920–2012), born in Raphine, Rockbridge County, American educator, public servant and President of University of North Carolina
* Sam Houston (1793–1863), born in Rockbridge County, the only person to serve as governor of two U.S. states (Texas and Tennessee), victor at the Battle of San Jacinto, President of the Republic of Texas, and United States Senator
* Stonewall Jackson (1824–1863), one-time resident of Lexington, the county seat; General in the Confederate Army
* Robert E. Lee (1807–1870), former commander of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia in the U.S. Civil War; after the war he accepted the presidency of Washington and Lee University (then Washington College)
* Sally Mann (born 1951), celebrated American photographer
* Charlie Manuel (born 1944), American and Japanese baseball player and World Series champion manager of the Philadelphia Phillies
* Rick Mast (born 1957), Fan-favorite Winston Cup and Busch Series driver
* Cyrus McCormick (1809–1884), inventor of the reaper
* Miles Poindexter (1868-1946), Graduate of Fancy Hill Academy and Washington &amp; Lee University, United States Senator from Washington, 1920 Republican Primary Presidential Candidate, United States Ambassador to Peru, Author, retired to and died in his home in Arnolds Valley
* Samuel B. Pryor (1816–1866), First mayor of Dallas, TX. He was in the first class of the Virginia Military Institute.
* Archibald Roane (1759/60–1819), lived in Rockbridge County in the 1780s, Governor of Tennessee
* William Taylor (missionary) -- Nineteenth century missionary who spread and/or introduced Methodism around the world through his missionary work.
* A. Willis Robertson (1887–1971), U.S. Senator, father of Pat Robertson
* Pat Robertson (1930–2023), American minister, university president and media figure
* Archibald Stuart (1795–1855), founder of Phi Beta Kappa
* Cy Twombly (1928–2011), born in Lexington, American expatriate painter
==Politics==










==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockbridge County, Virginia
* FOR Swimming

==References==
==External links==
* Rockbridge County Tourism Website – dining, lodging, events and attractions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q513805" start="0" end="17" title="Rockbridge County, Virginia" label="Rockbridge County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="23" end="29" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="37" end="54" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="82" end="94" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="98" end="106" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="118" end="129" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="162" end="173" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="189" end="198" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="243" end="261" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q503014" start="265" end="276" title="Buena Vista, Virginia" label="Buena Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="296" end="323" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513658" start="451" end="472" title="Monacan Indian Nation" label="Monacan Indian Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q285625" start="734" end="741" title="Augusta County, Virginia" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q495132" start="746" end="755" title="Botetourt County, Virginia" label="Botetourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500978" start="852" end="866" title="Natural Bridge (Virginia)" label="Natural Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="1560" end="1589" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q719357" start="1836" end="1851" title="Cyrus McCormick" label="Cyrus McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367947" start="2039" end="2045" title="reaper" label="reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713257" start="2051" end="2071" title="Steeles Tavern, Virginia" label="Steele&amp;#x27;s Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355864" start="2418" end="2432" title="Rocky Mountain (Rockbridge County, Virginia)" label="Rocky Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q470626" start="2455" end="2469" title="Amherst County, Virginia" label="Amherst County"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2488" end="2504" title="United States Census Bureau" label="US Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="2636" end="2667" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371958" start="2767" end="2849" title="American Nations" label="American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q495165" start="2885" end="2896" title="Bath County, Virginia" label="Bath County"/>
<link wikidata="Q285625" start="2911" end="2925" title="Augusta County, Virginia" label="Augusta County"/>
<link wikidata="Q515150" start="2940" end="2953" title="Nelson County, Virginia" label="Nelson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q470626" start="2963" end="2977" title="Amherst County, Virginia" label="Amherst County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494216" start="2992" end="3006" title="Bedford County, Virginia" label="Bedford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495132" start="3017" end="3033" title="Botetourt County, Virginia" label="Botetourt County"/>
<link wikidata="Q488675" start="3048" end="3064" title="Alleghany County, Virginia" label="Alleghany County"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="3108" end="3126" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="3136" end="3169" title="George Washington National Forest" label="George Washington National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="3179" end="3204" title="Jefferson National Forest" label="Jefferson National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740167" start="3214" end="3253" title="United States National Radio Quiet Zone" label="United States National Radio Quiet Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3559" end="3584" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3668" end="3686" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3794" end="3799" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3807" end="3812" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3816" end="3832" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3840" end="3855" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3863" end="3868" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3881" end="3892" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3957" end="3965" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3969" end="3975" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4102" end="4117" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4908" end="4925" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5021" end="5033" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="5449" end="5467" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q503014" start="5471" end="5482" title="Buena Vista, Virginia" label="Buena Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="5487" end="5496" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="5543" end="5551" title="Enclave and exclave" label="enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376339" start="5937" end="5944" title="Glasgow, Virginia" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376263" start="5947" end="5953" title="Goshen, Virginia" label="Goshen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328826" start="5988" end="6002" title="East Lexington, Virginia" label="East Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255792" start="6005" end="6014" title="Fairfield, Rockbridge County, Virginia" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976708" start="6052" end="6062" title="Brownsburg, Virginia" label="Brownsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275617" start="6065" end="6077" title="Collierstown, Virginia" label="Collierstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712360" start="6080" end="6093" title="Gilmore Mills, Virginia" label="Gilmore Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771696" start="6096" end="6105" title="Marlbrook, Virginia" label="Marlbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804627" start="6109" end="6123" title="Mechanicsville, Rockbridge County, Virginia" label="Mechanicsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980446" start="6126" end="6140" title="Natural Bridge, Virginia" label="Natural Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980455" start="6143" end="6165" title="Natural Bridge Station, Virginia" label="Natural Bridge Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294085" start="6168" end="6175" title="Raphine, Virginia" label="Raphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354978" start="6178" end="6194" title="Rockbridge Baths, Virginia" label="Rockbridge Baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713257" start="6197" end="6211" title="Steeles Tavern, Virginia" label="Steeles Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923524" start="6214" end="6222" title="Vesuvius, Virginia" label="Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355162" start="6245" end="6260" title="Robert H. Adams" label="Robert H. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="6301" end="6322" title="United States Senator" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="6328" end="6339" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218759" start="6342" end="6352" title="John Allen (soldier)" label="John Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="6459" end="6470" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q350673" start="6473" end="6494" title="Adam Rankin Alexander" label="Adam Rankin Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6535" end="6560" title="United States Congressman" label="United States Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="6566" end="6575" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786199" start="6578" end="6597" title="Archibald Alexander" label="Archibald Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="6644" end="6656" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="6657" end="6666" title="clergyman" label="clergyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="6681" end="6703" title="Hampden–Sydney College" label="Hampden–Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q909696" start="6759" end="6789" title="Princeton Theological Seminary" label="Princeton Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471095" start="6792" end="6803" title="Samuel Dale" label="Samuel Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="6937" end="6946" title="Creek War" label="Creek War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742552" start="6962" end="6974" title="Pierre Daura" label="Pierre Daura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187624" start="7059" end="7080" title="Jessie Benton Frémont" label="Jessie Benton Frémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006307" start="7162" end="7179" title="William C. Friday" label="William C. Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191202" start="7280" end="7308" title="University of North Carolina" label="University of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="7311" end="7322" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7420" end="7425" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="7430" end="7439" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="7456" end="7477" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="7496" end="7513" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="7519" end="7540" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q216124" start="7543" end="7560" title="Stonewall Jackson" label="Stonewall Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q501761" start="7595" end="7604" title="Lexington, Virginia" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="7638" end="7649" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="7657" end="7670" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="7708" end="7719" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7753" end="7767" title="U.S. Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="7813" end="7842" title="Washington and Lee University" label="Washington and Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q256434" start="7871" end="7881" title="Sally Mann" label="Sally Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960869" start="7930" end="7944" title="Charlie Manuel" label="Charlie Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="8000" end="8012" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="8037" end="8058" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331569" start="8061" end="8070" title="Rick Mast" label="Rick Mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="8097" end="8108" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="Winston Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q645499" start="8113" end="8125" title="NASCAR Xfinity Series" label="Busch Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q719357" start="8135" end="8150" title="Cyrus McCormick" label="Cyrus McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934657" start="8189" end="8205" title="Miles Poindexter" label="Miles Poindexter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8231" end="8249" title="Fancy Hill Academy" label="Fancy Hill Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785291" start="8254" end="8285" title="Washington &amp;amp; Lee University" label="Washington &amp;amp; Lee University"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8287" end="8300" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570643" start="8301" end="8308" title="Senator" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="8314" end="8324" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8331" end="8341" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q121998" start="8388" end="8398" title="Ambassador" label="Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="8402" end="8406" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980455" start="8451" end="8465" title="Natural Bridge Station, Virginia" label="Arnolds Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410837" start="8468" end="8483" title="Samuel B. Pryor" label="Samuel B. Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="8512" end="8522" title="Dallas" label="Dallas, TX"/>
<link wikidata="Q785357" start="8557" end="8584" title="Virginia Military Institute" label="Virginia Military Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q358264" start="8588" end="8603" title="Archibald Roane" label="Archibald Roane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589724" start="8661" end="8682" title="Governor of Tennessee" label="Governor of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019207" start="8685" end="8712" title="William Taylor (missionary)" label="William Taylor (missionary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331714" start="8833" end="8852" title="Absalom Willis Robertson" label="A. Willis Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="8890" end="8903" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="8906" end="8919" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q194749" start="8992" end="9008" title="Archibald Stuart" label="Archibald Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="9033" end="9047" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q159566" start="9050" end="9060" title="Cy Twombly" label="Cy Twombly"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="9102" end="9112" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977343" start="9159" end="9235" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockbridge County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rockbridge County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9238" end="9250" title="FOR Swimming" label="FOR Swimming"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91255" wikidata="Q513968" url="?curid=91255" title="Roanoke County, Virginia">
<text>Roanoke County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, its population was 96,929. Its county seat is Salem, but the county administrative offices are located in the census-designated place of Cave Spring.

Roanoke County is part of the Roanoke, Virginia Metropolitan Statistical Area, and is in the Roanoke Region of Virginia.

The independent cities of Roanoke and Salem (incorporated as such in 1884 and 1968 respectively) are inside the boundaries of Roanoke County but are not a part of the county. The town of Vinton is the only municipality in the county. While significant areas of the county are rural and mountainous, most residents live in the suburbs near Roanoke and Salem in the Roanoke Valley.

==History==

The county was established by an act of the Virginia Legislature on March 30, 1838, from the southern part of Botetourt County. It was named for the Roanoke River, which in turn was derived from a Native American term for money. Additional territory was transferred to Roanoke County from Montgomery County in 1845. Salem was originally the county seat. When Salem became an independent city, by agreement with the county the Roanoke County Courthouse remained in Salem and the two localities share a jail. However, the county administrative offices were moved to the Cave Spring District.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water.

===Districts===
The county is governed by a Board of Supervisors with one representative elected from each of the five magisterial districts: Catawba, Cave Spring, Hollins, Vinton, and Windsor Hills. Vinton is an incorporated town with an elected town council and town manager.

===Adjacent counties and cities===
* Bedford County, Virginia - East
* Botetourt County, Virginia - Northeast
* Craig County, Virginia - Northwest
* Floyd County, Virginia - Southwest
* Franklin County, Virginia - Southeast
* Montgomery County, Virginia - West
* Roanoke, Virginia - Center (enclave)
* Salem, Virginia - Center (enclave)

===Nationally protected areas===
* Blue Ridge Parkway (part)
* Jefferson National Forest (part)

===Major highways===
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 85,778 people, 34,686 households, and 24,696 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 36,121 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.63% White, 3.35% Black or African American, 0.12% Native American, 1.61% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.39% from other races, and 0.89% from two or more races. 1.04% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 34,686 households, out of which 30.60% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.90% were married couples living together, 8.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.80% were non-families. 25.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 2.88.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 22.70% under the age of 18, 6.60% from 18 to 24, 27.50% from 25 to 44, 27.20% from 45 to 64, and 15.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females there were 89.60 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 85.30 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $47,689, and the median income for a family was $56,450. Males had a median income of $39,126 versus $26,690 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,637. About 2.70% of families and 4.50% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.20% of those under age 18 and 4.90% of those age 65 or over.

==Politics==
Roanoke County is a strongly Republican county in Presidential elections. It was one of the first places in Virginia to turn Republican. No Democrat has carried the county since Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944, and Jimmy Carter in 1976 is the last Democrat to garner even 40 percent of the vote.

However, the independent city of Roanoke itself is more Democratic than the county&#x27;s average and has voted for Democrats in each presidential election since 1988.











==Education==
There are five public high schools in Roanoke County:
* Cave Spring
* Glenvar
* Hidden Valley
* Northside
* William Byrd

Hollins University, a member of the Old Dominion Athletic Conference, is in northern Roanoke County, near the Botetourt County border. Roanoke College, also a member of the Old Dominion Athletic Conference, is in the independent city of Salem within the boundaries of Roanoke County; Salem&#x27;s former county courthouse on Main Street is now a college academic building.

==Notable people==

Notable sports figures from Roanoke County include Tiki Barber, Ronde Barber, J. J. Redick, all of whom attended and graduated from Cave Spring High School in Southwest Roanoke County.

==Communities==
===Town===
* Vinton

===Census-designated places===
* Cave Spring
* Glenvar
* Hollins

===Other unincorporated communities===

* Back Creek
* Bent Mountain
* Bonsack
* Catawba
* Clearbrook
* Fort Lewis
* Hanging Rock
* Masons Cove
* Mount Pleasant
* Oak Grove
* Penn Forest
* Poages Mill

Many of these CDPs and unincorporated areas have mailing addresses in the cities of Roanoke and Salem.

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Roanoke County, Virginia

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Jack, George S. and Edward Boyle Jacobs, (1912). &quot;History of Roanoke County,&quot; Stone.

==External links==
* County of Roanoke Homepage
* The Roanoke Valley Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q513968" start="0" end="14" title="Roanoke County, Virginia" label="Roanoke County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="24" end="30" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="38" end="48" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="56" end="80" title="Commonwealth of Virginia" label="Commonwealth of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="92" end="103" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="136" end="147" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q502230" start="151" end="156" title="Salem, Virginia" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374740" start="242" end="253" title="Cave Spring, Virginia" label="Cave Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="286" end="293" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339817" start="304" end="333" title="Roanoke metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339799" start="349" end="375" title="Roanoke Region" label="Roanoke Region of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="382" end="400" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q502230" start="416" end="421" title="Salem, Virginia" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376732" start="565" end="571" title="Vinton, Virginia" label="Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="704" end="711" title="suburbs" label="suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339810" start="742" end="756" title="Roanoke Valley" label="Roanoke Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="816" end="836" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q495132" start="882" end="898" title="Botetourt County, Virginia" label="Botetourt County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="921" end="934" title="Roanoke River" label="Roanoke River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="969" end="984" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="1061" end="1078" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896147" start="1198" end="1223" title="Old Roanoke County Courthouse" label="Roanoke County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1394" end="1412" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175507" start="1530" end="1550" title="Board of Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626849" start="1605" end="1626" title="List of magisterial districts in Virginia" label="magisterial districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q494216" start="1802" end="1826" title="Bedford County, Virginia" label="Bedford County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495132" start="1836" end="1862" title="Botetourt County, Virginia" label="Botetourt County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495185" start="1877" end="1899" title="Craig County, Virginia" label="Craig County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502031" start="1914" end="1936" title="Floyd County, Virginia" label="Floyd County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502036" start="1951" end="1976" title="Franklin County, Virginia" label="Franklin County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="1991" end="2018" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="2028" end="2045" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502230" start="2067" end="2082" title="Salem, Virginia" label="Salem, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="2138" end="2156" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="2166" end="2191" title="Jefferson National Forest" label="Jefferson National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2498" end="2504" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2607" end="2625" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2734" end="2739" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2747" end="2752" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2756" end="2772" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2780" end="2795" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2803" end="2808" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2816" end="2832" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2845" end="2856" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2921" end="2929" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2933" end="2939" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3067" end="3082" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3893" end="3910" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4006" end="4018" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="4136" end="4146" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="4247" end="4255" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="4285" end="4306" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217574" start="4310" end="4314" title="United States presidential election in Virginia, 1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="4320" end="4332" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148365" start="4336" end="4340" title="1976 United States presidential election in Virginia" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4415" end="4431" title="Independent city (United States)#Virginia" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="4435" end="4442" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="4564" end="4568" title="1988 United States Presidential Election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054920" start="4651" end="4662" title="Cave Spring High School (Roanoke, Virginia)" label="Cave Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569379" start="4665" end="4672" title="Glenvar High School" label="Glenvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752002" start="4675" end="4688" title="Hidden Valley High School (Roanoke, Virginia)" label="Hidden Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059740" start="4691" end="4700" title="Northside High School (Roanoke, Virginia)" label="Northside"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006239" start="4703" end="4715" title="William Byrd High School" label="William Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060410" start="4717" end="4735" title="Hollins University" label="Hollins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083859" start="4753" end="4785" title="Old Dominion Athletic Conference" label="Old Dominion Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q495132" start="4827" end="4843" title="Botetourt County" label="Botetourt County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339779" start="4852" end="4867" title="Roanoke College" label="Roanoke College"/>
<link wikidata="Q638847" start="5162" end="5173" title="Tiki Barber" label="Tiki Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377886" start="5175" end="5187" title="Ronde Barber" label="Ronde Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q369109" start="5189" end="5201" title="JJ Redick" label="J. J. Redick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054920" start="5243" end="5266" title="Cave Spring High School (Roanoke, Virginia)" label="Cave Spring High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376732" start="5326" end="5332" title="Vinton, Virginia" label="Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374740" start="5367" end="5378" title="Cave Spring, Virginia" label="Cave Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474860" start="5381" end="5388" title="Glenvar, Virginia" label="Glenvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375071" start="5391" end="5398" title="Hollins, Virginia" label="Hollins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5442" end="5452" title="Back Creek, Virginia" label="Back Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890336" start="5455" end="5468" title="Bent Mountain, Virginia" label="Bent Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942569" start="5471" end="5478" title="Bonsack, Virginia" label="Bonsack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051595" start="5481" end="5488" title="Catawba, Virginia" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5491" end="5501" title="Clearbrook, Roanoke County, Virginia" label="Clearbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471511" start="5504" end="5514" title="Fort Lewis, Virginia" label="Fort Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648009" start="5517" end="5529" title="Hanging Rock, Virginia" label="Hanging Rock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5532" end="5543" title="Masons Cove, Virginia" label="Masons Cove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5546" end="5560" title="Mount Pleasant, Virginia" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5563" end="5572" title="Oak Grove, Roanoke County, Virginia" label="Oak Grove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5575" end="5586" title="Penn Forest, Virginia" label="Penn Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5589" end="5600" title="Poages Mill, Virginia" label="Poages Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977331" start="5721" end="5794" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Roanoke County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Roanoke County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91256" wikidata="Q651476" url="?curid=91256" title="Computer and network surveillance">
<text>Computer and network surveillance is the monitoring of computer activity and data stored locally on a computer or data being transferred over computer networks such as the Internet. This monitoring is often carried out covertly and may be completed by governments, corporations, criminal organizations, or individuals. It may or may not be legal and may or may not require authorization from a court or other independent government agencies. Computer and network surveillance programs are widespread today and almost all Internet traffic can be monitored.

Surveillance allows governments and other agencies to maintain social control, recognize and monitor threats or any suspicious or abnormal activity, and prevent and investigate criminal activities. With the advent of programs such as the Total Information Awareness program, technologies such as high-speed surveillance computers and biometrics software, and laws such as the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, governments now possess an unprecedented ability to monitor the activities of citizens.

Many civil rights and privacy groups, such as Reporters Without Borders, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and the American Civil Liberties Union, have expressed concern that increasing surveillance of citizens will result in a mass surveillance society, with limited political and/or personal freedoms. Such fear has led to numerous lawsuits such as &quot;Hepting v. AT&amp;T&quot;. The hacktivist group Anonymous has hacked into government websites in protest of what it considers &quot;draconian surveillance&quot;.

==Network surveillance==

The vast majority of computer surveillance involves the monitoring of personal data and traffic on the Internet. For example, in the United States, the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act mandates that all phone calls and broadband internet traffic (emails, web traffic, instant messaging, etc.) be available for unimpeded, real-time monitoring by Federal law enforcement agencies.

Packet capture (also known as &quot;packet sniffing&quot;) is the monitoring of data traffic on a network. Data sent between computers over the Internet or between any networks takes the form of small chunks called packets, which are routed to their destination and assembled back into a complete message. A packet capture appliance intercepts these packets, so that they may be examined and analyzed. Computer technology is needed to perform traffic analysis and sift through intercepted data to look for important/useful information. Under the Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act, all U.S. telecommunications providers are required to install such packet capture technology so that Federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies are able to intercept all of their customers&#x27; broadband Internet and voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) traffic. These technologies can be used both by the intelligence and for illegal activities.

There is far too much data gathered by these packet sniffers for human investigators to manually search through. Thus, automated Internet surveillance computers sift through the vast amount of intercepted Internet traffic, filtering out, and reporting to investigators those bits of information which are &quot;interesting&quot;, for example, the use of certain words or phrases, visiting certain types of web sites, or communicating via email or chat with a certain individual or group. Billions of dollars per year are spent by agencies such as the Information Awareness Office, NSA, and the FBI, for the development, purchase, implementation, and operation of systems which intercept and analyze this data, extracting only the information that is useful to law enforcement and intelligence agencies.

Similar systems are now used by Iranian Security dept. to more easily distinguish between peaceful citizens and terrorists. All of the technology has been allegedly installed by German Siemens AG and Finnish Nokia.

The Internet&#x27;s rapid development has become a primary form of communication. More people are potentially subject to Internet surveillance. There are advantages and disadvantages to network monitoring. For instance, systems described as &quot;Web 2.0&quot; have greatly impacted modern society. Tim O’ Reilly, who first explained the concept of &quot;Web 2.0&quot;, stated that Web 2.0 provides communication platforms that are &quot;user generated&quot;, with self-produced content, motivating more people to communicate with friends online. However, Internet surveillance also has a disadvantage. One researcher from Uppsala University said &quot;Web 2.0 surveillance is directed at large user groups who help to hegemonically produce and reproduce surveillance by providing user-generated (self-produced) content. We can characterize Web 2.0 surveillance as mass self-surveillance&quot;. Surveillance companies monitor people while they are focused on work or entertainment. Yet, employers themselves also monitor their employees. They do so in order to protect the company&#x27;s assets and to control public communications but most importantly, to make sure that their employees are actively working and being productive. This can emotionally affect people; this is because it can cause emotions like jealousy. A research group states &quot;...we set out to test the prediction that feelings of jealousy lead to &#x27;creeping&#x27; on a partner through Facebook, and that women are particularly likely to engage in partner monitoring in response to jealousy&quot;. The study shows that women can become jealous of other people when they are in an online group.

Virtual assistants have become socially integrated into many people&#x27;s lives. Currently, virtual assistants such as Amazon&#x27;s Alexa or Apple&#x27;s Siri cannot call 911 or local services. They are constantly listening for command and recording parts of conversations that will help improve algorithms. If the law enforcement is able to be called using a virtual assistant, the law enforcement would then be able to have access to all the information saved for the device. The device is connected to the home&#x27;s internet, because of this law enforcement would be the exact location of the individual calling for law enforcement. While the virtual assistance devices are popular, many debates the lack of privacy. The devices are listening to every conversation the owner is having. Even if the owner is not talking to a virtual assistant, the device is still listening to the conversation in hopes that the owner will need assistance, as well as to gather data.

==Corporate surveillance==
Corporate surveillance of computer activity is very common. The data collected is most often used for marketing purposes or sold to other corporations, but is also regularly shared with government agencies. It can be used as a form of business intelligence, which enables the corporation to better tailor their products and/or services to be desirable by their customers. The data can also be sold to other corporations so that they can use it for the aforementioned purpose, or it can be used for direct marketing purposes, such as targeted advertisements, where ads are targeted to the user of the search engine by analyzing their search history and emails (if they use free webmail services), which are kept in a database.

Such type of surveillance is also used to establish business purposes of monitoring, which may include the following:
* Preventing misuse of resources. Companies can discourage unproductive personal activities such as online shopping or web surfing on company time. Monitoring employee performance is one way to reduce unnecessary network traffic and reduce the consumption of network bandwidth.
* Promoting adherence to policies. Online surveillance is one means of verifying employee observance of company networking policies.
* Preventing lawsuits. Firms can be held liable for discrimination or employee harassment in the workplace. Organizations can also be involved in infringement suits through employees that distribute copyrighted material over corporate networks.
* Safeguarding records. Federal legislation requires organizations to protect personal information. Monitoring can determine the extent of compliance with company policies and programs overseeing information security. Monitoring may also deter unlawful appropriation of personal information, and potential spam or viruses.
* Safeguarding company assets. The protection of intellectual property, trade secrets, and business strategies is a major concern. The ease of information transmission and storage makes it imperative to monitor employee actions as part of a broader policy.
The second component of prevention is determining the ownership of technology resources. The ownership of the firm&#x27;s networks, servers, computers, files, and e-mail should be explicitly stated. There should be a distinction between an employee&#x27;s personal electronic devices, which should be limited and proscribed, and those owned by the firm.

For instance, Google Search stores identifying information for each web search. An IP address and the search phrase used are stored in a database for up to 18 months. Google also scans the content of emails of users of its Gmail webmail service in order to create targeted advertising based on what people are talking about in their personal email correspondences. Google is, by far, the largest Internet advertising agency—millions of sites place Google&#x27;s advertising banners and links on their websites in order to earn money from visitors who click on the ads. Each page containing Google advertisements adds, reads, and modifies &quot;cookies&quot; on each visitor&#x27;s computer. These cookies track the user across all of these sites and gather information about their web surfing habits, keeping track of which sites they visit, and what they do when they are on these sites. This information, along with the information from their email accounts, and search engine histories, is stored by Google to use to build a profile of the user to deliver better-targeted advertising.

The United States government often gains access to these databases, either by producing a warrant for it, or by simply asking. The Department of Homeland Security has openly stated that it uses data collected from consumer credit and direct marketing agencies for augmenting the profiles of individuals that it is monitoring.

==Malicious software==
In addition to monitoring information sent over a computer network, there is also a way to examine data stored on a computer&#x27;s hard drive, and to monitor the activities of a person using the computer. A surveillance program installed on a computer can search the contents of the hard drive for suspicious data, can monitor computer use, collect passwords, and/or report back activities in real-time to its operator through the Internet connection. A keylogger is an example of this type of program. Normal keylogging programs store their data on the local hard drive, but some are programmed to automatically transmit data over the network to a remote computer or Web server.

There are multiple ways of installing such software. The most common is remote installation, using a backdoor created by a computer virus or trojan. This tactic has the advantage of potentially subjecting multiple computers to surveillance. Viruses often spread to thousands or millions of computers, and leave &quot;backdoors&quot; which are accessible over a network connection, and enable an intruder to remotely install software and execute commands. These viruses and trojans are sometimes developed by government agencies, such as CIPAV and Magic Lantern. More often, however, viruses created by other people or spyware installed by marketing agencies can be used to gain access through the security breaches that they create.

Another method is &quot;cracking&quot; into the computer to gain access over a network. An attacker can then install surveillance software remotely. Servers and computers with permanent broadband connections are most vulnerable to this type of attack. Another source of security cracking is employees giving out information or users using brute force tactics to guess their password.

One can also physically place surveillance software on a computer by gaining entry to the place where the computer is stored and install it from a compact disc, floppy disk, or thumbdrive. This method shares a disadvantage with hardware devices in that it requires physical access to the computer. One well-known worm that uses this method of spreading itself is Stuxnet.

==Social network analysis==
One common form of surveillance is to create maps of social networks based on data from social networking sites as well as from traffic analysis information from phone call records such as those in the NSA call database, and internet traffic data gathered under CALEA. These social network &quot;maps&quot; are then data mined to extract useful information such as personal interests, friendships and affiliations, wants, beliefs, thoughts, and activities.

Many U.S. government agencies such as the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) are currently investing heavily in research involving social network analysis. The intelligence community believes that the biggest threat to the U.S. comes from decentralized, leaderless, geographically dispersed groups. These types of threats are most easily countered by finding important nodes in the network, and removing them. To do this requires a detailed map of the network.

Jason Ethier of Northeastern University, in his study of modern social network analysis, said the following of the Scalable Social Network Analysis Program developed by the Information Awareness Office:

==Monitoring from a distance==
With only commercially available equipment, it has been shown that it is possible to monitor computers from a distance by detecting the radiation emitted by the CRT monitor. This form of computer surveillance, known as TEMPEST, involves reading electromagnetic emanations from computing devices in order to extract data from them at distances of hundreds of meters.

IBM researchers have also found that, for most computer keyboards, each key emits a slightly different noise when pressed. The differences are individually identifiable under some conditions, and so it&#x27;s possible to log key strokes without actually requiring logging software to run on the associated computer.

In 2015, lawmakers in California passed a law prohibiting any investigative personnel in the state to force businesses to hand over digital communication without a warrant, calling this Electronic Communications Privacy Act. At the same time in California, state senator Jerry Hill introduced a bill making law enforcement agencies to disclose more information on their usage and information from the Stingray phone tracker device. As the law took into effect in January 2016, it will now require cities to operate with new guidelines in relation to how and when law enforcement use this device. Some legislators and those holding a public office have disagreed with this technology because of the warrantless tracking, but now if a city wants to use this device, it must be heard by a public hearing. Some cities have pulled out of using the StingRay such as Santa Clara County.

And it has also been shown, by Adi Shamir et al., that even the high frequency noise emitted by a CPU includes information about the instructions being executed.

==Policeware and govware==
In German-speaking countries, spyware used or made by the government is sometimes called &quot;govware&quot;. Some countries like Switzerland and Germany have a legal framework governing the use of such software. Known examples include the Swiss MiniPanzer and MegaPanzer and the German R2D2 (trojan).

Policeware is a software designed to police citizens by monitoring the discussion and interaction of its citizens. Within the U.S., Carnivore was the first incarnation of secretly installed e-mail monitoring software installed in Internet service providers&#x27; networks to log computer communication, including transmitted e-mails. Magic Lantern is another such application, this time running in a targeted computer in a trojan style and performing keystroke logging. CIPAV, deployed by the FBI, is a multi-purpose spyware/trojan.

The Clipper Chip, formerly known as MYK-78, is a small hardware chip that the government can install into phones, designed in the nineties. It was intended to secure private communication and data by reading voice messages that are encoded and decode them. The Clipper Chip was designed during the Clinton administration to, “…protect personal safety and national security against a developing information anarchy that fosters criminals, terrorists and foreign foes.” The government portrayed it as the solution to the secret codes or cryptographic keys that the age of technology created. Thus, this has raised controversy in the public, because the Clipper Chip is thought to have been the next “Big Brother” tool. This led to the failure of the Clipper proposal, even though there have been many attempts to push the agenda.

The &quot;Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act&quot; (CBDTPA) was a bill proposed in the United States Congress. CBDTPA was known as the &quot;Security Systems and Standards Certification Act&quot; (SSSCA) while in draft form and was killed in committee in 2002. Had CBDTPA become law, it would have prohibited technology that could be used to read digital content under copyright (such as music, video, and e-books) without digital rights management (DRM) that prevented access to this material without the permission of the copyright holder.

==Surveillance as an aid to censorship==
Surveillance and censorship are different. Surveillance can be performed without censorship, but it is harder to engage in censorship without some forms of surveillance. And even when surveillance does not lead directly to censorship, the widespread knowledge or belief that a person, their computer, or their use of the Internet is under surveillance can lead to self-censorship.

In March 2013 Reporters Without Borders issued a &quot;Special report on Internet surveillance&quot; that examines the use of technology that monitors online activity and intercepts electronic communication in order to arrest journalists, citizen-journalists, and dissidents. The report includes a list of &quot;State Enemies of the Internet&quot;, Bahrain, China, Iran, Syria, and Vietnam, countries whose governments are involved in active, intrusive surveillance of news providers, resulting in grave violations of freedom of information and human rights. Computer and network surveillance is on the increase in these countries. The report also includes a second list of &quot;Corporate Enemies of the Internet&quot;, Amesys (France), Blue Coat Systems (U.S.), Gamma (UK and Germany), Hacking Team (Italy), and Trovicor (Germany), companies that sell products that are liable to be used by governments to violate human rights and freedom of information. Neither list is exhaustive and they are likely to be expanded in the future.

Protection of sources is no longer just a matter of journalistic ethics. Journalists should equip themselves with a &quot;digital survival kit&quot; if they are exchanging sensitive information online, storing it on a computer hard-drive or mobile phone. Individuals associated with high-profile rights organizations, dissident groups, protest groups, or reform groups are urged to take extra precautions to protect their online identities.

==Countermeasures==
Countermeasures against surveillance vary based on the type of eavesdropping targeted. Electromagnetic eavesdropping, such as TEMPEST and its derivatives, often requires hardware shielding, such as Faraday cages, to block unintended emissions. To prevent interception of data in transit, encryption is a key defense. When properly implemented with end-to-end encryption, or while using tools such as Tor, and provided the device remains uncompromised and free from direct monitoring via electromagnetic analysis, audio recording, or similar methodologies, the content of communication is generally considered secure. 

For a number of years, numerous government initiatives have sought to weaken encryption or introduce backdoors for law enforcement access. Privacy advocates and the broader technology industry strongly oppose these measures, arguing that any backdoor would inevitably be discovered and exploited by malicious actors. Such vulnerabilities would endanger everyone&#x27;s private data while failing to hinder criminals, who could switch to alternative platforms or create their own encrypted systems. 

Surveillance remains effective even when encryption is correctly employed, by exploiting metadata that is often accessible to packet sniffers unless countermeasures are applied. This includes DNS queries, IP addresses, phone numbers, URLs, timestamps, and communication durations, which can reveal significant information about user activity and interactions or associations with a person of interest.

==See also==

* Anonymizer, a software system that attempts to make network activity untraceable
* Computer surveillance in the workplace
* Cyber spying
* Datacasting, a means of broadcasting files and Web pages using radio waves, allowing receivers near total immunity from traditional network surveillance techniques.
* Differential privacy, a method to maximize the accuracy of queries from statistical databases while minimizing the chances of violating the privacy of individuals.
* ECHELON, a signals intelligence (SIGINT) collection and analysis network operated on behalf of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States, also known as AUSCANNZUKUS and Five Eyes
* GhostNet, a large-scale cyber spying operation discovered in March 2009
* List of government surveillance projects
* Internet censorship and surveillance by country
* Mass surveillance
** China&#x27;s Golden Shield Project
** Mass surveillance in Australia
** Mass surveillance in China
** Mass surveillance in East Germany
** Mass surveillance in India
** Mass surveillance in North Korea
** Mass surveillance in the United Kingdom
** Mass surveillance in the United States
* Surveillance
* Surveillance by the United States government:
** 2013 mass surveillance disclosures, reports about NSA and its international partners&#x27; mass surveillance of foreign nationals and U.S. citizens
** Bullrun (code name), a highly classified NSA program to preserve its ability to eavesdrop on encrypted communications by influencing and weakening encryption standards, by obtaining master encryption keys, and by gaining access to data before or after it is encrypted either by agreement, by force of law, or by computer network exploitation (hacking)
** Carnivore, a U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation system to monitor email and electronic communications
** COINTELPRO, a series of covert, and at times illegal, projects conducted by the FBI aimed at U.S. domestic political organizations
** Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act
** Computer and Internet Protocol Address Verifier (CIPAV), a data gathering tool used by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
** Dropmire, a secret surveillance program by the NSA aimed at surveillance of foreign embassies and diplomatic staff, including those of NATO allies
** Magic Lantern, keystroke logging software developed by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation
** Mass surveillance in the United States
** NSA call database, a database containing metadata for hundreds of billions of telephone calls made in the U.S.
** NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)
** NSA whistleblowers: William Binney, Thomas Andrews Drake, Mark Klein, Edward Snowden, Thomas Tamm, Russ Tice
** Spying on United Nations leaders by United States diplomats
** Stellar Wind (code name), code name for information collected under the President&#x27;s Surveillance Program
** Tailored Access Operations, NSA&#x27;s hacking program
** Terrorist Surveillance Program, an NSA electronic surveillance program
** Total Information Awareness, a project of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
* TEMPEST, codename for studies of unintentional intelligence-bearing signals which, if intercepted and analyzed, may disclose the information transmitted, received, handled, or otherwise processed by any information-processing equipment

==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Selected Papers in Anonymity&quot;, Free Haven Project, accessed 16 September 2011.
Yan, W. (2019) Introduction to Intelligent Surveillance: Surveillance Data Capture, Transmission, and Analytics, Springer.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651476" start="0" end="33" title="Computer and network surveillance" label="Computer and network surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="142" end="158" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="172" end="180" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="521" end="537" title="Internet traffic" label="Internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="620" end="634" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="734" end="742" title="criminal" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156611" start="795" end="822" title="Total Information Awareness" label="Total Information Awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q647506" start="853" end="886" title="NarusInsight" label="high-speed surveillance computers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="891" end="901" title="Surveillance#Biometric" label="biometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="933" end="982" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="1078" end="1090" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="1095" end="1102" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="1119" end="1144" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q624023" start="1150" end="1180" title="Electronic Frontier Foundation" label="Electronic Frontier Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="1190" end="1220" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="1303" end="1320" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732094" start="1432" end="1451" title="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T" label="Hepting v. AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="1463" end="1473" title="hacktivist" label="hacktivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10920" start="1480" end="1489" title="Anonymous (group)" label="Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="1691" end="1704" title="data mining" label="personal data"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="1709" end="1716" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1724" end="1732" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="1773" end="1822" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="1857" end="1866" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536440" start="1867" end="1883" title="internet traffic" label="internet traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="1885" end="1890" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172573" start="1893" end="1904" title="web traffic" label="web traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="1906" end="1923" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q54366" start="2018" end="2032" title="Packet capture" label="Packet capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="2116" end="2123" title="computer network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2162" end="2170" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123000" start="2326" end="2350" title="Packet Capture Appliance" label="packet capture appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="2461" end="2477" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="2564" end="2613" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="2817" end="2835" title="broadband Internet" label="broadband Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="2840" end="2868" title="voice over Internet protocol" label="voice over Internet protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="3521" end="3549" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="3551" end="3554" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="3564" end="3567" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365657" start="3806" end="3828" title="Ministry of Intelligence and National Security of Iran" label="Iranian Security dept."/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="3959" end="3969" title="Siemens AG" label="Siemens AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="3982" end="3987" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965787" start="4176" end="4194" title="network monitoring" label="network monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="4613" end="4631" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q822707" start="5003" end="5026" title="employee monitoring" label="monitor their employees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467906" start="5662" end="5680" title="Virtual assistant (artificial intelligence)" label="Virtual assistants"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090024" start="6663" end="6685" title="Corporate surveillance" label="Corporate surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353185" start="6898" end="6919" title="business intelligence" label="business intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628411" start="7196" end="7218" title="targeted advertisement" label="targeted advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593332" start="7667" end="7687" title="Employee Performance" label="employee performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001223" start="7721" end="7736" title="network traffic" label="network traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="7767" end="7784" title="network bandwidth" label="network bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="8536" end="8557" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="8559" end="8571" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="9113" end="9126" title="Google Search" label="Google Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="9182" end="9192" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="9737" end="9756" title="HTTP cookie" label="&amp;quot;cookies&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978844" start="9804" end="9818" title="web tracking" label="track the user"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368831" start="10033" end="10058" title="email tracking" label="from their email accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248282" start="10127" end="10134" title="profile (information science)" label="profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="10319" end="10350" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="10670" end="10680" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q161157" start="10888" end="10896" title="password" label="password"/>
<link wikidata="Q254569" start="11321" end="11329" title="Backdoor (computing)" label="backdoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="11343" end="11357" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14639" start="11361" end="11367" title="Trojan (computer security)" label="trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122348" start="11757" end="11762" title="CIPAV" label="CIPAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q163751" start="11767" end="11780" title="Magic Lantern (spyware)" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q14644" start="11838" end="11845" title="spyware" label="spyware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="11972" end="11992" title="Security cracking" label="&amp;quot;cracking&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="12103" end="12109" title="Server (computing)" label="Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="12140" end="12149" title="broadband" label="broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="12486" end="12498" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="12500" end="12511" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="12516" end="12526" title="USB flash drive" label="thumbdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189582" start="12604" end="12619" title="physical access" label="physical access"/>
<link wikidata="Q53479" start="12702" end="12709" title="Stuxnet" label="Stuxnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551269" start="12778" end="12807" title="Social network analysis" label="create maps of social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="12828" end="12851" title="social networking sites" label="social networking sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832483" start="12868" end="12884" title="traffic analysis" label="traffic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907611" start="12942" end="12959" title="NSA call database" label="NSA call database"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="13002" end="13007" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="CALEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="13015" end="13029" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="13056" end="13066" title="data mining" label="data mined"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="13240" end="13289" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="13295" end="13325" title="National Security Agency (NSA)" label="National Security Agency (NSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="13335" end="13372" title="Department of Homeland Security (DHS)" label="Department of Homeland Security (DHS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="13931" end="13959" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="14129" end="14138" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="14154" end="14165" title="CRT monitor" label="CRT monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213174" start="14212" end="14219" title="Tempest (codename)" label="TEMPEST"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617439" start="15078" end="15100" title="Stingray phone tracker" label="Stingray phone tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q320624" start="15589" end="15599" title="Adi Shamir" label="Adi Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="15637" end="15642" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="15656" end="15659" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101002" start="15994" end="16019" title="MiniPanzer and MegaPanzer" label="MiniPanzer and MegaPanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23138" start="16035" end="16048" title="R2D2 (trojan)" label="R2D2 (trojan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q594062" start="16183" end="16192" title="Carnivore (software)" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q163751" start="16385" end="16398" title="Magic Lantern (spyware)" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122348" start="16521" end="16526" title="CIPAV" label="CIPAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q663839" start="16589" end="16601" title="Clipper chip" label="Clipper Chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="17120" end="17133" title="Cryptography" label="cryptographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q500031" start="17424" end="17479" title="Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act" label="Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="17858" end="17883" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="18019" end="18031" title="Surveillance" label="Surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="18036" end="18046" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="18383" end="18398" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="18415" end="18440" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q848979" start="18640" end="18659" title="Citizen journalism" label="citizen-journalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="18750" end="18757" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="18759" end="18764" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="18766" end="18770" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="18772" end="18777" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="18783" end="18790" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004175" start="19122" end="19128" title="Amesys" label="Amesys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928982" start="19139" end="19156" title="Blue Coat Systems" label="Blue Coat Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q208138" start="20096" end="20109" title="Faraday cage" label="Faraday cages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340257" start="20246" end="20267" title="End-to-end encryption" label="end-to-end encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q202044" start="20298" end="20301" title="Tor (network)" label="Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387876" start="20587" end="20604" title="Crypto Wars" label="weaken encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="21209" end="21212" title="Domain Name System" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="21222" end="21234" title="IP address" label="IP addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="21251" end="21255" title="URL" label="URLs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170450" start="21399" end="21417" title="Person of interest" label="person of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q567624" start="21436" end="21446" title="Anonymizer" label="Anonymizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157587" start="21519" end="21557" title="Computer surveillance in the workplace" label="Computer surveillance in the workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039245" start="21560" end="21572" title="Cyber spying" label="Cyber spying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227432" start="21575" end="21586" title="Datacasting" label="Datacasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275358" start="21742" end="21762" title="Differential privacy" label="Differential privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217386" start="21908" end="21915" title="ECHELON" label="ECHELON"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033111" start="22092" end="22104" title="AUSCANNZUKUS" label="AUSCANNZUKUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494000" start="22121" end="22129" title="GhostNet" label="GhostNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13448182" start="22195" end="22235" title="List of government surveillance projects" label="List of government surveillance projects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055776" start="22238" end="22285" title="Internet censorship and surveillance by country" label="Internet censorship and surveillance by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="22288" end="22305" title="Mass surveillance" label="Mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q615446" start="22309" end="22343" title="Golden Shield Project" label="China&amp;#x27;s Golden Shield Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166132" start="22347" end="22377" title="Mass surveillance in Australia" label="Mass surveillance in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113427" start="22381" end="22407" title="Mass surveillance in China" label="Mass surveillance in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009610" start="22411" end="22444" title="Mass surveillance in East Germany" label="Mass surveillance in East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q54484590" start="22448" end="22474" title="Mass surveillance in India" label="Mass surveillance in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009624" start="22478" end="22510" title="Mass surveillance in North Korea" label="Mass surveillance in North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012207" start="22514" end="22553" title="Mass surveillance in the United Kingdom" label="Mass surveillance in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166099" start="22557" end="22595" title="Mass surveillance in the United States" label="Mass surveillance in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="22598" end="22610" title="Surveillance" label="Surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644106" start="22662" end="22696" title="2013 mass surveillance disclosures" label="2013 mass surveillance disclosures"/>
<link wikidata="Q14831675" start="22813" end="22832" title="Bullrun (code name)" label="Bullrun (code name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="22854" end="22857" title="National Security Agency" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q594062" start="23168" end="23177" title="Carnivore (FBI)" label="Carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q644439" start="23275" end="23285" title="COINTELPRO" label="COINTELPRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154160" start="23409" end="23458" title="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act" label="Communications Assistance For Law Enforcement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122348" start="23462" end="23509" title="Computer and Internet Protocol Address Verifier" label="Computer and Internet Protocol Address Verifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592736" start="23599" end="23607" title="Dropmire" label="Dropmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q163751" start="23749" end="23762" title="Magic Lantern (spyware)" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166099" start="23848" end="23886" title="Mass surveillance in the United States" label="Mass surveillance in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907611" start="23890" end="23907" title="NSA call database" label="NSA call database"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023116" start="24004" end="24042" title="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)" label="NSA warrantless surveillance (2001–07)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="24050" end="24064" title="whistleblowers" label="whistleblowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566454" start="24066" end="24080" title="William Binney (U.S. intelligence official)" label="William Binney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422025" start="24082" end="24102" title="Thomas Andrews Drake" label="Thomas Andrews Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294135" start="24104" end="24114" title="Mark Klein" label="Mark Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="24116" end="24130" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151996" start="24132" end="24143" title="Thomas Tamm" label="Thomas Tamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381246" start="24145" end="24154" title="Russ Tice" label="Russ Tice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581758" start="24158" end="24217" title="Spying on United Nations leaders by United States diplomats" label="Spying on United Nations leaders by United States diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607195" start="24221" end="24245" title="Stellar Wind (code name)" label="Stellar Wind (code name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241189" start="24293" end="24330" title="President&amp;#x27;s Surveillance Program" label="President&amp;#x27;s Surveillance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442819" start="24334" end="24360" title="Tailored Access Operations" label="Tailored Access Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407000" start="24392" end="24422" title="Terrorist Surveillance Program" label="Terrorist Surveillance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156611" start="24466" end="24493" title="Total Information Awareness" label="Total Information Awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="24512" end="24553" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213174" start="24564" end="24571" title="Tempest (codename)" label="TEMPEST"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91257" wikidata="Q505854" url="?curid=91257" title="Richmond County, Virginia">
<text>Richmond County is a county located on the Northern Neck in the U.S. state of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population sits at 8,923. Its county seat is Warsaw. The rural county should not be confused with the large city and state capital Richmond, Virginia. It was formed in 1692 when the first Rappahannock County was divided to form Richmond County and Essex County.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (11.5%) is water.

===Adjacent counties===
* Westmoreland County, Virginia – north
* Northumberland County, Virginia – east
* Lancaster County, Virginia – southeast
* Essex County, Virginia – southwest

===National protected area===
* Rappahannock River Valley National Wildlife Refuge (part) Franklin, Island Farm, Laurel Grove, Peter, Tayloe, Wellford, Wilna, Wright units; Menokin, Wellford easements

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 8809 people, 2,937 households, and 2,000 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 3,512 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 64.77% White, 33.17% Black or African American, 0.09% Native American, 0.32% Asian, 0.07% Pacific Islander, 0.85% from other races, and 0.73% from two or more races. 2.10% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 2,937 households, out of which 27.20% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.30% were married couples living together, 11.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.90% were non-families. 28.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 18.40% under the age of 18, 8.00% from 18 to 24, 31.80% from 25 to 44, 24.10% from 45 to 64, and 17.70% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 127.60 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 131.90 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $33,026, and the median income for a family was $42,143. Males had a median income of $30,722 versus $21,807 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,675. About 11.90% of families and 15.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.20% of those under age 18 and 12.50% of those age 65 or over.

In 2004 the Menokin Bluegrass Festival (later changed to Menokin Music Festival) was launched in Richmond County at the ruins of Francis Lightfoot Lee&#x27;s (a signer of the Declaration of Independence) ancestral home, Menokin. The festival attracts thousands of music fans every year in a celebration of the Northern Neck&#x27;s historical legacy.

== Government ==
Supervisors of Richmond County (2022) are:

* Richard E. Thomas Sr. (District 1, Vice Chair)
* John David Parr (District 2)
* William C. Herbert, II (District 3)
* Robert B. Pemberton (District 4)
* F. Lee Sanders (District 5, chair)

The County Administrator is R. Morgan Quicke.

== Education ==
Richmond County Public Schools operates 2 public school campuses with about 1300 total students enrolled. Richmond County Elementary / Middle School serves grades K-7, and Rappahannock High School serves grades 8–12. The current Superintendent (2022) is Bernard S. &quot;Trey&quot; Davis III.

==Communities==
===Town===
* Warsaw

===Unincorporated communities===
* Farnham
* Foneswood
* Haynesville
* Lyells
* Rich Neck
* Sharps
* Village
* Newland

Germans Corner another locality name in the county. It is about 1.5 miles north of Naylors Beach, at the junction of Virginia State Route 636 and Virginia State Route 624. It is named from Wilber L. Jerman, who built a large dwelling at the location in 1923, and lived there until 1946. Jerman&#x27;s wife Cleva May was deeded 50 acres extending from the south and west of the corner from her father in 1920. Over time the original &quot;Jerman&#x27;s Corner&quot; has come to be misspelled and known as &quot;German&#x27;s Corner.&quot;

==Politics==










==Notable people==
* Annie R. Blount (1839–unknown), poet, short story writer, and newspaper editor

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Richmond County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==
* Menokin Bluegrass Festival</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505854" start="0" end="15" title="Richmond County, Virginia" label="Richmond County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="21" end="27" title="County (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712980" start="43" end="56" title="Northern Neck" label="Northern Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="64" end="74" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="78" end="86" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="98" end="109" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="145" end="156" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376135" start="160" end="166" title="Warsaw, Virginia" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="246" end="264" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885158" start="303" end="322" title="Rappahannock County (1656), Virginia" label="Rappahannock County"/>
<link wikidata="Q182112" start="363" end="375" title="Essex County, Virginia" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="409" end="427" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="528" end="557" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505292" start="568" end="599" title="Northumberland County, Virginia" label="Northumberland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505941" start="609" end="635" title="Lancaster County, Virginia" label="Lancaster County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182112" start="650" end="672" title="Essex County, Virginia" label="Essex County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294311" start="718" end="768" title="Rappahannock River Valley National Wildlife Refuge" label="Rappahannock River Valley National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1196" end="1202" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1301" end="1319" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1427" end="1432" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1441" end="1446" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1450" end="1466" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1474" end="1489" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1497" end="1502" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1510" end="1526" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1539" end="1550" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1615" end="1623" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1627" end="1633" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1760" end="1775" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2588" end="2605" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2703" end="2715" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2968" end="2995" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q106454785" start="3459" end="3489" title="Richmond County Public Schools" label="Richmond County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376135" start="3782" end="3788" title="Warsaw, Virginia" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712313" start="3825" end="3832" title="Farnham, Virginia" label="Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465017" start="3835" end="3844" title="Foneswood, Virginia" label="Foneswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687094" start="3847" end="3858" title="Haynesville, Virginia" label="Haynesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707759" start="3861" end="3867" title="Lyells, Virginia" label="Lyells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323390" start="3870" end="3879" title="Rich Neck, Virginia" label="Rich Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490418" start="3882" end="3888" title="Sharps, Virginia" label="Sharps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930604" start="3891" end="3898" title="Village, Virginia" label="Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018308" start="3901" end="3908" title="Newland, Virginia" label="Newland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123735419" start="4493" end="4508" title="Annie R. Blount" label="Annie R. Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977317" start="4588" end="4662" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Richmond County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Richmond County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91258" wikidata="Q510920" url="?curid=91258" title="Rappahannock County, Virginia">
<text>Rappahannock County is a county located in the northern Piedmont region of the Commonwealth of Virginia, US, adjacent to Shenandoah National Park. As of the 2020 Census, the population was 7,348. Its county seat is Washington. The name &quot;Rappahannock&quot; comes from the Algonquian word &quot;lappihanne&quot; (also noted as &quot;toppehannock&quot;), meaning &quot;river of quick, rising water&quot; or &quot;where the tide ebbs and flows.&quot; The county is included in the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Rappahannock County was founded by an act of the Virginia General Assembly in 1833, based on the growing population&#x27;s need to have better access to a county seat. The county&#x27;s land was carved from Culpeper County. Rappahannock County was named for the river that separates it from Fauquier County.

The land on which Rappahannock County is sited was owned in the early 1700s by Thomas Fairfax 6th Lord Fairfax. It was part of the Northern Neck Proprietary, which consisted of 5.3 million acres of land located between the Rappahannock River and the Potomac River, from their headwaters in the Blue Ridge Mountains to the Chesapeake Bay. In 1649, King Charles II of England, then in exile in France after the execution of his father (Charles I), had given this unmapped and unsettled region to seven loyal supporters. By 1688, the proprietary was owned solely by Thomas Lord Culpeper whose only child married Thomas 5th Lord Fairfax in 1690. They acquired the proprietary on the death of Lord Culpeper, and the region became synonymous with the Fairfax name. In 1719, Thomas Fairfax 6th Lord Fairfax inherited the land.

In 1728, the land that became Rappahannock County began to be granted to individuals by agents of King George II of Great Britain. At that time, it was believed that the headwaters of the Rappahannock River were in the Chester Gap area and that the Rappahannock County land was located south of the Northern Neck Proprietary. Much of the land granted by the King consisted of large tracts along the rivers and streams and was prime agricultural land. In 1735, Thomas Fairfax brought suit against the English crown because of these land grants. Surveying parties were dispatched which determined that the headwaters of the Rappahannock River was the Conway River, which leads into the Rapidan River and then into the Rappahannock River. After 10 years, Fairfax won his suit against the Crown, and land grants in this area subsequent to 1745 were made by Fairfax. After the American Revolution, the remaining land, located primarily in the mountains, was granted by the Commonwealth of Virginia.

After its founding in 1833, Rappahannock County was governed by 25 gentlemen justices, supplemented by a Clerk of the Court, Commonwealth attorney, county surveyor, commissioner of revenue, and sheriff. The courthouse, court clerk&#x27;s office, and jail were constructed in the town of Washington in 1834–1836. The county was primarily agricultural and self-sufficient, with a few merchants and craftsmen providing goods that could not be made on the farms. Although tobacco was widely grown in tidewater Virginia, the land in Rappahannock County was inadequate for this crop. Instead, farmers in the county grew wheat, oats, corn, and hay and maintained herds of cattle, sheep, and swine. The county was well-watered by streams and rivers originating in the Blue Ridge Mountains, and mills along these waterways were built to grind corn and grain, saw lumber, and card and weave wool. The 1850s was an era of turnpike building, providing access from Culpeper, New Market, and Fredericksburg to the county. At this time, transportation was by foot, by horseback, or by horse-drawn wagon or carriage.

In 1861, Virginia seceded from the Union. No battles were fought in Rappahannock County during the Civil War although there were skirmishes, encampments, and significant troop movements through the county. Men from the county served in the 6th &amp; 12th Regiment Virginia Cavalry and the 1st, 7th, and 49th Regiment Virginia Infantry. The war devastated the agricultural economy of the county and destroyed the turnpikes. After the war, the county was governed under the auspices of Military District No. 1 commanded by Union General John M. Schofield. In 1870, a new Virginia constitution was adopted that mandated the county be divided into five townships with one elected supervisor from each to form a Board to perform the executive functions of the county. This government by a five-member Board of Supervisors still exists.

Recovery from the war was slow, but times were becoming more prosperous by the 1890s. The county remained primarily rural and agricultural. Apples became an important cash crop. Rappahannock County moved into the 20th century with the introduction of telephones, electricity, automobiles, improved roads, high school education, and a local newspaper. A jitney company was created in 1916 to provide public transportation, followed by other bus lines in the 1920s and 1930s. In the mid-1920s, the Commonwealth of Virginia began actions to acquire land to establish Shenandoah National Park, either by purchase from willing owners or by condemnation and purchase. About 32,000 acres of Rappahannock County land was conveyed to the federal government for the Park, displacing multiple families. A memorial with the surnames of those who lived in the Rappahannock County portion of the Park was constructed along Route 211 in 2019. Two resettlement areas were established in the county, one near the town of Washington and the other near the village of Flint Hill. During the Depression years of the 1930s, the county benefitted from President Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal programs. Construction of Skyline Drive in Shenandoah National Park began in 1931 through the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), and several of their camps were established at Beech Spring on Route 211 west of Sperryville and north and south of Thornton&#x27;s Gap at the top of the Blue Ridge. These provided work for local men and a market for farmers for produce, meat, milk, and eggs to feed the corpsmen.

The opening of Shenandoah National Park brought substantial tourism business to the county in the 1930s, aided by inexpensive automobile transportation and by the Commonwealth of Virginia taking over maintenance of all primary and secondary roads in the county. The area became replete with gasoline stations, roadside businesses, lunchrooms, restaurants, and motels. Many private homes took in overnight lodgers. In the 1970s, there was an influx of young adults into the county who were seeking a rural lifestyle and who brought with them their skills and talents as artists, artisans, musicians, carpenters, and other craftsmen. They blended with the rural residents who already lived in the county, often for many generations, which fostered the community of diverse individuals who live in the county today. Rappahannock County continues to cater to tourists and locals alike, with chic restaurants, bars, artisan shops, artist studios, bed and breakfast accommodations, and antique stores. However, the county remains primarily rural, agricultural, and undeveloped, in large part due to tight governmental control of land zoning and restrictions on subdivision.

==Historic Districts and Structures==
Rappahannock County has five historic districts designated on the National Register of Historic Places. These are located in Ben Venue, Flint Hill, Laurel Mills, Sperryville, and the town of Washington. It also has thirteen historic structures listed on the National Register. Many other homes and buildings in the county are also historic, dating from the 1800s. The Virginia Department of Historic Resources maintains a database of historic properties in the County that contains information on more than 700 properties.  Over 300 family cemeteries have also been documented as historic resources.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water. The Rappahannock River forms the northeastern boundary and separates Rappahannock County from Fauquier County. Rappahannock County is bounded on the southeast by Culpeper County and on the southwest by Madison County. The Blue Ridge Mountains occupy much of the western portion of the county.

===Adjacent counties===
* Warren County, Virginia – northwest
* Fauquier County, Virginia – northeast
* Culpeper County, Virginia – southeast
* Madison County, Virginia – southwest
* Page County, Virginia – west

===National protected area===
* Shenandoah National Park (part)

===Mountains===
Rappahannock County is located in the northern Piedmont area of Virginia. Much of its land consists of monadnocks, many of which were named for the families that originally owned the land. These small mountains culminate in the west at the Blue Ridge Mountains of Shenandoah National Park. When the Park&#x27;s land was privately owned, much of the land had been cleared for farms, pasturage, and orchards. Today these mountainsides are completely wooded again, laced with hiking trails including the Appalachian Trail and with Skyline Drive located along the summits of the Blue Ridge Mountains. The summits of the following mountains are located within Rappahannock County:

* Battle and Little Battle Mountains
* Big and Little Bastard Mountains
* Bessie Bell Mountain
* Browns Mountain
* Buck Ridge
* Butler Mountain
* Castle (Castleton) Mountain
* Catlett Mountain
* Chancellor Mountain
* Compton Peak
* Fielding Mountain
* Fodderstack Mountain
* Fogg Mountain
* Fork Mountain
* Ginger Hill
* Googe Mountain
* Grindstone Mountain
* Hazel Mountain
* Hickerson Mountain
* Hogback Mountain
* Hot Mountain
* Jefferson Mountain
* Jenkins and Little Jenkins Mountains
* Jobbers Mountain
* Keyser Mountain
* Long Mountain
* Mary&#x27;s Rock
* Mason and Little Mason Mountains
* Massies Mountain
* Meetinghouse Mountain
* Menefee Mountain
* Mulky and Little Mulky Mountains
* North Marshall Mountain
* Long Mountain
* Oventop Mountain
* Pass Mountain
* The Peak
* Pickerel Ridge
* Pignut Mountain
* Pine Hill
* Piney Ridge
* The Pinnacle
* Poes Mountain
* Poortown Mountain
* Redmans Mountain
* Red Oak Mountain
* Rosser Mountain
* Round Mountain
* Schoolhouse Mountain
* Skinner Ridge
* Slaughter Mountain
* Turkey Ridge
* Turkey Mountain
* Walden Mountain
* Wolf Mountain

===Transportation===
Three primary highways traverse the county: U.S. Route 211, U.S. Route 522, and State Route 231. These account for 57 miles and 21% of the total public road mileage. The remaining 219 miles are secondary roads which provide a link to the rural residential and farm areas of the county. Five roads in the county have been designated as Virginia Scenic Byways, and Skyline Drive in Shenandoah National Park has been designated as a National Scenic Byway. The county has no public transportation by air, bus, or rail.
* 
* Skyline Drive

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

From 1840 to 1970, the county had a marked decline in population, from 9,257 people to 5,199 people. This was primarily due to freed slaves moving north and fewer people needed to operate farms. Since then, there has been an increase in the population, to an estimated 7,370 people in the year 2019. In that year, 16% of people were age 17 years or younger, 56% were age 18–64 years, and 28% were age 65 years or older. It was also estimated that 92.4% of residents were white, 4.2% were African American, and 3.4% were other or mixed races.

Rappahannock residents are among the oldest in Virginia, with a median age of 47.5 years in 2010; this is about 11 years greater than the U.S. as a whole. The 2010 census found 19% of residents were age 65 and older, which is a marked increase over the 2000 census finding of 14%. Provisional estimates for the year 2019 indicate that this percentage has increased further, to 28% of the county population. The population of the county is widely dispersed, with a density of only 27.9 people per square mile, ranking it 122nd among Virginia&#x27;s 132 cities and counties in population density.

It was estimated that there were 2,976 households in Rappahannock County in 2017, with an average of 2.5 persons per household. Almost all housing in the county is composed of single-family homes. Between 1960 and 2010, the number of housing units more than doubled. In 2017, it was estimated that there were 3,945 housing units, 79% of which were occupied year-round and 14% of which were seasonal units. The owner-occupied housing rate was 74%.

The county has been populated by three waves: those who&#x27;ve lived in the county for many generations, those who started coming to the county in the 1960s and 1970s as young adults, and retirees and weekenders who decided to settle in the county since about 1990. The poor, near poor, middle income, and wealthy all live scrambled together. “All seem to appreciate the beauty and quiet of the county, its family farms, the quality of its rivers and streams, and the unblemished views of the night skies.”

== Land Use, Zoning, and Development ==
Rappahannock County contains a land area of 266.6 square miles; of this 73.7% is forests (including 49.5 square miles in Shenandoah National Park), 20.1% is pasture/farmland, and the remainder is roads and buildings and their surroundings. The main forest type is oak-hickory.

One factor that has played a large role in protecting Rappahannock County&#x27;s rural identity is the Virginia state law allowing tax deductions for land devoted to agricultural, horticultural, or forest uses (“land use”). By enabling property owners to significantly reduce their tax bills, the tax deferments have permitted large landowners to keep farms and forests intact, instead of needing to subdivide and sell parcels. That was the intent of the state law when it was passed in the 1970s and adopted by the county in 1982.

These tax deductions have a downside, in that they significantly reduce the county&#x27;s revenue. In 2017, land in the county that had a land-use deduction generated about $3.54 million in revenue. Without the deductions, the same land would have brought in more than $7.58 million in revenue. About 50% of the county&#x27;s total acreage now receives a land-use tax deferment, although that represents less than one-third of the parcels of taxable land — 1,850 out of 5,840 parcels.

Of the 266.6 square miles comprising the county, about 52.2 square miles of land has been placed in conservation easements by individual landowners, guaranteeing preservation of the integrity of the landscape, restrictions on development, and protection of water and scenic resources. An additional 49.5 square miles are located in Shenandoah National Park, which affords this land the protection of the federal government, and 130.3 square miles are in land use. This leaves only about 30.6 square miles that are not protected from development (excluding existing roads and buildings).

The county has a long tradition of progressive planning and policies for land use to restrict development and to maintain the rural, bucolic nature of the county. The first subdivision ordinance was enacted in 1962 and the first zoning ordinance in 1966. Land use policies are formulated by the Board of Supervisors with the advice of the Planning Commission and the Board of Zoning Appeals, both of which are citizen advisory groups appointed by the Board. These and other policies are incorporated into the Rappahannock County Code. Complementing these governmental bodies are the efforts of individual citizens and local organizations such as the Rappahannock League for Environmental Protection and the Piedmont Environmental Council.

The 25-acre zoning restriction for land parcels outside the villages has clearly become a defining feature of Rappahannock, one that distinguishes it as a rural oasis in a region of hyper-development. Many residents believe that strict zoning and density ordinances have slowed population growth and spared Rappahannock “the environmentally destructive growth we see in the counties around us. We take credit for comprehensive planning happening here before it was required.”

== Economy ==
Historically, the county has had a rural economy based on agriculture. However, present day agriculture has been influenced by significant removal of land from farming. Between 1949 and 1974, the total number of farms declined about 63%, from 687 to 257 farms. This trend showed a slow reverse and in 2017 there were 439 farms in the county, although only 86 farms contained 180 acres or more. Almost all are family farms. Some farmers don&#x27;t own the land they farm but lease it from owners who are content to have pastures maintained and fences kept in good order. Cropland is primarily devoted to hay, and pastureland is primarily for beef cattle, with small amounts of land for sheep and goats.

Orchard land in the county was devoted to apple production for many years, with a smaller peach crop. The production of orchard crops has sharply declined to the point where only 20 small farms still harvested apples and 10 still harvested peaches in 2017. Vineyards now occupy a small part of county farmland. Wineries, organic farms, and consumer demand for grass-fed beef have created new opportunities for farmers. Several farm operations have successfully tapped into the Washington D.C. market, selling their produce at urban farmer&#x27;s markets. There are nine award-winning wineries in the county as well as two distilleries, two breweries, and a cider and mead facility.

Together with the decline in farms, agriculture no longer employs as high a percentage of the workforce as was once the case. In 2010, only 7% of the 3,412 employed persons were in the employment category of farming, forestry, fishing, and mining. In that year, 17% were employed in health/education, 15% in construction, 12.5% in professional/administrative occupations, 10.9% in personal/recreation services, 9.6% in retail trade, and the remainder in miscellaneous other occupations. About 19% of residents were age 65 years or older, and most of these were retired.

The median family income in 2010 was $75,975; 35% of families had incomes of $100,000 or greater. Rappahannock County ranks among the top 10 wealthiest jurisdictions in Virginia. In 2017, county residents had a gross income of $265 million, but much of that wealth was concentrated in a small number of residents. The county ranks in the 17th percentile for income inequality compared to all U.S. counties. About 10% of county families are below the federal poverty level.

There are no large private employers located in the county. There are no supermarkets, pharmacies, large stores, or large office buildings in the county. The absence of a commercial tax base places pressure on homeowners’ property taxes to fund the county budget. In a survey by the University of Virginia for the Foothills Forum, residents wanted the beauty, the mountain vistas, the clean rivers and the dark, starlit skies preserved, even if they must drive out of the county to shop at a supermarket or fill a prescription. About 80% of county residents surveyed ranked inadequate cellphone and internet coverage as the biggest issues facing the county. Coverage is available primarily along the main highways passing through the county or through unreliable satellite service. The Rappahannock County Broadband Authority has been established to investigate this issue.

== Government ==
Like many counties in Virginia, Rappahannock County is governed by a Board of Supervisors who serve staggered 4-year terms. Voters in each of the five districts of the county elect one member of the Board; the chair of the Board is chosen by the five supervisors. The Board handles policy issues, sets the budget, and appoints a county administrator to handle the county government&#x27;s day-to-day operations.

Over the years, the Board of Supervisors of Rappahannock County has kept a tight rein on spending. In fiscal year July 2020-June 2021, the county government budget was $26.6 million, of which 50% was designated for education of students in the two public schools. Other expenditure categories included 10.7% for county government expenses, 9.5% for public safety, 5.5% for fire and emergency medical services, 2.4% for refuse disposal, 1.4% for the public library, and 0.1% for parks and recreation. Some of the county&#x27;s expenses were supplemented by state, federal, and grant funding.

Taxes on real estate ($13.3 million) and personal property ($1.4 million) comprised 55% of county revenues in 2020–2021. The absence of a commercial tax base has resulted in high taxes for homeowners. The county does not have manufacturing, large box stores, and other similar commercial establishments and hence has a commercial tax base of only about $700,000.

===Board of Supervisors===
* Debbie Donehey – Chair (Wakefield District)
* Christine Smith – (Piedmont District)
* Van Carney – (Stonewall-Hawthorne District)
* Keir Whitson – Vice-Chair (Hampton District)
* Donna Comer – (Jackson District)

===Politics===
Rappahannock County invariably leans toward the Republican Party, doing so every election since 1980. However, parts of Sperryville are quite culturally liberal.










==Education==
Education was provided by private schools during the 1800s until mandatory public education was instituted by the Underwood Constitution of 1869–1870, which resulted in the creation of 14 white and 7 black primary education schools in Rappahannock County. High schools for whites were established in the town of Washington and the village of Sperryville in 1908–1909; black students were bussed out of the county to the Manassas Industrial Institute and the George Washington Carver school.

In 2017–2018, the Rappahannock County Public Schools District served about 812 students in grades preK through 12 at one elementary school and one high school. The graduation rate was 94%, and 80% of graduates continued their education after completing high school. Per pupil expenditures were $14,406. Of this, 80% was derived from local taxes and only 20% from the State. Overall, in Virginia the State contributes 55% to counties for education. Rappahannock County&#x27;s Local Composite Index, an indicator used to allocate State aid to school districts, was 11th highest in Virginia, resulting in extreme limitations on State aid for education in the county. The Local Composite Index uses the true value of real estate in its computation, whereas most Rappahannock County land is under land use or conservation easements and is taxed at significantly less than true value. The large proportion of education costs derived from local real estate taxes is symptomatic of the fact that there are no large businesses in the county.

There are also four private schools in the county. In 2018, Wakefield Country Day School served 150 students, Hearthstone School served 50 students, Belle Meade Montessori School served 25 students, and the Child Care and Learning Center served 65 children. About 60 county children were home-schooled.

Although there is no large higher education facility in the county, the Rapp Center for Education is a non-profit organization committed to lifelong learning and workforce training and is registered with the State Council for Higher Education. Knowledgeable residents of the county teach numerous courses in their particular specialties through this facility. Healthcare training is provided toward certification as a Clinical Medical Assistant, Radiography Technician, and Pharmacy Technician. Courses are also taught on Information Technology knowledge and skills to help people develop a broader understanding of IT.

==Communities==

There is one incorporated town (Washington) and five village settlements in the county (Chester Gap, Flint Hill, Amissville, Sperryville, and Woodville). The villages have no defined legal boundaries and are characterized generally by having a rural post office and general store, older homes, one or more houses of worship, service stations, and small commercial establishments.

===Town===
* Washington

===Census-designated places===
* Chester Gap
* Flint Hill
* Sperryville

===Other unincorporated communities===

* Amissville
* Boston
* Castleton
* Huntly
* Laurel Mills
* Peola Mills
* Revercombs Corner
* Wakefield Manor
* Woodville
===Community facilities and activities===
There are no stoplights in Rappahannock County. There are also no large stores, franchise fast-food places, or sprawling subdivisions in the county.

The county maintains one public library, located in the central part of the county, managed by three employees and a nine-member Board of Trustees. In 2020, there were 3,349 library card holders, circulation was 22,245, and there were 16,768 individual uses of the library&#x27;s WiFi; the latter statistic is indicative of the lack of internet service to the county. The operating budget for the library was $315,857, of which the county provided 66%, the State provided 15%, and 19% was from endowment and other sources.

In nighttime photos taken from space, the county is one of the few conspicuous dark spots amid a blaze of lights illuminating the East Coast from Miami to Maine. It is one of the last places on the East Coast with a view of the Milky Way. In 2019, the Rappahannock County Park was certified as an International Dark-Sky Park by the International Dark-Sky Association. It is the third Virginia park to receive a Dark-Sky Park designation, the other two being state parks. Rappahannock County Park is also the third county park in the U.S. to be awarded this honor. Throughout the year, multiple lectures and dark sky viewing events are held during evenings in the Park.

There are seven volunteer fire and rescue companies in the county. Amissville, Castleton, Chester Gap, Flint Hill, and Washington handle both fire and ambulance calls; Sperryville has separate squads. None of the members of these squads have paid positions. The county is served by the weekly &quot;Rappahannock News&quot; newspaper. The county seat of Washington is home to the three Michelin Star Inn at Little Washington. Thirty-five churches are located in the county, although many of these have small congregations. There are two medical facilities. The Rappahannock Historical Society, founded in 1964 and located in the town of Washington, serves as a resource for historical and genealogical information about the county.

Local support for the arts is provided through the Rappahannock Association for the Arts and the Community. The annual Rappahannock County Arts Tour provides an opportunity to visit artists in their studios. There are three performing arts theaters: the Theatre at Washington, Virginia, the RAAC Community Theater, and the Theater House at Castleton Farms, founded by the late Lorin Maazel which features the Castleton Chamber Players and the Castleton Music Festival. The nationally renowned Kid Pan Alley originated in and is still based in the county. Rappahannock Radio interviews members of the local community and beyond.

Other amusements and events include a 9-hole golf course; the annual Fodderstack 10K race; Sperryfest street fair featuring the Great Rubber Duck Race Down the Thornton River; Oktoberfest held in Sperryville, a collaborative effort by local farms, breweries, and businesses involving beer and food prepared and served by the brewers and farmers of the county; the annual Rappahannock Farm Tour; the annual Artists of Rappahannock tour of artists’ studios; Old Dominion Hounds Point-to-Point races; the Amissville carnival and parade; Rappahannock Rough Ride for bicyclists; John Jackson Piedmont Blues festival; Fourth of July celebration and fireworks; and Christmas in Little Washington parade and festivities.

Recreation in Rappahannock County includes fishing, horseback riding, camping, hiking, and canoeing, particularly in Shenandoah National Park. The Sperryville Community Alliance has created two walking trails along the Thornton River. Three foxhunting associations are active in the county, the Rappahannock Hunt, the Old Dominion Hounds, and the Thornton Hill Hounds. Hunting is a popular activity, and in 2020 there were 23 bears and 1,848 white-tailed deer harvested in the county.

The county is a popular tourist site. A 31-item Civil War Trails markers system is located throughout the county.

==Notable people==

* Charles T. &quot;Chuck&quot; Akre, investor, financier and businessman; founder, chairman, and chief investment officer of Akre Capital Management, FBR Focus, and other funds
* Ned Bittinger, portrait painter and illustrator
* Edward Dolnick, nonfiction author
* Frederick Hart, American sculptor 
* Ben Jones, former U.S. representative from Georgia; played Cooter on the television show, &quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot;
* James Kilpatrick, former columnist
* Lorin Maazel, Pittsburgh Symphony director
* Ronald F. Maxwell, film director and screenwriter whose films include the American Civil War historical fiction films Gettysburg, Gods and Generals, and Copperhead
* Eugene McCarthy, Former Senator
* Patrick O’Connell, chef and owner of the internationally renowned Inn at Little Washington
* Mary Virginia Proctor, journalist, philanthropist, social activist
* John Fox Sullivan, former publisher at large, Atlantic Media; former mayor of Washington, Virginia

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Rappahannock County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==

* Rappahannock County, Virginia, the county government homepage
* Blue Ridge Independent News, an online local newspaper
* Rappahannock News, a print and online newspaper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q510920" start="0" end="19" title="Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Rappahannock County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="25" end="31" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="79" end="91" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="95" end="103" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="200" end="211" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373453" start="215" end="225" title="Washington, Virginia" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="276" end="286" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="482" end="556" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="620" end="645" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="778" end="793" title="Culpeper County" label="Culpeper County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="862" end="877" title="Fauquier County" label="Fauquier County"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="8055" end="8073" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333499" start="8150" end="8168" title="Rappahannock River" label="Rappahannock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="8240" end="8255" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="8308" end="8323" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper County"/>
<link wikidata="Q513891" start="8348" end="8362" title="Madison County, Virginia" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="8368" end="8388" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q510934" start="8466" end="8489" title="Warren County, Virginia" label="Warren County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="8504" end="8529" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="8544" end="8569" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513891" start="8584" end="8608" title="Madison County, Virginia" label="Madison County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513818" start="8623" end="8644" title="Page County, Virginia" label="Page County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137401" start="8685" end="8709" title="Shenandoah National Park" label="Shenandoah National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q911052" start="11047" end="11060" title="Skyline Drive" label="Skyline Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="21560" end="21576" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961050" start="23284" end="23312" title="Wakefield Country Day School" label="Wakefield Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373453" start="24560" end="24570" title="Washington, Virginia" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093565" start="24605" end="24616" title="Chester Gap, Virginia" label="Chester Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459517" start="24619" end="24629" title="Flint Hill, Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Flint Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133106" start="24632" end="24643" title="Sperryville, Virginia" label="Sperryville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746820" start="24687" end="24697" title="Amissville, Virginia" label="Amissville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24700" end="24706" title="Boston, Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050629" start="24709" end="24718" title="Castleton, Virginia" label="Castleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945684" start="24721" end="24727" title="Huntly, Virginia" label="Huntly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499912" start="24730" end="24742" title="Laurel Mills, Virginia" label="Laurel Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165442" start="24745" end="24756" title="Peola Mills, Virginia" label="Peola Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961060" start="24779" end="24794" title="Wakefield Manor, Virginia" label="Wakefield Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477159" start="24797" end="24806" title="Woodville, Virginia" label="Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082801" start="28891" end="28924" title="Charles T. Akre" label="Charles T. &amp;quot;Chuck&amp;quot; Akre"/>
<link wikidata="Q112116308" start="29068" end="29081" title="Ned Bittinger" label="Ned Bittinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342611" start="29118" end="29132" title="Edward Dolnick" label="Edward Dolnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496083" start="29154" end="29168" title="Frederick Hart (sculptor)" label="Frederick Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q506021" start="29191" end="29200" title="Ben Jones (American actor and politician)" label="Ben Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304408" start="29287" end="29307" title="The Dukes of Hazzard" label="The Dukes of Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680621" start="29316" end="29332" title="James J. Kilpatrick" label="James Kilpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q117710" start="29353" end="29365" title="Lorin Maazel" label="Lorin Maazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q759186" start="29398" end="29415" title="Ronald F. Maxwell" label="Ronald F. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="29564" end="29579" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147365" start="29598" end="29615" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Connell (chef)" label="Patrick O’Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65521421" start="29691" end="29712" title="Mary Virginia Proctor" label="Mary Virginia Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="29760" end="29777" title="John Fox Sullivan" label="John Fox Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977296" start="29875" end="29953" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rappahannock County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Rappahannock County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91259" wikidata="Q586070" url="?curid=91259" title="Radford, Virginia">
<text>Radford (formerly [[Lovely Mount]], Central City, English Ferry and Ingle&#x27;s Ferry) is an independent city in the U.S. state of Virginia. As of 2020, the population was 16,070 by the United States Census Bureau. For statistical purposes, the Bureau of Economic Analysis combines the city of Radford with neighboring Montgomery County.

Radford is included in the Blacksburg–Christiansburg metropolitan area.

Radford is the home of Radford University. Despite its name, the Radford Arsenal, historically a major employer of city residents, is in neighboring Pulaski and Montgomery counties. Radford City has four schools: McHarg Elementary, Belle Heth Elementary, Dalton Intermediate, and Radford High School.

==History==
Radford was named for Dr. John B. Radford. Dr. Radford&#x27;s home Arnheim was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2002. Radford was originally a small village of people that gathered near the New River, which was a major draw to travelers for fresh water and food while traveling west. The town&#x27;s population grew rapidly after 1854 when the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad was built nearby. A large depot was placed at Lovely Mount because of its strategic positioning between the eastern and western parts of the state. The actual station was not on Lovely Mountain, located on the southwestern side of town, but Lovely Mount was a known mountain and naming the station this would help people to remember the location of the depot. The Railroad Depot caused the population of Radford to boom. It also caused a major increase in the amount of trade and business in the area. Radford became a railroad town. The original name for Radford was Lovely Mount because of the location of the depot; the name was changed in 1891 to Radford. Radford, or at least the train station area, was called Central Depot because of its central location halfway between Lynchburg and Bristol, Virginia, on the original railroad, the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad (later the Norfolk and Western Railway). The names &quot;Ingle&#x27;s Ferry&quot; or &quot;English Ferry&quot; were derived from Ingles Ferry over the New River, just West of the town.

From 1900 to 1930, many companies came to Radford, including an ice company, a creamery, milling companies, piping, and preserving plants. In 1913, Radford was selected to become home to Radford State Normal School, a women&#x27;s college. The school would later, in 1924, become Radford College and then in 1979 would be renamed Radford University. The presence of a college brought even more attention to Radford, causing even more population growth. In 1940–1941 the US Military decided to build a manufacturing plant for gunpowder and other ammunition needed by the military. Thus the Radford Army Ammunition Plant, or the &quot;Arsenal&quot; as it would come to be called, joined the railroad and Lynchburg Foundry as major employers creating a huge influx in population. Many families moved to the area. Housing for the Arsenal was built in specific areas of town and these neighborhoods still exist today; Monroe Terrace, Radford Village, and Sunset Village. Today these are Radford&#x27;s main residential neighborhoods. The railroad ceased passenger service through Radford 1971 as personal transportation moved to the fairly new interstate highway system and the airways. However, the railroad route through Radford is still a major component of Norfolk Southern Railway&#x27;s Roanoke to Bristol route. But, Radford no longer needed the railroad passenger service to survive.

The James Charlton Farm, Ingles Bottom Archeological Sites, and Ingles Ferry are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Although a majority of Radford voters supported Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton and Joe Biden in the elections of 2008, 2012, 2016 and 2020, during the 2012 campaign the city was the site of the so-called Crumb and Get It bakery incident, in which a bakery owner declined to host a campaign event for then-Vice President Joe Biden, citing political differences. The incident sparked significant media coverage and a surge in business for the bakery.

===Glencoe Museum===

Glencoe Museum is located in west downtown Radford overlooking the New River. The house was built in 1870 in the 19th century Victorian style, specifically Second Empire, and serves as a home for many artifacts concerning the beginnings of Radford. It was the postbellum home of Confederate Brigadier General Gabriel C. Wharton. It is a large, two-story, five-bay, brick dwelling, and originally had quite extensive grounds. The original house had a barn, chicken coop, smoke house, and an ice house. The name Glencoe is thought to be inspired by Anne Wharton&#x27;s ancestry. Her family was originally from Scotland. The house didn&#x27;t appear on Radford&#x27;s tax records until 1876, it took a very long time to build a house of its size and grandeur in the 1800s. The house was kept in the family till 1996 when, after being deserted for 30 years, the house was given to the city of Radford.

The house and grounds were donated by the Kollmorgen Motion Technology Group. The house was converted into a museum to show off pieces of history found in Radford. There are many Native American artifacts in the museum that help us understand the New River&#x27;s importance to the Native American culture and way of life. In Glencoe, a person can find some of the original blueprints for the city and pictures of Radford from the past. There is also Local Sports History exhibit and an exhibit on how the river impacted life in Radford. The New River Exhibit also includes a lot of information on ferries, steamboats, and other modes of transportation used on the river. Glencoe Museum is a very popular attraction for school field trips and visitors who are trying to find out more about Radford.

It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2000.

==Local attractions==
Radford has five parks: Bisset Park, Wildwood Park, Riverview Park, Sunset Park, and Sisson Park. Radford also has the historic antebellum period Glencoe Museum, a local farmer&#x27;s market and one movie theater.

Sunset Park is located in the center of the west end of Radford. Riverview is used mainly for soccer practices, and like its name suggests is also located on the New River and in the west end of Radford. Wildwood Park is a wildlife and plant reserve for the city. Sisson Park, like Sunset Park, is located in the center of the west end of Radford. Sisson Park also accommodates Joe Hodge Field, a baseball/softball field, mainly used for little league practices and games.

=== Bisset Park ===
Bisset Park is the largest of the four parks, located on the New River, it stretches . Bisset Park was named for David Bisset, a major contributor and overseer of parks and recreation in Radford. Bisset Park is located in the center of town across from Wildwood Park. It features three picnic shelters, a gazebo, tennis courts, and open fields mainly used for little league soccer. The Riverway Trail is a 3.5 mile paved biking and walking path that can be accessed from Bissett Park. From there the trail extends to the east along the New River and to the south into Wildwood Park. A Civil War Trails marker can be found at the westernmost end of the park, where the foundation of a bridge burned down during the Battle of New River Bridge can be seen.

===Wildwood Park===
Wildwood Park is a 50-acre wooded ravine in the center of town, with a paved bikeway along a stream at the bottom of two forested hillsides crisscrossed by hiking trails. It became the city&#x27;s first public park in 1929, and was narrowly rescued from a highway-bypass plan in 1998 with the formation of a &quot;Pathways for Radford&quot; group seeking city support, leading to a development plan. The park falls along the original boundary between the former towns of East Radford, home of Radford University, and the traditionally more industrial West Radford. The towns were joined with the bridging of Connelly&#x27;s Run by the city&#x27;s East and West Main Street. The park&#x27;s bikeway extends through a culvert tunnel beneath Main Street, connecting to the city&#x27;s Bissett Park along the New River. Wildwood Park includes a public restroom and a roofed pavilion with meeting or picnic tables. The park is used by both Radford University and Radford High School for biology classes as well as summer nature lectures for the public. Students perform animal, plant, and stream tests, tree population counts, clean stream testing (for federal use), and observation of wildlife, Monarch butterflies, and spring wildflowers. The well-documented variety of flowers is especially attractive to visitors. Wildlife include many native birds as well as deer, raccoons, opossums, skunks, and groundhogs. 
The western slope includes Adams Cave, a limestone cave used for saltpeter during the Civil War; the cave entrance is now gated and locked.
A shallow stream, Connelly&#x27;s Run, flows through the park and provides great crayfish hunting for children during the summer months. A culvert carries its waters under Main Street to the New River in Bisset Park. Connelly&#x27;s Run fed a city swimming pool for 45 years, but the pool was closed and filled-in when faced with the prospect of racial integration in 1965.

==Geography==
Radford is located at (37.127585, −80.569523).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (3.3%) is water. The New River runs along the southwestern, western and northern edge of the city.

===Weather and climate history===

The worst river flooding in Radford&#x27;s recorded history occurred on August 14, 1940, with a slow-moving tropical depression. The 1940 hurricane season produced eight storms, four of which were hurricanes. Around August 5 of that year, a tropical storm was detected along the northern Leeward Islands in the West Indies. The storm brought wind gusts of 44 mph to San Juan, Puerto Rico, as it moved northwestward. By August 6 it began a turn to the north while producing rough seas in the southeastern Bahamas. Four days later on August 10 the S.S. Maine off the southeast coast measured hurricane-force winds and the storm began movement again toward the northwest. The storm made landfall as a category 1 hurricane on August 11 at approximately 4 PM near Beaufort, South Carolina (along the SC/GA border). Winds reached 73 mph in nearby Savannah, Georgia.

As the Georgia – South Carolina hurricane of 1940 moved inland, record rainfall amounts were observed from South Carolina north through the Smoky Mountains and into southwest and central Virginia. The storm meandered along the Cumberland Plateau region as rain began falling in Virginia on August 13. The mountainous terrain coupled with extremely slow movement from the now tropical depression produced tremendous amounts of rain. Copper Hill in Floyd County, Virginia, received the highest rainfall in the state: 17.03 inches.

The United States Geological Survey (USGS) stream gauge across the New River (Kanawha River) from Bisset Park measured an all-time record height of 35 feet 11.5 inches which is nearly 22 feet above what is considered flood stage. Residents in low-lying areas were forced to evacuate their homes and both the former Burlington Mills and the Lynchburg Foundry manufacturing plants were shut down because of high water. The road leading from Radford into Pulaski County towards Claytor Lake Dam was inundated and impassable. Thankfully, no deaths were reported across southwest Virginia, but several million dollars worth of damage occurred (1940 USD).

On October 18, 2011, a sign recognizing the historic flooding was dedicated in Bisset Park near downtown Radford. The sign was donated by local resident Anthony Phillips, a hydrometeorologist from Snowville, Virginia, and installation was sponsored by the National Weather Service and the United States Geological Survey through the High Water Mark (HWM) Project. The project helps raise awareness of flood risk by installing high-water mark signs in prominent locations within communities that have experienced severe flooding.

===Adjacent counties===
* Pulaski County, Virginia – west
* Montgomery County, Virginia – east

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 15,859 people, 5,809 households, and 2,643 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 6,137 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 88.21% White, 8.10% African American, 0.25% Native American, 1.43% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.49% from other races, and 1.51% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.16% of the population.

There were 5,809 households, out of which 18.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 33.9% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 54.5% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.78.

The age distribution, which is strongly influenced by Radford University, is: 12.9% under the age of 18, 44.0% from 18 to 24, 19.6% from 25 to 44, 14.3% from 45 to 64, and 9.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 23 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $24,654, and the median income for a family was $46,332. Males had a median income of $33,045 versus $22,298 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,289. About 6.9% of families and 31.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.8% of those under age 18 and 9.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Local sports accomplishments==
* From 1946 to 1950, Radford hosted its first and only Professional Baseball team, The Radford Rockets, who played as members of the Blue Ridge League.
* John Dobbins was the 1st Black Football player for Virginia Tech.
* Radford High School has won 36 VHSL State Titles.
* Radford&#x27;s 1971 and 1972 high school football teams were undefeated and won over 26 straight games. The Bobcats won the AA state title 2 years in a row and they were considered one of the top high school football teams in the nation in the early 1970s.
* Virginia Tech Head Football Coach Frank Beamer was an assistant coach for the 1971 AA State Championship Radford Bobcats Football Team.
* Norman G. Lineburg is legendary in Virginia for coaching the Radford Bobcats from 1970 to 2006. He retired from coaching football after the 2006 season with 315 wins. Lineburg has the second most wins in VHSL football history behind legendary Hampton coach Mike Smith.
* Former Radford High School standout Darris Nichols was a basketball player for the West Virginia Mountaineers. Nichols is famous in Mountaineer-lore for hitting the game-winning three-point shot that sent the Mountaineers to the NIT Championship game in 2007. He also holds the school record for the most career games played and most tournament games played all-time, tied for the school record for the most all-time postseason tournament games played, and the NCAA record for playing 141 games without fouling out.

Radford High School Athletic State Titles:
2022 Class A Boys&#x27; Outdoor Track and Field,
2017 Class 2A Boys Swimming 
2013 Class A Boys&#x27; Outdoor Track and Field,
2013 Class A Boys&#x27; Basketball,
2012 Class A Boys&#x27; Cross Country,
2011 Class A Boys&#x27; Basketball,
2011 Class A Girls&#x27; Basketball,
2009 Class A Boys&#x27; Basketball,
2008 Class A Boys&#x27; Soccer,
2007 Class A Girls&#x27; Soccer,
2007 Class A Boys&#x27; Soccer,
2007 Class A Boys&#x27; Cross Country,
2005 Class A Girls&#x27; Basketball,
2002 Class A Girls&#x27; Tennis,
2001 Class A Girls&#x27; Tennis,
2000 Class A Girls&#x27; Tennis,
1999 Class A Girls&#x27; Tennis,
1998 Class A Wrestling,
1998 Class A Girls&#x27; Tennis,
1998 Class A Boys&#x27; Tennis,
1998 Class A Boys&#x27; Track,
1990 Class AA Girls&#x27; Track,
1989 Class AA Girls&#x27; Track,
1988 Class AA Girls&#x27; Basketball,
1988 Class AA Girls&#x27; Tennis,
1985 Class AA Girls&#x27; Tennis,
1984 Class AA Girls&#x27; volleyball,
1984 Class AA Girls&#x27; Basketball,
1983 Class AA Girls&#x27; Basketball,
1972 Class AA Football,
1972 Class AA Boys&#x27; Outdoor Track,
1972 Class AA Boys&#x27; Indoor Track,
1971 Class AA Football,
1963 Class AA Boys&#x27; Tennis,
1949 Class AA Boys&#x27; Basketball.

==Climate==
The climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Radford has a marine west coast climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfb&quot; on climate maps.

==Notable people==
* Richard Harding Poff, US Representative and Senior Justice of VA Supreme Court. Richard Nixon&#x27;s choice for nomination to the supreme court, he withdrew his name before the nomination reached the senate.
* The Gregory Brothers, musicians, comedians
* John Dalton, former Virginia Governor
* James Hoge Tyler, former Virginia Governor
* James Clinton Turk, United States District Judge and Minority Leader of State Senate
* Theodore Roosevelt Dalton, United States District Judge and two time Republican candidate for Governor
* Glen E. Conrad, United States District Judge
* Scott Long, human rights activist
* Mike Williams, Major League Baseball relief pitcher
* John Ripley, United States Marine Corps Colonel and recipient of the Navy Cross
* Kevin Hartman, Major League Soccer goalkeeper
* Margaret Skeete (1878–1994), oldest living American
* Paul Washer, Christian missionary and evangelist
* Seka (actress), actress, radio talk show host, and author
* Mike Young (basketball), Virginia Tech Hokies Men&#x27;s Head Basketball Coach

==Politics==

As reflected in the table below, Radford has leaned Democratic in presidential elections, but citizens have rarely given a candidate 60 percent of their vote. 













==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places in Radford, Virginia

== References ==

==External links==

* City of Radford
* The Roanoke Times regional section
* Radford News Journal – newspaper site
* New River Voice – Nonprofit online newspaper
* Radford University Website
* The Tartan – Radford University student newspaper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="0" end="7" title="Radford, Virginia" label="Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="18" end="34" title="Radford, Virginia" label="[[Lovely Mount]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="36" end="48" title="Radford, Virginia" label="Central City"/>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="50" end="63" title="Radford, Virginia" label="English Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="68" end="86" title="Radford, Virginia" label="Ingle&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="94" end="110" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="118" end="128" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="132" end="140" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="187" end="214" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="246" end="273" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="320" end="337" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923347" start="367" end="410" title="Blacksburg–Christiansburg metropolitan area" label="Blacksburg–Christiansburg metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q632465" start="436" end="454" title="Radford University" label="Radford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280148" start="478" end="493" title="Radford Army Ammunition Plant" label="Radford Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q514038" start="562" end="569" title="Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="574" end="584" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493378" start="753" end="768" title="John Blair Radford" label="John B. Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16161685" start="794" end="801" title="Arnheim (Radford, Virginia)" label="Arnheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="820" end="856" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934675" start="1092" end="1123" title="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad" label="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q844012" start="1902" end="1911" title="Lynchburg, Virginia" label="Lynchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q503366" start="1916" end="1933" title="Bristol, Virginia" label="Bristol, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934675" start="1965" end="1996" title="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad" label="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032601" start="2126" end="2138" title="Ingles Ferry" label="Ingles Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712616" start="3575" end="3594" title="James Charlton Farm" label="James Charlton Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996942" start="3596" end="3629" title="Ingles Bottom Archeological Sites" label="Ingles Bottom Archeological Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032601" start="3635" end="3647" title="Ingles Ferry" label="Ingles Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="3666" end="3702" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="3753" end="3765" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="3767" end="3782" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="3787" end="3796" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608612" start="3908" end="3940" title="Crumb and Get It bakery incident" label="Crumb and Get It bakery incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="4024" end="4033" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q21405624" start="4176" end="4190" title="Glencoe Museum" label="Glencoe Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="4302" end="4311" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174419" start="4332" end="4345" title="Second Empire architecture" label="Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515556" start="4485" end="4503" title="Gabriel C. Wharton" label="Gabriel C. Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="5896" end="5932" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9453" end="9480" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q952823" start="9555" end="9564" title="New River (Kanawha River tributary)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="9957" end="9972" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="9980" end="9991" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41211" start="10035" end="10056" title="San Juan, Puerto Rico" label="San Juan, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="10173" end="10180" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q813376" start="10428" end="10452" title="Beaufort, South Carolina" label="Beaufort, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="10510" end="10527" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207404" start="10537" end="10579" title="Georgia-South Carolina hurricane of 1940" label="Georgia – South Carolina hurricane of 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="10637" end="10651" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360486" start="10670" end="10685" title="Smoky Mountains" label="Smoky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="10717" end="10725" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="10757" end="10775" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="10808" end="10816" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502031" start="10977" end="10999" title="Floyd County, Virginia" label="Floyd County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="11064" end="11095" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q952823" start="11127" end="11152" title="New River (Kanawha River)" label="New River (Kanawha River)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11158" end="11169" title="Bisset Park" label="Bisset Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q514038" start="11512" end="11526" title="Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="11635" end="11643" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045317" start="11884" end="11902" title="hydrometeorologist" label="hydrometeorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548736" start="11908" end="11927" title="Snowville, Virginia" label="Snowville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="11967" end="11991" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="12000" end="12031" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q514038" start="12267" end="12291" title="Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Pulaski County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="12301" end="12328" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="12614" end="12620" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="12719" end="12737" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12843" end="12848" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12856" end="12872" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12880" end="12895" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12903" end="12908" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12916" end="12932" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12945" end="12956" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="12992" end="13000" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13004" end="13010" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="13164" end="13179" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="14003" end="14020" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="14113" end="14125" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255068" start="14320" end="14335" title="Radford Rockets" label="Radford Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929719" start="14366" end="14383" title="Blue Ridge League" label="Blue Ridge League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5485253" start="14800" end="14812" title="Frank Beamer" label="Frank Beamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q100890955" start="15211" end="15225" title="Darris Nichols" label="Darris Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="17097" end="17126" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="17149" end="17174" title="marine west coast climate" label="marine west coast climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307742" start="17243" end="17263" title="Richard Harding Poff" label="Richard Harding Poff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521161" start="17453" end="17473" title="The Gregory Brothers" label="The Gregory Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q880687" start="17498" end="17509" title="John N. Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q264874" start="17538" end="17554" title="James Hoge Tyler" label="James Hoge Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131476" start="17583" end="17601" title="James Clinton Turk" label="James Clinton Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781986" start="17670" end="17695" title="Theodore Roosevelt Dalton" label="Theodore Roosevelt Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567702" start="17775" end="17789" title="Glen E. Conrad" label="Glen E. Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436721" start="17822" end="17832" title="Scott Long" label="Scott Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339601" start="17858" end="17871" title="Mike Williams (baseball player)" label="Mike Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254978" start="17912" end="17923" title="John Ripley (USMC)" label="John Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="17925" end="17951" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q558250" start="17994" end="18007" title="Kevin Hartman" label="Kevin Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="18009" end="18028" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309504" start="18042" end="18057" title="Margaret Skeete" label="Margaret Skeete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499480" start="18096" end="18107" title="Paul Washer" label="Paul Washer"/>
<link wikidata="Q255121" start="18147" end="18161" title="Seka (actress)" label="Seka (actress)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849350" start="18207" end="18230" title="Mike Young (basketball)" label="Mike Young (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18489" end="18546" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Virginia#Radford (city)" label="National Register of Historic Places in Radford, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91260" wikidata="Q514038" url="?curid=91260" title="Pulaski County, Virginia">
<text>Pulaski County is a county located in the southwestern part of the U.S. state of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 33,800. Its county seat is Pulaski. Pulaski County is part of the Blacksburg–Christiansburg, VA Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Pulaski County was formed on March 30, 1839, from parts of Montgomery and Wythe counties, becoming the 87th county of the Commonwealth of Virginia. It was named for Count Casimir Pulaski, an exiled Polish nobleman who fought during the American Revolution as part of George Washington&#x27;s army. He joined the army in 1777 and became a brigadier general and chief of cavalry in the Continental Army. He was fatally wounded at Savannah and died on October 11, 1779.

This area of the Blue Ridge has rolling hills and was settled by mostly small farmers, recent Scots-Irish and German immigrants and their descendants who migrated down the Shenandoah Valley from Pennsylvania in the mid to late-18th century. They pushed out or killed most Native Americans in the area. The new settlers were yeomen, who held fewer slaves than in the Tidewater area. Nonetheless, by 1840 about one-quarter of the population was made up of enslaved black Americans. The county had 3,739 persons, consisting of 2,768 free whites, and 971 blacks. Some 17 of the latter were free blacks.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.0%) is water. Pulaski County is one of the 423 counties served by the Appalachian Regional Commission, and it is identified as part of &quot;Greater Appalachia&quot; by Colin Woodard in his book &quot;American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America&quot;.

Pulaski County is the site of Claytor Lake State Park, which is located on Claytor Lake, a , long human-made lake on the New River created for a hydroelectric project of Appalachian Power Company. Claytor Lake State Park, located on the north side of the lake, provides 497 acres of park with camping, cabins, picnic areas, and a swimming beach, as well as a marina. It is named for W. Graham Claytor, Sr. (1886–1971) of Roanoke, Virginia, a vice president of Appalachian Power who supervised construction of the dam and creation of the lake.

Pulaski County has several public boating sites including Harry DeHaven Park, in Allisonia on Rt.639, in Dublin on Rt. 660, and Gatewood Reservoir, a 162-acre water supply impoundment owned by the Town of Pulaski.

=== Adjacent counties / Independent city ===
* Bland County, Virginia – northwest
* Giles County, Virginia – north
* Montgomery County, Virginia – northeast
* Radford, Virginia – northeast
* Floyd County, Virginia – southeast
* Carroll County, Virginia – south
* Wythe County, Virginia – southwest
Law Enforcement

Pulaski County Sheriff is Michael W. Worrell, a law enforcement veteran with twenty plus years of service to the citizens of Pulaski County. He is a graduate of Pulaski County High School and Radford University.

===National protected area===
* Jefferson National Forest (part)

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 35,127 people, 14,643 households, and 10,147 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 16,325 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.60% White, 5.57% Black or African American, 0.15% Native American, 0.32% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 0.37% from other races, and 0.94% from two or more races. 0.96% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 14,643 households, out of which 26.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.90% were married couples living together, 10.50% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.70% were non-families. 27.00% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.10% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.80.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 20.60% under the age of 18, 7.30% from 18 to 24, 29.20% from 25 to 44, 27.70% from 45 to 64, and 15.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.20 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $33,873, and the median income for a family was $42,251. Males had a median income of $30,712 versus $21,596 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,973. About 10.60% of families and 13.10% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.90% of those under age 18 and 11.50% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
The Volvo Trucks North America plant in Pulaski County will begin manufacturing a battery-powered VNR Electric truck model starting in early 2021. It is the largest Volvo truck plant in the world, and the Dublin, Virginia facility currently employed close to 3,000 people building multiple models of heavy-duty trucks.

==Schools==
===Secondary and Higher Education===
* New River Community College
* Southwest Virginia Governor School
* Pulaski County High School

===Middle schools===
* Pulaski County Middle School

===Elementary schools===
* Pulaski Elementary School
* Dublin Elementary School
* Critzer Elementary School
* Riverlawn Elementary School
* Snowville Elementary School

==Communities==

===Towns===
* Dublin
* Pulaski

===Census-designated places===

* Allisonia
* Belspring
* Draper
* Fairlawn
* Hiwassee
* New River
* Parrott
* Snowville
===Other unincorporated communities===
* Caseknife
* Claytor Lake
* Newbern
* Wurno
* Little Creek
* Delton
* Tinytown

==Politics==










===Pulaski County reps in state government===
* James A. Walker
* James Hoge Tyler

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Pulaski County, Virginia

==References==
==External links==
* Claytor Lake Webcam
* Pulaski County, Virginia official website
* Claytor Lake State Park (Virginia)
* Virginia Dept. of Game and Inland Fisheries, Claytor Lake webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q514038" start="0" end="14" title="Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Pulaski County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571371" start="42" end="54" title="Southwest Virginia" label="southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="67" end="77" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="81" end="89" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="101" end="112" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="145" end="156" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376301" start="160" end="167" title="Pulaski, Virginia" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q285816" start="199" end="209" title="Blacksburg, Virginia" label="Blacksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376400" start="210" end="224" title="Christiansburg, Virginia" label="Christiansburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923347" start="229" end="258" title="Blacksburg-Christiansburg metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q381854" start="444" end="459" title="Casimir Pulaski" label="Casimir Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="758" end="768" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="1195" end="1219" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved black Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500267" start="1327" end="1338" title="free people of color" label="free blacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1372" end="1390" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780854" start="1519" end="1550" title="Appalachian Regional Commission" label="Appalachian Regional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371958" start="1650" end="1732" title="American Nations" label="American Nations: A History of the Eleven Rival Regional Cultures of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130394" start="1771" end="1794" title="Claytor Lake State Park" label="Claytor Lake State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130389" start="1816" end="1828" title="Claytor Lake" label="Claytor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q952823" start="1862" end="1871" title="New River (Kanawha River)" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="1886" end="1899" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945601" start="2124" end="2146" title="W. Graham Claytor" label="W. Graham Claytor, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q501796" start="2162" end="2179" title="Roanoke, Virginia" label="Roanoke, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="2254" end="2257" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q495112" start="2547" end="2569" title="Bland County, Virginia" label="Bland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q951290" start="2584" end="2606" title="Giles County, Virginia" label="Giles County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q495120" start="2617" end="2644" title="Montgomery County, Virginia" label="Montgomery County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586070" start="2659" end="2676" title="Radford, Virginia" label="Radford, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502031" start="2691" end="2713" title="Floyd County, Virginia" label="Floyd County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q488917" start="2728" end="2752" title="Carroll County, Virginia" label="Carroll County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q513950" start="2763" end="2785" title="Wythe County, Virginia" label="Wythe County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079313" start="3060" end="3085" title="Jefferson National Forest" label="Jefferson National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3402" end="3408" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3511" end="3529" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3638" end="3643" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3651" end="3656" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3660" end="3676" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3684" end="3699" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3707" end="3712" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3720" end="3736" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3749" end="3760" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3825" end="3833" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3837" end="3843" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3971" end="3986" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4798" end="4815" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4913" end="4925" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5019" end="5045" title="Volvo Trucks#North America" label="Volvo Trucks North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373580" start="5220" end="5236" title="Dublin, Virginia" label="Dublin, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011240" start="5386" end="5413" title="New River Community College" label="New River Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259198" start="5453" end="5479" title="Pulaski County High School (Virginia)" label="Pulaski County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373580" start="5734" end="5740" title="Dublin, Virginia" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376301" start="5743" end="5750" title="Pulaski, Virginia" label="Pulaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732855" start="5786" end="5795" title="Allisonia, Virginia" label="Allisonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q962399" start="5798" end="5807" title="Belspring, Virginia" label="Belspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305844" start="5810" end="5816" title="Draper, Virginia" label="Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376028" start="5819" end="5827" title="Fairlawn, Pulaski County, Virginia" label="Fairlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682556" start="5830" end="5838" title="Hiwassee, Virginia" label="Hiwassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011215" start="5841" end="5850" title="New River, Virginia" label="New River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063811" start="5853" end="5860" title="Parrott, Virginia" label="Parrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548736" start="5863" end="5872" title="Snowville, Virginia" label="Snowville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5914" end="5923" title="Caseknife, Virginia" label="Caseknife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130389" start="5926" end="5938" title="Claytor Lake" label="Claytor Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016865" start="5941" end="5948" title="Newbern, Virginia" label="Newbern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8039301" start="5951" end="5956" title="Wurno, Virginia" label="Wurno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337215" start="5959" end="5971" title="Little Creek, Virginia" label="Little Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5974" end="5980" title="Delton, Virginia" label="Delton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808669" start="5983" end="5991" title="Tinytown, Virginia" label="Tinytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679906" start="6064" end="6079" title="James A. Walker" label="James A. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q264874" start="6082" end="6098" title="James Hoge Tyler" label="James Hoge Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977270" start="6115" end="6188" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Pulaski County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Pulaski County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91261" wikidata="Q183263" url="?curid=91261" title="Prince William County, Virginia">
<text>Prince William County lies beside the Potomac River in the Commonwealth of Virginia. At the 2020 census, the population was 482,204, making it Virginia&#x27;s second most populous county. The county seat is the independent city of Manassas. A part of Northern Virginia, Prince William County is part of the Washington metropolitan area. In 2020, it had the 24th highest income of any county in the United States.

==History==

At the time of European colonization, the native tribes of the area that would become Prince William County were the Doeg, an Algonquian-speaking sub-group of the Powhatan tribal confederation. When John Smith and other English explorers ventured to the upper Potomac River, beginning in 1608, they recorded the name of a village that the Doeg inhabited as &quot;Pemacocack&quot; (meaning &quot;plenty of fish&quot; in their language). It was on the west bank of the Potomac River, about 30 miles south of present-day Alexandria. Unable to deal with European diseases and firepower, the Doeg abandoned their villages in the area by 1700.

===Creation and divisions in colonial and early statehood era===
As population increased in the area, the General Assembly of the colony of Virginia split Stafford County, Virginia in 1731, and added a section which had previously been part of King George County in order to create Prince William County. The county was named for Prince William, Duke of Cumberland, the third son of King George II. The area encompassed by the 1731 act creating Prince William County originally included all of what later became the counties of Arlington, Fairfax, Fauquier, and Loudoun; and the independent cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, Falls Church, Manassas, and Manassas Park. Fairfax County was split from Prince William County in 1742, and first Loudoun (in 1757) and then the incorporated town of Alexandria (in 1779, part of which later became Arlington County) would later be split from Fairfax County. Fauquier County was created from western Prince William County in 1759.

In 1790 Prince William County&#x27;s population was 58% white; most of the remainder were enslaved African Americans. The county had been an area of tobacco plantations, but planters were changing to cultivate mixed crops due to soil exhaustion and changes in the market. In the first two decades after the Revolution, the number and percentage of free blacks increased in Virginia as some whites freed their slaves, based on revolutionary ideals.

===Post-Reconstruction era to present===
On March 19, 1892, two caucasian men, Lee Heflin and Joseph Dye, were lynched in Haymarket. They had been convicted of the murder of a girl and sentenced to death, but the mob did not want to wait for the legal system. The men were hanged from trees at the edge of woods; then the mob shot into their bodies. &quot;The Washington Post&quot; said, &quot;mob law...is a dangerous thing to encourage. There is too much of it already throughout the country, and it spreads like a contagion so long as public sentiment tacitly approves it.&quot; It was unusual that white men were lynched; in Virginia and the rest of the South, black men were overwhelmingly the victims of lynching, the violence by which whites maintained dominance.

The county was rural and agricultural for decades. Into the early 20th century, the population was concentrated in two areas, one at Manassas (site of a major railroad junction), and the other near Occoquan and Woodbridge along the Potomac River, which was an important transportation route. Beginning in the late 1930s, suburban residential development began, and new housing was developed near the existing population centers, particularly in Manassas.

In 1960 the population was 50,164. Continued suburbanization and growth of the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area caused that to increase rapidly in the following decades. There was expansion of federal, military and commercial activities in Northern Virginia in the late 20th century. By 2000, this was the third-most populous local jurisdiction in Virginia. From 2000 to 2010, the population increased by 43.2%. During this period the county became minority-majority: the new majority is composed of Hispanic (of any race, largely of Central and South American ancestry), African American, and Asian. In 2012 it was the seventh-wealthiest county in the country. The estimated population of 2014 is more than 437,000.

In 1994 The Walt Disney Company bought extensive amounts of land in Haymarket for a proposed Disney&#x27;s America theme park. Local resistance to the resort, because of its perceived adverse effects on the historic Manassas Battlefield, led to its end as a viable idea. William B. Snyder, a local business man convinced Disney to sell the property to him. Snyder, in turn, sold off most of the land to developers, except for the donated to the National Capital Area Council of the Boy Scouts, who used the land to create Camp Snyder for Cub Scouts.

The Marine Corps Heritage Museum and the Hylton Performing Arts Center opened in the 21st century. The American Wartime Museum is also to be located in this county. During the commemoration of the Sesquicentennial of the Civil War, re-enactment of the famous First and Second Battles of Manassas was planned.
==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.5%) is water. It is bounded on the north by Loudoun and Fairfax Counties; on the west by Fauquier County; on the south by Stafford County; and on the east by the Potomac River (Charles County, Maryland lies across the river). The western half of the county is occupied by a green belt known as the rural crescent.

The Bureau of Economic Analysis combines the independent cities of Manassas and Manassas Park with Prince William County (within which the two cities are enclaves) for statistical purposes:

===Adjacent jurisdictions===
* Loudoun County – north
* Fairfax County – northeast
* Charles County, Maryland – southeast
* Stafford County – south
* Fauquier County – west
* Manassas – center (enclave)
* Manassas Park – center (enclave)

===National protected areas===
* Featherstone National Wildlife Refuge
* Manassas National Battlefield Park
* Occoquan Bay National Wildlife Refuge
* Prince William Forest Park

==Government==
===County elected offices===
The county is divided into seven magisterial districts: Brentsville, Coles, Potomac, Gainesville, Neabsco, Occoquan, and Woodbridge. The magisterial districts each elect one supervisor to the Board of Supervisors which governs Prince William County. There is also a chairman elected by the county at-large, bringing total board membership to 8. A vice-chairman is selected by the board from among its membership. The county operates under the county form of the county executive system of government, with an elected Board of Supervisors. The board appoints a professional, nonpartisan county executive to manage operations of government agencies.

Christopher Shorter was named County Executive for Prince William County, Virginia, by the Board of County Supervisors in October 2022. Prior to serving as the County Executive in Prince William County, he served as the first City Administrator in the City of Baltimore, Assistant City Manager in Austin, Texas, and served for more than 10 years in various leadership roles for the District of Columbia government, including Director of the DC Department of Public Works.
In other elected County offices, the Prince William County Commonwealth&#x27;s Attorney, Amy Ashworth, and the Prince William County Clerk of Circuit Court, Jacqueline Smith are Democrats. The Prince William County Sheriff, Glen Hill, is a Republican.

===State elected offices===
Republicans formerly held six of the eight Virginia House of Delegates seats that include parts of the county, with that delegation having consisted of Robert G. Marshall, Scott Lingamfelter, Tim Hugo, Jackson Miller, Rich Anderson, and Mark Dudenhefer. In the 2017 legislative election, which saw the Democrats cut a Republican majority in the House of Delegates from 66 to 51, Prince William County saw its number of Republican Delegates be reduced from six to one, with Tim Hugo being the sole Republican to represent the county. Marshall, Lingamfelter, Miller, and Anderson all ran for reelection and were defeated by Democratic challengers Danica Roem, Elizabeth Guzmán, Lee Carter, and Hala Ayala respectively. Dudenhefer opted to retire and instead successfully ran for a seat on the Stafford County Board of Supervisors, and he was replaced by Democrat Jennifer Carroll Foy. Democrats Luke Torian and John Bell were already representing the county in the House at the time of the 2017 elections, and with the addition of the five newcomers, Democrats held seven of the eight House seats that include parts of Prince William County. Hugo was then defeated in the 2019 election by Democrat Dan Helmer and Democrats now hold all eight House seats.

Four of the five Virginia State Senate seats that include parts of the county are held by Democrats, including Democratic Sen. Jeremy Mc Pike, the President pro tempore of the Senate, Toddy Puller, George Barker and John Bell. Republican Richard Stuart also represents portions of the county.

In 2005, Democratic Gubernatorial candidate Tim Kaine won the county with 49.95% of the vote.

===National politics===
Democrats hold both of the U.S. Congressional seats that include parts of Prince William County. In 2006, Democratic U.S. Senator candidate Jim Webb carried the county with 50.51% of the vote.

In the 2008 United States presidential election, Democrat Barack Obama carried Prince William with 57.51% of the vote, compared to Republican John McCain who received 41.62%. Obama&#x27;s final rally the night before the election was held at the Prince William County Fairgrounds, just outside the city of Manassas. He was the first Democrat to carry the county since 1964.

Continuing demographic changes in the county, such as an increasingly diverse and urbanized population, were cited by &quot;The New York Times&quot; as contributing to Obama&#x27;s success in the 2012 United States presidential election and suggesting the future appeal of the Democratic Party in the United States. Between 2000 and 2010, county population had increased by 121,189 persons (43.2%). It had changed from a primarily white, rural county. Prince William by 2012 had an educated professional population with the seventh-highest income in the country; it is the first county in Virginia to be composed of a majority of minorities: Hispanic, African American, and Asian. Obama and the Democrats attracted their votes. &quot;Time&quot; identified Prince William as one of five critical counties in Virginia for the election. Obama defeated Romney soundly by 16 percentage points with a margin of 57%–41%, narrowly beating his 2008 margin.

The county continued its trend toward Democratic candidates in the 2016 United States presidential election, Prince William County voted 57.6% for Hillary Clinton to Trump&#x27;s 36.5%. Clinton&#x27;s victory represented the largest margin of victory for any presidential candidate in the county since 1988. In 2020, Prince William County voted for Joe Biden with 62.6% of the vote, the largest share of the vote for a Democratic candidate since 1944.

The county has been a focal point for right-wing conspiracy theories about illegitimate votes during the 2020 presidential election. Virginia conservatives cited the prosecution of Prince William County&#x27;s former top election official, Michele White, for alleged vote count fraud in 2020 as evidence of election fraud concerns. However, the case was dropped, and it was revealed that the errors in vote tabulation actually favored Trump, with no evidence of intentional fraud or significant impact on election outcomes.













==Economy==

===Top employers===
According to the county&#x27;s 2013 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the county are:

Prince William and neighboring Loudoun County are home to millions of square feet of data centers.

== Education ==

=== Secondary ===
Prince William County Public Schools is the second largest school system in Virginia (having, circa 2007, overtaken Virginia Beach City Public Schools). The system consists of 57 elementary, 16 middle, and 13 high schools, as well as a virtual high school, two traditional schools, three special education schools, and two alternative schools. The Superintendent of Prince William County Public Schools is Dr. LaTanya McDade. The system has a television station called PWCS-TV. It is programmed and operated by Prince William County Public Schools&#x27; Media Production Services Department and is accessible to Comcast and Verizon subscribers in Prince William County.

The county system serves all parts of the county except for Marine Corps Base Quantico, which is served by the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA). The DoDEA high school is Quantico Middle High School.

=== Higher ===
=== Catholic Schools ===
The Diocese of Arlington provides education from pre-K through middle school at multiple diocesan run schools, and grades 9-12 at Pope John Paul the Great Catholic High School in Dumfries.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 402,002 people, 137,115 housing units, and 130,785 households residing in the county. The population density was . There were 137,115 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county (reporting as only one race) was:
* 57.8% White
* 20.2% Black or African American
* 0.6% Native American
* 7.5% Asian (1.5% Indian, 1.2% Filipino, 1.2% Korean, 0.8% Vietnamese 0.6% Chinese, 0.1% Japanese, 2.1% Other Asian)
* 0.1% Pacific Islander
* 9.1% from other races
* and 5.1% from two or more races
* 20.3% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race (6.8% Salvadoran, 3.7% Mexican, 1.8% Puerto Rican, 1.1% Guatemalan, 1.0% Peruvian, 0.9% Honduran, 0.7% Bolivian, 0.4% Colombian, 0.3% Nicaraguan, 0.3% Dominican)

Also according to census figures, there were 130,785 households in Prince William County as of April 1, 2010. According to the Census Bureau&#x27;s 2009 American Community Survey, 76.1% of the county&#x27;s households are occupied by families, (compared to 66.5% in the United States). This represents a decrease of 4.6 percentage points since 1990, when 80.7% of households in the county were families. Approximately 42.2% of Prince William County&#x27;s households are family households occupied by parents with their own children under 18 years of age.

According to the Census Bureau&#x27;s 2009 American Community Survey, 29.3% of the total County population is under 18 years of age; approximately 6.5% is aged 65 and over. The median age of the population is 33.2 years. The 2009 American Community Survey also indicated that 50.0% of the county&#x27;s population is male and 50.0% is female.

According to the 2009 American Community Survey, the 2009 median household income in Prince William County was $89,785. The per capita income for the county was $35,890. The 2009 American Community Survey reported that in 2009, 6.0% of Prince William County&#x27;s population was living below the poverty line, including 7.7% of those under age 18 and 5.3% of those age 65 or over.

It is a majority-minority county, with &quot;White, not Hispanic or Latino&quot; at 44.8%, &quot;Hispanic or Latino&quot; at 22.3%, and &quot;Black or African American&quot; at 21.8% the chief groups.

== Sports ==
Northern Virginia FC is an American minor league soccer team, also located in Woodbridge, Virginia. NoVa FC has minor league affiliation with D.C. United, Washington, D.C. Major League Soccer franchise.

The historic Old Dominion Speedway was located in Manassas. Opened in 1948, it was the location of the first commercial drag race held on the East Coast, and was a stop on the NASCAR Grand National schedule in the late 50s and early 60s. Old Dominion Speedway closed in the Fall of 2012 because of noise complaints.

== Museums ==

The National Museum of the Marine Corps is located in Triangle, Virginia and is free to the public. The Historic Preservation Division of Prince William County also operates five museums: Rippon Lodge Historic Site, Brentsville Historic Centre, Bristoe Station Battlefield Heritage Park, Lucasville Historic Site, and Ben Lomond Historic Site.

== Libraries ==
The Prince William Public Library System is a regional public library system that serves Prince William County, the City of Manassas and the City of Manassas Park. The system consists of 6 full-service branches and 5 neighborhood branches that covers the entire Prince William area.

== Parks ==

Two National Parks lie within the county. Prince William Forest Park was established as Chopawamsic Recreational Demonstration Area in 1936 and is located in eastern Prince William County. This is the largest protected natural area in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan region at over . Manassas National Battlefield Park, located north of Manassas in Prince William County, preserves the site of two major American Civil War battles: the First Battle of Manassas on July 21, 1861, and the Second Battle of Manassas which was fought between August 28 and 30, 1862. Outside the South, these battles are commonly referred to as the first and second battles of Bull Run.

The Prince William County Department of Parks &amp; Recreation operates fifty parks, two water parks, two recreation centers (Birchdale Rec. Center and Sharron Baucom Dale City Rec. Center), two community centers, six sports complexes, and an ice-skating rink:
* Prince William Forest Park, the largest National Park Service property in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area
* Leesylvania State Park, the ancestral home of the Lee family, with a range of recreational activities and views of the river
* Manassas National Battlefield Park, a Civil War battlefield

== Transportation ==
The county is traversed by many major highways and roads, including the following:
* Interstate 66
* Interstate 95
* U.S. Route 1 (Richmond Highway)
* U.S. Route 15 (James Madison Highway)
* U.S. Route 29 (Lee Highway)
* State Route 28 (Nokesville Road/Centerville Road)
* State Route 55 (John Marshall Highway/Washington Street)
* State Route 123 (Gordon Boulevard)
* State Route 215 (Vint Hill Road)
* State Route 234 (Dumfries Road/Prince William Parkway/Sudley Road)
* State Route 234 Business (Dumfries Road/Grant Avenue/Sudley Road)
* State Route 294 (Prince William Parkway)
* State Route 393 (Campus Drive)
* State Route 394 (College Drive)
* State Route 612 (Yates Ford Road)
* State Route 619 (Linton Hall Road/Bristow Road/Joplin Road/Fuller Heights Road)
* State Route 784 (Dale Boulevard)

Manassas Regional Airport lies near its namesake city; for commercial passengers, both Dulles Airport and Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport are located nearby.

Public bus service in the county is provided by the Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission. Services provided by PRTC include OmniRide, OmniLink, and OmniMatch.

The county is served by both Virginia Railway Express (VRE) lines. The Manassas line has the Manassas Park, Manassas, and Broad Run / Airport stations. The Fredericksburg line has the Woodbridge, Rippon, and Quantico stations. The Manassas, Quantico and Woodbridge stations are also served by Amtrak.

==Communities==
===Towns===
* Dumfries
* Haymarket
* Occoquan
* Quantico

===Villages===
* Nokesville

===Hamlets===
* Brentsville
* Catharpin
* Greenwich
* Woolsey

===Census-designated places===

* Buckhall
* Bull Run
* Bull Run Mountain Estates
* Cherry Hill
* County Center
* Dale City
* Gainesville
* Independent Hill
* Innovation
* Lake Ridge
* Leesylvania
* Linton Hall
* Loch Lomond
* Quantico Base
* Montclair
* Nokesville
* Potomac Mills
* Sudley
* Triangle
* Woodbridge
* Yorkshire
===Other unincorporated communities===

* Aden
* Ashland
* Bethel
* Bristow
* Buckland
* Canova
* Cornwell
* Featherstone
* Hoadly
* Joplin
* Quantico Station
* Rixlew
* Southbridge
* Sudley Springs
* Thoroughfare
* Waterfall
* Wellington
* West Gate
=== Former communities ===

* Agnewville
* Batestown
* Groveton
* Hickory Grove
* Hickory Ridge
* Kopp
* Minnieville
* Pamacocack

=== Independent cities ===
The independent cities of Manassas and Manassas Park are surrounded by Prince William County. Before becoming independent cities in 1975, as are all cities in Virginia, both were towns and officially part of the county. The Prince William County Circuit, District, Juvenile and Domestic Relations Courts, Prince William County Commonwealth Attorney&#x27;s Office, Prince William County Adult Detention Center, Prince William County Sheriff&#x27;s Office, and other county agencies are located at Prince William County Courthouse complex. The courthouse complex itself is located in a Prince William County enclave surrounded by the city of Manassas.

Prince William County, Manassas, and Manassas Park share a single judicial system (courts) and Constitutional offices (Commonwealth&#x27;s Attorney, Sheriff, Circuit Court Clerk).

==Notable people==
* Margaret Kempe Howell, mother-in-law of Jefferson Davis
* Austin Steward, abolitionist
* Tommy Richman, rapper

==Other important features==

* Marine Corps Base Quantico, a large military installation
* Hylton Performing Arts Center
* Jiffy Lube Live concert venue
* Potomac Mills, a tourist destination and largest outlet mall in the region
* FBI Academy, the Federal Bureau of Investigation&#x27;s training and research facility.
* Camp William B. Snyder, one of the largest Cub Scout Camps in the United States.

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince William County, Virginia
* Prince William County Department of Fire and Rescue
* Prince William County Police Department
* Prince William County Sheriff&#x27;s Office
* Splash Down Waterpark

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183263" start="0" end="21" title="Prince William County, Virginia" label="Prince William County"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="38" end="51" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="59" end="71" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="75" end="83" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="92" end="103" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="192" end="203" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="211" end="227" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="231" end="239" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q596021" start="251" end="268" title="Northern Virginia" label="Northern Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="307" end="335" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622417" start="357" end="411" title="List of highest-income counties in the United States" label="24th highest income of any county in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288074" start="544" end="548" title="Doeg tribe" label="Doeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="553" end="563" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49291" start="590" end="598" title="Powhatan" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="626" end="636" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="894" end="907" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="945" end="955" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="1221" end="1246" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613700" start="1310" end="1328" title="King George County, Virginia" label="King George County"/>
<link wikidata="Q378088" start="1396" end="1430" title="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland" label="Prince William, Duke of Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1454" end="1463" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="1594" end="1603" title="Arlington County" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="1605" end="1612" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="1614" end="1622" title="Fauquier County" label="Fauquier"/>
<link wikidata="Q495310" start="1628" end="1635" title="Loudoun County" label="Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="1645" end="1663" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="1667" end="1677" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q501785" start="1679" end="1686" title="Fairfax, Virginia" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q408744" start="1688" end="1700" title="Falls Church, Virginia" label="Falls Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="1702" end="1710" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502269" start="1716" end="1729" title="Manassas Park, Virginia" label="Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="2125" end="2151" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="2595" end="2602" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="2840" end="2859" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373638" start="3454" end="3462" title="Occoquan, Virginia" label="Occoquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375929" start="3467" end="3477" title="Woodbridge, Virginia" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="3488" end="3501" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3791" end="3807" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="4163" end="4180" title="minority-majority" label="minority-majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="4440" end="4463" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q685489" start="4500" end="4509" title="Haymarket, Virginia" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776991" start="4525" end="4546" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s America" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="4648" end="4668" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas Battlefield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4954" end="4965" title="National Capital Area Council#Camp William B. Snyder" label="Camp Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5324" end="5342" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q495310" start="5445" end="5452" title="Loudoun County, Virginia" label="Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="5457" end="5464" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="5490" end="5505" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="5523" end="5538" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q179444" start="5563" end="5576" title="Potomac River" label="Potomac River"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="5578" end="5602" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="5675" end="5685" title="green belt" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="5720" end="5747" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="5783" end="5791" title="Manassas" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502269" start="5796" end="5809" title="Manassas Park" label="Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q495310" start="5938" end="5952" title="Loudoun County, Virginia" label="Loudoun County"/>
<link wikidata="Q341915" start="5963" end="5977" title="Fairfax County, Virginia" label="Fairfax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501319" start="5992" end="6016" title="Charles County, Maryland" label="Charles County, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="6031" end="6046" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502213" start="6057" end="6072" title="Fauquier County, Virginia" label="Fauquier County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="6082" end="6090" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="6101" end="6108" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q502269" start="6112" end="6125" title="Manassas Park, Virginia" label="Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439649" start="6179" end="6216" title="Featherstone National Wildlife Refuge" label="Featherstone National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="6219" end="6253" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075726" start="6256" end="6293" title="Occoquan Bay National Wildlife Refuge" label="Occoquan Bay National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244291" start="6296" end="6322" title="Prince William Forest Park" label="Prince William Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244283" start="6560" end="6580" title="Prince William Board of County Supervisors" label="Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="6665" end="6673" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998914" start="6830" end="6846" title="county executive" label="county executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="7548" end="7576" title="Commonwealth&amp;#x27;s Attorney" label="Commonwealth&amp;#x27;s Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="7622" end="7644" title="Clerk of Circuit Court" label="Clerk of Circuit Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="7697" end="7711" title="County sheriff" label="County Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="7813" end="7840" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933266" start="7922" end="7940" title="Robert G. Marshall" label="Robert G. Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436704" start="7942" end="7960" title="Scott Lingamfelter" label="Scott Lingamfelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803683" start="7962" end="7970" title="Tim Hugo" label="Tim Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117259" start="7972" end="7986" title="Jackson Miller" label="Jackson Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323733" start="7988" end="8001" title="Rich Anderson (Virginia politician)" label="Rich Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767419" start="8007" end="8022" title="Mark Dudenhefer" label="Mark Dudenhefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864475" start="8031" end="8056" title="Virginia House of Delegates election, 2017" label="2017 legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30323707" start="8415" end="8426" title="Danica Roem" label="Danica Roem"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887620" start="8428" end="8444" title="Elizabeth Guzmán" label="Elizabeth Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q42886824" start="8446" end="8456" title="Lee Carter (politician)" label="Lee Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887619" start="8462" end="8472" title="Hala Ayala" label="Hala Ayala"/>
<link wikidata="Q341755" start="8561" end="8597" title="Stafford County, Virginia" label="Stafford County Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q42835938" start="8631" end="8651" title="Jennifer Carroll Foy" label="Jennifer Carroll Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702403" start="8663" end="8674" title="Luke Torian" label="Luke Torian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003352" start="8679" end="8688" title="John Bell (Virginia politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60766413" start="8940" end="8953" title="2019 Virginia House of Delegates election" label="2019 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q73467807" start="8966" end="8976" title="Dan Helmer" label="Dan Helmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="9041" end="9062" title="Virginia Senate" label="Virginia State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263568" start="9151" end="9165" title="Jeremy McPike" label="Jeremy Mc Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241388" start="9171" end="9192" title="President pro tempore" label="President pro tempore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812758" start="9208" end="9220" title="Toddy Puller" label="Toddy Puller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039472" start="9222" end="9235" title="George Barker (Virginia politician)" label="George Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003352" start="9240" end="9249" title="John Bell (Virginia politician)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329288" start="9262" end="9276" title="Richard Stuart" label="Richard Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9327" end="9337" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q359888" start="9362" end="9371" title="Tim Kaine" label="Tim Kaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q532279" start="9577" end="9585" title="Jim Webb" label="Jim Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="9638" end="9678" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="9689" end="9701" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="9773" end="9784" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="10202" end="10242" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="10648" end="10656" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10740" end="10744" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="11022" end="11062" title="2016 United States presidential election" label="2016 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="11304" end="11313" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q102422710" start="11446" end="11476" title="Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election" label="right-wing conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="11843" end="11848" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q495310" start="12122" end="12136" title="Loudoun County, Virginia" label="Loudoun County"/>
<link wikidata="Q671224" start="12176" end="12187" title="data center" label="data center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244292" start="12226" end="12262" title="Prince William County Public Schools" label="Prince William County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="12302" end="12310" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934131" start="12342" end="12376" title="Virginia Beach City Public Schools" label="Virginia Beach City Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="12957" end="12983" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Marine Corps Base Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260231" start="13008" end="13048" title="Department of Defense Education Activity" label="Department of Defense Education Activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q108293001" start="13083" end="13110" title="Quantico Middle High School" label="Quantico Middle High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q866914" start="13157" end="13177" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Arlington" label="Diocese of Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229201" start="13283" end="13328" title="Saint John Paul the Great Catholic High School" label="Pope John Paul the Great Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="13406" end="13412" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q105102828" start="15461" end="15478" title="majority-minority" label="majority-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007180" start="15668" end="15688" title="Northern Virginia FC" label="Northern Virginia FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="15717" end="15723" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375929" start="15746" end="15766" title="Woodbridge, Virginia" label="Woodbridge, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238593" start="15810" end="15821" title="D.C. United" label="D.C. United"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="15823" end="15839" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="15840" end="15859" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877925" start="15885" end="15906" title="Old Dominion Speedway" label="Old Dominion Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974515" start="16208" end="16243" title="National Museum of the Marine Corps" label="National Museum of the Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378358" start="16258" end="16276" title="Triangle, Virginia" label="Triangle, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23137399" start="16569" end="16605" title="Prince William Public Library System" label="Prince William Public Library System"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="16620" end="16634" title="public library" label="public library"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="16681" end="16697" title="City of Manassas" label="City of Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502269" start="16706" end="16727" title="Manassas Park, Virginia" label="City of Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="16866" end="16880" title="National Park Service" label="National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244291" start="16904" end="16930" title="Prince William Forest Park" label="Prince William Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="17101" end="17117" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="17148" end="17182" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="17201" end="17209" title="Manassas" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221469" start="17300" end="17324" title="First Battle of Manassas" label="First Battle of Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="17351" end="17376" title="Second Battle of Manassas" label="Second Battle of Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244286" start="17534" end="17592" title="Prince William County Department of Parks &amp;amp; Recreation" label="Prince William County Department of Parks &amp;amp; Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244291" start="17793" end="17819" title="Prince William Forest Park" label="Prince William Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367175" start="17871" end="17905" title="Washington metropolitan area" label="Washington, D.C. metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516491" start="17908" end="17930" title="Leesylvania State Park" label="Leesylvania State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065295" start="17958" end="17968" title="Lee family" label="Lee family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747016" start="18035" end="18069" title="Manassas National Battlefield Park" label="Manassas National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="18073" end="18082" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q94600" start="18202" end="18215" title="Interstate 66" label="Interstate 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448996" start="18218" end="18231" title="Interstate 95 in Virginia" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818331" start="18234" end="18246" title="U.S. Route 1 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818366" start="18268" end="18281" title="U.S. Route 15 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508269" start="18308" end="18321" title="U.S. Route 29 in Virginia" label="U.S. Route 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507646" start="18338" end="18352" title="Virginia State Route 28" label="State Route 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507707" start="18390" end="18404" title="Virginia State Route 55" label="State Route 55"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507846" start="18449" end="18464" title="Virginia State Route 123" label="State Route 123"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508057" start="18486" end="18501" title="Virginia State Route 215" label="State Route 215"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508092" start="18521" end="18536" title="Virginia State Route 234" label="State Route 234"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18590" end="18614" title="Virginia State Route 234#oute 234 Business (Manassas)" label="State Route 234 Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244295" start="18658" end="18673" title="Virginia State Route 294" label="State Route 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507581" start="18701" end="18716" title="Virginia State Route 393" label="State Route 393"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507581" start="18734" end="18749" title="Virginia State Route 394" label="State Route 394"/>
<link wikidata="Q18381973" start="18768" end="18783" title="Virginia State Route 612" label="State Route 612"/>
<link wikidata="Q47256720" start="18804" end="18819" title="Virginia State Route 619" label="State Route 619"/>
<link wikidata="Q75353662" start="18886" end="18901" title="Virginia State Route 784" label="State Route 784"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747022" start="18920" end="18945" title="Manassas Airport" label="Manassas Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q466835" start="19007" end="19021" title="Washington Dulles International Airport" label="Dulles Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q676576" start="19026" end="19067" title="National Airport" label="Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235095" start="19141" end="19191" title="Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission" label="Potomac and Rappahannock Transportation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q170781" start="19292" end="19316" title="Virginia Railway Express" label="Virginia Railway Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="19334" end="19342" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747019" start="19356" end="19369" title="Manassas Park (VRE station)" label="Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747010" start="19371" end="19379" title="Manassas (VRE station)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971927" start="19385" end="19404" title="Broad Run/Airport (VRE station)" label="Broad Run / Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="19419" end="19433" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032404" start="19447" end="19457" title="Woodbridge (VRE station)" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335738" start="19459" end="19465" title="Rippon (VRE station)" label="Rippon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268905" start="19471" end="19479" title="Quantico (VRE station)" label="Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19556" end="19562" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375743" start="19595" end="19603" title="Dumfries, Virginia" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q685489" start="19606" end="19615" title="Haymarket, Virginia" label="Haymarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373638" start="19618" end="19626" title="Occoquan, Virginia" label="Occoquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204315" start="19629" end="19637" title="Quantico, Virginia" label="Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374419" start="19656" end="19666" title="Nokesville, Virginia" label="Nokesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961739" start="19684" end="19695" title="Brentsville, Virginia" label="Brentsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052125" start="19698" end="19707" title="Catharpin, Virginia" label="Catharpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604821" start="19710" end="19719" title="Greenwich, Virginia" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19722" end="19729" title="Woolsey, Virginia" label="Woolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473756" start="19765" end="19773" title="Buckhall, Virginia" label="Buckhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376671" start="19776" end="19784" title="Bull Run, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996618" start="19787" end="19812" title="Bull Run Mountain Estates, Virginia" label="Bull Run Mountain Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842510" start="19815" end="19826" title="Cherry Hill, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Cherry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177634" start="19829" end="19842" title="County Center, Virginia" label="County Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q976180" start="19845" end="19854" title="Dale City, Virginia" label="Dale City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374347" start="19857" end="19868" title="Gainesville, Virginia" label="Gainesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473739" start="19871" end="19887" title="Independent Hill, Virginia" label="Independent Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q109255778" start="19890" end="19900" title="Innovation, Virginia" label="Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374531" start="19903" end="19913" title="Lake Ridge, Virginia" label="Lake Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039167" start="19916" end="19927" title="Leesylvania, Virginia" label="Leesylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374440" start="19930" end="19941" title="Linton Hall, Virginia" label="Linton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375777" start="19944" end="19955" title="Loch Lomond, Virginia" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="19958" end="19971" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Quantico Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374832" start="19974" end="19983" title="Montclair, Virginia" label="Montclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374419" start="19986" end="19996" title="Nokesville, Virginia" label="Nokesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083609" start="19999" end="20012" title="Potomac Mills, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Potomac Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374664" start="20015" end="20021" title="Sudley, Virginia" label="Sudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378358" start="20024" end="20032" title="Triangle, Virginia" label="Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375929" start="20035" end="20045" title="Woodbridge, Virginia" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374628" start="20048" end="20057" title="Yorkshire, Virginia" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682152" start="20100" end="20104" title="Aden, Virginia" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20107" end="20114" title="Ashland, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Ashland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897830" start="20117" end="20123" title="Bethel, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969135" start="20126" end="20133" title="Bristow, Virginia" label="Bristow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983280" start="20136" end="20144" title="Buckland, Virginia" label="Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12832934" start="20147" end="20153" title="Canova, Virginia" label="Canova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172052" start="20156" end="20164" title="Cornwell, Virginia" label="Cornwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439644" start="20167" end="20179" title="Featherstone, Virginia" label="Featherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874287" start="20182" end="20188" title="Hoadly, Virginia" label="Hoadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276171" start="20191" end="20197" title="Joplin, Virginia" label="Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="20200" end="20216" title="Quantico Station, Virginia" label="Quantico Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339015" start="20219" end="20225" title="Rixlew, Virginia" label="Rixlew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569223" start="20228" end="20239" title="Southbridge, Virginia" label="Southbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633899" start="20242" end="20256" title="Sudley Springs, Virginia" label="Sudley Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796654" start="20259" end="20271" title="Thoroughfare, Virginia" label="Thoroughfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973952" start="20274" end="20283" title="Waterfall, Virginia" label="Waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981309" start="20286" end="20296" title="Wellington, Virginia" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376387" start="20299" end="20308" title="West Gate, Prince William County, Virginia" label="West Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693185" start="20339" end="20349" title="Agnewville, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Agnewville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868845" start="20352" end="20361" title="Batestown, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Batestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611587" start="20364" end="20372" title="Groveton, Prince William County, Virginia" label="Groveton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20375" end="20388" title="Hickory Grove, Virginia" label="Hickory Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5751276" start="20391" end="20404" title="Hickory Ridge, Virginia" label="Hickory Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431153" start="20407" end="20411" title="Kopp, Virginia" label="Kopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q10982736" start="20414" end="20425" title="Minnieville, Virginia" label="Minnieville"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20428" end="20438" title="Pamacocack, Virginia" label="Pamacocack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="20471" end="20489" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q511876" start="20493" end="20501" title="Manassas, Virginia" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502269" start="20506" end="20519" title="Manassas Park, Virginia" label="Manassas Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q125678725" start="21320" end="21341" title="Margaret Kempe Howell" label="Margaret Kempe Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q162269" start="21360" end="21375" title="Jefferson Davis" label="Jefferson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823294" start="21378" end="21392" title="Austin Steward" label="Austin Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q125778611" start="21409" end="21422" title="Tommy Richman" label="Tommy Richman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374564" start="21464" end="21490" title="Marine Corps Base Quantico" label="Marine Corps Base Quantico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192246" start="21556" end="21571" title="Jiffy Lube Live" label="Jiffy Lube Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235071" start="21588" end="21601" title="Potomac Mills" label="Potomac Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q76470" start="21637" end="21648" title="outlet mall" label="outlet mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822407" start="21665" end="21676" title="FBI Academy" label="FBI Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971250" start="21755" end="21777" title="Camp Snyder" label="Camp William B. Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063240" start="21852" end="21932" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince William County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince William County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183263" start="21935" end="21986" title="Prince William County Department of Fire and Rescue" label="Prince William County Department of Fire and Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244288" start="21989" end="22028" title="Prince William County Police Department" label="Prince William County Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244289" start="22031" end="22074" title="Prince William County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Prince William County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578373" start="22077" end="22098" title="Splash Down Waterpark" label="Splash Down Waterpark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91262" wikidata="Q337776" url="?curid=91262" title="Prince George County, Virginia">
<text>Prince George County is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 43,010. Its county seat is Prince George.

Prince George County is located within the Greater Richmond Region of the U.S. state of Virginia.

== History ==

Prince George County was formed in 1703 in the Virginia Colony from the portion of Charles City County that was south of the James River. It was named in honor of Prince George of Denmark, husband of Anne, Queen of Great Britain.

In 1619, &quot;Charles Cittie&quot; was one of four &quot;boroughs&quot; or &quot;incorporations&quot; created by the Virginia Company. The first Charles City County courthouses were located along the James River at Westover Plantation on the north side and City Point on the south side. The Virginia Company lost its charter in 1624, and Virginia became a royal colony. Charles City Shire was formed in 1634 in the Virginia Colony by order of Charles I, King of England. It was named as Charles City County in 1643.

Charles Cittie, Charles City Shire, and Charles City County all extended to both sides of the James River, which was the major transportation thoroughfare of the Virginia Colony throughout the 17th century. The original central city of Charles City County was Charles City Point, which was in an area south of the James River at the confluence of the Appomattox River. The name was later shortened to City Point.

In 1703, all of the original area of Charles City County south of the James River was severed to form Prince George County. As population increased, portions were divided and organized as several additional counties. City Point became an incorporated town in Prince George County.

===20th century to present===
Annexed by the independent city of Hopewell in 1923, City Point is no longer in the county.

Nearby the current bridges, this water-only section of the county at the Appomattox River was the site of a fatal bus accident at an open drawbridge on December 22, 1935; thirteen people died.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (5.9%) is water. The northwestern corner of the county near the cities of Hopewell and Petersburg, and the location of Fort Gregg-Adams is exurban, but the rest of the county is rural with most land devoted to agriculture and timber production.

===Adjacent counties / independent cities===
* Petersburg, Virginia – independent city, northwest
* Chesterfield County, Virginia – northwest
* Hopewell, Virginia – independent city, northwest
* Colonial Heights – independent city, northwest
* Charles City County, Virginia – north
* Surry County, Virginia – east
* Sussex County, Virginia – south
* Dinwiddie County, Virginia – west

===National protected areas===
* James River National Wildlife Refuge
* Petersburg National Battlefield Park (part)

==Economy==

===Top employers===

According to the County&#x27;s &quot;Annual Comprehensive Financial Report for the Year Ended June 30, 2023,&quot; the top employers in the county were:

Goya Foods has its Virginia offices south of the Prince George CDP.

== Government ==
In modern times, there are no centralized cities or towns in the county. Prince George Court House, which uses the postal address Prince George, Virginia, is the focal point of government. The County Administrator answers to the elected Board of Supervisors, who are elected from single-member districts.

===Politics===










===Law enforcement===
Prince George County is served primarily by the Prince George County Police Department and the Prince George County Sheriff&#x27;s Office. The police department&#x27;s responsibility is the enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth and local ordinances. The primary responsibility of the Sheriff&#x27;s Office is the security of the courts and service of court (criminal and civil) papers. The Sheriff&#x27;s Office also assists the police department in the enforcement of the laws of the Commonwealth as a secondary responsibility.

===Correctional institutions===
Riverside Regional Jail is located west of 295 and south of the Appomattox River in the county. It serves seven member localities. It is overseen by the Riverside Regional Jail Authority Board.

In addition, the Federal Correctional Institution, Petersburg is located west of the regional jail, closer to the Appomattox River as it curves south. This complex for male inmates, located west of the independent city of Hopewell, Virginia, consists of both a low-security facility, with 1,111 inmates; 293 at the adjacent minimum-security satellite camp; and 1,595 at the associated medium-security facility. All are managed by the Bureau of Prisons (BOP).

== Towns, communities, region ==
There are currently no incorporated towns within Prince George County. Unincorporated towns or communities in the county include:

===Census-designated places===
* Disputanta
* Fort Gregg-Adams (a military base)
* Prince George
* Templeton

===Other unincorporated communities===

* Burrowsville
* Carson
* Garysville
* Jordan Point
* Kingwood
* New Bohemia
* Newville
== Transportation ==
Interstate Highways 95 and 295 pass through the county, as does north-south U.S. Route 301 and east-west U.S. Route 460. State Route 10 runs along the southern shore of the James River near several of the James River plantations located in the county. State Route 106 runs through Prince George, the county seat.

Freight railroad service for the county is provided by CSX Transportation, which interchanges with Norfolk Southern at Petersburg. The famous 52-mile long tangent rail line between Petersburg and Suffolk of the former Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad was built by William Mahone in the 1850s, and now forms a vital link of the Norfolk Southern system. A Norfolk Southern Railway automobile transloading facility is located nearby. There are future plans underway for a large Intermodal freight transport railroad-trucking transfer facility in Prince George County as well.

===Major highways===
* , the major north-south highway on the Eastern Seaboard, enters Prince George County from Sussex County. Access to the county is available at Exits 37, 41, 45, and 46 before the road enters the City of Petersburg.
* is the north-south bypass around Petersburg and Richmond, further north. Besides its southern terminus at Exit 46 on I-95, access to the county is available at Exits 3A and 3B before the road enters the City of Hopewell.
* , the principal south-north route Sussex County until it was supplanted by I-95. A spur of US Route 1, it enters Prince George County from Sussex County and serves as a frontage road along I-95, until reaching Carson, where it moves further away from the interstate. However, it does cross over I-95 at exit 41 along with an overlap of VA 35 (&quot;see below&quot;), and again at Exit 45 eventually entering Petersburg.
* , a major west-to-east corridor that runs southeasterly in the south-central of Prince George County, as a connecting route between the Central Appalachian Mountains and the Hampton Roads area. A spur of US 60, it enters the county from Petersburg entering New Bohemia, then later runs through Disputanta before leaving the county at the Sussex County line northwest of Waverly.
* , is a state route that runs west to east along the south side of the James River. Named James River Drive throughout the county, it enters the county from Hopewell at the bridges over the Bailey Creek, and briefly takes an overlap of VA 106/156 between Ruffin Road and Jordan Point Road. From there it passes south of the privately-owned Henshaw Airport near Garysville, then passes through Burrowsville, and after the intersection with Chippokes Road (VSR 610), crosses the Prince George-Surry County Line.
* , a south-north state road that enters the county from rural areas north of Disputanta. The route runs mainly southeast to northwest along Courtland Street from the Sussex-Prince George County Line and terminates at a pair of Virginia Secondary Routes northwest of the US 301/VA 35 overlap in Templeton. Both VA 35 and US 301 were part of the historic Jerusalem Plank Road, which was the site of a Civil War Battle in Petersburg.
* runs northeast from Petersburg as Courthouse Road, through Prince George, where it runs under I-295 with no interchange. It then encounters VA 156 (&quot;see below&quot;) which joins VA 106 in an overlap towards the Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge.
* runs northeast from Templeton at the southeast end of the US 301/VA 35 overlap. It passes through Disputanta, then joins VA 106 in an overlap east of Prince George where it too heads towards the Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 35,725 people, 10,159 households, and 8,096 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 10,726 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 60.93% White, 32.54% Black or African American, 0.42% Native American, 1.73% Asian, 0.15% Pacific Islander, 2.19% from other races, and 2.03% from two or more races. 4.92% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, on July 1, 2019, it is estimated that there is a population of 38,353 people living in Prince George County.

There were 10,159 households, out of which 41.90% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.50% were married couples living together, 12.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.30% were non-families. 17.20% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.76 and the average family size was 3.11.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 25.10% under the age of 18, 13.60% from 18 to 24, 33.30% from 25 to 44, 20.80% from 45 to 64, and 7.30% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 117.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 120.90 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $49,877, and the median income for a family was $53,750. Males had a median income of $37,363 versus $26,347 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,196. About 6.50% of families and 8.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.40% of those under age 18 and 8.30% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
=== Colleges and Universities ===
* Richard Bland College

===K-12 education===
The school division is the Prince George County Public Schools school district.

; Secondary schools
* Prince George High School 10–12
* N.B. Clements Jr. High 8–9
* J.E.J Moore Middle School 6–7

; Elementary schools
* D. A. Harrison Elementary School K–5
* L.L. Beazley Elementary School K-5
* Middle Road Elementary School K-5
* North Elementary School K-5
* South Elementary School K-5

==Notable people==
* Richard Bland – planter and statesman, member of the Virginia House of Burgesses.
* Richard Bland II – Planter and statesman, member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, and delegate to the Continental Congress.
* Theodorick Bland of Cawsons – Planter and statesman, member of the Virginia House of Burgesses.
* Theodorick Bland – Physician, revolutionary soldier, and statesman who became a major figure in the formation of the new United States Government, representing Virginia in both the Continental Congress and the United States House of Representatives.
* Colonel Robert Bolling – Planter and merchant who resided at Kippax Plantation.
* Jane Rolfe Bolling – Wife of Colonel Robert Bolling, granddaughter of Pocahontas and English colonist John Rolfe
* Jackie Bradley Jr. – Major League Baseball player, attended Prince George High School.
* Larry Brooks – National Football League player, graduated from Prince George High School
* Robert Williams Daniel – Banker who survived the sinking of the &quot;RMS Titanic&quot; and later served in the Virginia Senate; resided at Brandon Plantation.
* Margery Durant Daniel – Second wife of Robert Williams Daniel, daughter of Billy Durant, a businessman and founder of General Motors
* Robert Williams Daniel Jr. – Member of the US House of Representatives; served five terms representing Virginia&#x27;s 4th congressional district.
* Richard Eppes – Planter and surgeon in the Confederate States Army during the American Civil War; resided at Appomattox Manor.
* Rick Gates – Political consultant, lobbyist, and business associate of Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort graduated from Prince George High School. 
* Elmon T. Gray – Waverly businessman and son of Garland Gray; served in the Virginia Senate from 1971 to 1992.
* Samuel Jordan – Jamestown colonist and one of the first colonial legislators; established Jordan&#x27;s Point Plantation
* John Martin – Jamestown colonist who established Martin&#x27;s Brandon Plantation
* Johnny Oates – Major League Baseball player, coach, and manager, graduated from Prince George High School.
* Edmund Ruffin – Planter, agronomist, and southern secessionist; born at Evergreen Plantation in Prince George.
* Reggie Williams – NBA player; graduated from Prince George High School.
* George Yeardley – Jamestown colonist who established Flowerdew Hundred Plantation

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince George County, Virginia
* Prince George County Sheriff&#x27;s Office
* Prince George County Police Department

==References==

19. &quot;Quick Facts Prince George County, Virginia&quot; Retrieved July 1, 2019

==External links==
* Prince George County official website
* Prince George County Economic Development</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q337776" start="0" end="20" title="Prince George County, Virginia" label="Prince George County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="26" end="32" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="48" end="60" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="64" end="72" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="84" end="95" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="128" end="139" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474339" start="143" end="156" title="Prince George, Virginia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600736" start="202" end="225" title="Greater Richmond Region" label="Greater Richmond Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="233" end="243" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="247" end="255" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="320" end="335" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q337348" start="356" end="375" title="Charles City County, Virginia" label="Charles City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="398" end="409" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q317499" start="443" end="460" title="George of Denmark" label="George of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="473" end="501" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne, Queen of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152507" start="622" end="638" title="Virginia Company" label="Virginia Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="705" end="716" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310858" start="720" end="739" title="Westover Plantation" label="Westover Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123368" start="762" end="772" title="City Point, Virginia" label="City Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076276" start="875" end="893" title="Charles City Shire" label="Charles City Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="948" end="957" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="1116" end="1127" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="1373" end="1389" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123368" start="1423" end="1433" title="City Point, Virginia" label="City Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="1674" end="1691" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="1763" end="1779" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q502235" start="1783" end="1791" title="Hopewell, Virginia" label="Hopewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="1914" end="1930" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="1955" end="1958" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23383" start="1979" end="1989" title="drawbridge" label="drawbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2066" end="2084" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q502235" start="2214" end="2222" title="Hopewell, Virginia" label="Hopewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="2227" end="2237" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376750" start="2259" end="2275" title="Fort Gregg-Adams" label="Fort Gregg-Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="2433" end="2453" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340608" start="2486" end="2515" title="Chesterfield County, Virginia" label="Chesterfield County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502235" start="2530" end="2548" title="Hopewell, Virginia" label="Hopewell, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501789" start="2581" end="2597" title="Colonial Heights, Virginia" label="Colonial Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q337348" start="2630" end="2659" title="Charles City County, Virginia" label="Charles City County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506209" start="2670" end="2692" title="Surry County, Virginia" label="Surry County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340591" start="2702" end="2725" title="Sussex County, Virginia" label="Sussex County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q340606" start="2736" end="2762" title="Dinwiddie County, Virginia" label="Dinwiddie County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142161" start="2804" end="2840" title="James River National Wildlife Refuge" label="James River National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178190" start="2843" end="2879" title="Petersburg National Battlefield Park" label="Petersburg National Battlefield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590161" start="3076" end="3086" title="Goya Foods" label="Goya Foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474339" start="3125" end="3138" title="Prince George, Virginia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="3442" end="3465" title="single-member districts" label="single-member districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440140" start="4295" end="4339" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Petersburg" label="Federal Correctional Institution, Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q502235" start="4500" end="4518" title="Hopewell, Virginia" label="Hopewell, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="4794" end="4811" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="4842" end="4877" title="Unincorporated community" label="Unincorporated towns or communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282684" start="4935" end="4945" title="Disputanta, Virginia" label="Disputanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376750" start="4948" end="4964" title="Fort Gregg-Adams, Virginia (CDP)" label="Fort Gregg-Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474339" start="4985" end="4998" title="Prince George, Virginia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698822" start="5001" end="5010" title="Templeton, Virginia" label="Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000515" start="5054" end="5066" title="Burrowsville, Virginia" label="Burrowsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046897" start="5069" end="5075" title="Carson, Virginia" label="Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526237" start="5078" end="5088" title="Garysville, Virginia" label="Garysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276886" start="5091" end="5103" title="Jordan Point, Virginia" label="Jordan Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654793" start="5106" end="5114" title="Kingwood, Virginia" label="Kingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980617" start="5117" end="5128" title="New Bohemia, Virginia" label="New Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020837" start="5131" end="5139" title="Newville, Virginia" label="Newville"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="5161" end="5179" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448996" start="5181" end="5183" title="Interstate 95 in Virginia" label="95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450655" start="5188" end="5191" title="Interstate 295 (Virginia)" label="295"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818339" start="5237" end="5251" title="U.S. Route 301 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 301"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818473" start="5266" end="5280" title="U.S. Route 460 (Virginia)" label="U.S. Route 460"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507616" start="5282" end="5296" title="State Route 10 (Virginia)" label="State Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142168" start="5366" end="5389" title="List of James River plantations" label="James River plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507807" start="5413" end="5428" title="Virginia State Route 106" label="State Route 106"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474339" start="5442" end="5455" title="Prince George, Virginia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="5461" end="5472" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5483" end="5491" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="5530" end="5548" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="5574" end="5590" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q342428" start="5671" end="5678" title="Suffolk, Virginia" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051140" start="5693" end="5724" title="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad" label="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="5738" end="5752" title="William Mahone" label="William Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="5828" end="5852" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410234" start="5864" end="5876" title="transloading" label="transloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675313" start="5949" end="5977" title="Intermodal freight transport" label="Intermodal freight transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="6095" end="6102" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="6110" end="6126" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Eastern Seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q340591" start="6161" end="6174" title="Sussex County, Virginia" label="Sussex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="6265" end="6283" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="City of Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779930" start="6306" end="6312" title="Bypass (road)" label="bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="6335" end="6343" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q502235" start="6490" end="6506" title="Hopewell, Virginia" label="City of Hopewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q406204" start="6601" end="6611" title="US Route 1" label="US Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q409952" start="7136" end="7141" title="US 60" label="US 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="7169" end="7179" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10980617" start="7189" end="7200" title="New Bohemia, Virginia" label="New Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282684" start="7226" end="7236" title="Disputanta, Virginia" label="Disputanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871326" start="8222" end="8252" title="Battle of Jerusalem Plank Road" label="Civil War Battle in Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474339" start="8315" end="8328" title="Prince George, Virginia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888788" start="8472" end="8505" title="Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge" label="Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888788" start="8704" end="8737" title="Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge" label="Benjamin Harrison Memorial Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="9017" end="9023" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="9125" end="9143" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9252" end="9257" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9266" end="9271" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9275" end="9291" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9299" end="9314" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9322" end="9327" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9335" end="9351" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9364" end="9375" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9440" end="9448" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9452" end="9458" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="9732" end="9747" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="10560" end="10577" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="10673" end="10685" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324209" start="10812" end="10833" title="Richard Bland College" label="Richard Bland College"/>
<link wikidata="Q30266691" start="10883" end="10918" title="Prince George County Public Schools" label="Prince George County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244023" start="10959" end="10984" title="Prince George High School" label="Prince George High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324206" start="11268" end="11281" title="Richard Bland (burgess)" label="Richard Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="11321" end="11348" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324207" start="11352" end="11368" title="Richard Bland" label="Richard Bland II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="11457" end="11477" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782139" start="11481" end="11508" title="Theodorick Bland of Cawsons" label="Theodorick Bland of Cawsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="11548" end="11575" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749152" start="11579" end="11595" title="Theodorick Bland (congressman)" label="Theodorick Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="11609" end="11622" title="American Revolution" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="11700" end="11724" title="United States Government" label="United States Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11789" end="11827" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342195" start="11831" end="11853" title="Robert Bolling" label="Colonel Robert Bolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414676" start="11892" end="11909" title="Kippax Plantation" label="Kippax Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152682" start="11913" end="11931" title="Jane Rolfe" label="Jane Rolfe Bolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="11983" end="11993" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="12015" end="12025" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116248" start="12028" end="12046" title="Jackie Bradley Jr." label="Jackie Bradley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6490002" start="12117" end="12129" title="Larry Brooks (American football)" label="Larry Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="12132" end="12156" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351134" start="12208" end="12230" title="Robert Williams Daniel" label="Robert Williams Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="12278" end="12289" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="12320" end="12335" title="Virginia Senate" label="Virginia Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872592" start="12348" end="12366" title="Lower Brandon Plantation" label="Brandon Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667176" start="12370" end="12391" title="Margery Durant" label="Margery Durant Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q381381" start="12445" end="12457" title="William Crapo Durant" label="Billy Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="12488" end="12502" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356455" start="12505" end="12531" title="Robert Daniel" label="Robert Williams Daniel Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7934058" start="12624" end="12627" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325526" start="12654" end="12667" title="Richard Eppes" label="Richard Eppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="12697" end="12720" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12732" end="12750" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781660" start="12763" end="12779" title="Appomattox Manor" label="Appomattox Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42429771" start="12783" end="12793" title="Rick Gates (political consultant)" label="Rick Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="12854" end="12859" title="Donald Trump" label="Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371760" start="12877" end="12890" title="Paul Manafort" label="Paul Manafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244023" start="12906" end="12931" title="Prince George High School" label="Prince George High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q27589838" start="12936" end="12949" title="Elmon T. Gray" label="Elmon T. Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375497" start="12952" end="12959" title="Waverly, Virginia" label="Waverly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896233" start="12983" end="12995" title="Garland Gray" label="Garland Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200093" start="13048" end="13061" title="Samuel Jordan" label="Samuel Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276886" start="13138" end="13168" title="Jordan&amp;#x27;s Point Plantation" label="Jordan&amp;#x27;s Point Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246943" start="13171" end="13182" title="John Martin (Jamestown)" label="John Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="13185" end="13194" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872592" start="13220" end="13252" title="Martin&amp;#x27;s Brandon Plantation" label="Martin&amp;#x27;s Brandon Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702371" start="13255" end="13267" title="Johnny Oates" label="Johnny Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="13270" end="13291" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048129" start="13364" end="13377" title="Edmund Ruffin" label="Edmund Ruffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="13389" end="13399" title="agronomist" label="agronomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="13414" end="13426" title="secessionist" label="secessionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q639025" start="13477" end="13492" title="Reggie Williams (basketball, born 1986)" label="Reggie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="13495" end="13498" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546596" start="13551" end="13566" title="George Yeardley" label="George Yeardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462252" start="13604" end="13632" title="Flowerdew Hundred Plantation" label="Flowerdew Hundred Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977258" start="13649" end="13728" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince George County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince George County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337776" start="13731" end="13773" title="Prince George County Sheriff’s Office (Virginia)" label="Prince George County Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q337776" start="13776" end="13814" title="Prince George County Police Department (Virginia)" label="Prince George County Police Department"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91263" wikidata="Q505884" url="?curid=91263" title="Prince Edward County, Virginia">
<text>Prince Edward County is located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 21,849. Its county seat is Farmville.

==History==
===Formation and county seats===
Prince Edward County was formed in the Virginia Colony in 1754 from Amelia County. It was named for Prince Edward, second son of Frederick, Prince of Wales, and younger brother of George III of the United Kingdom.

The original county seat housed the courthouse and was called Prince Edward Courthouse; it is now the village of Worsham.

Near the headwaters of the Appomattox River, the Town of Farmville was formed in 1798 and was incorporated in 1912. The county seat was moved from Worsham to Farmville in 1871.

===Railroads===
In the 1850s, the Southside Railroad between Petersburg and Lynchburg was built through Farmville between Burkeville and Pamplin City. The route, which was subsidized by a contribution from Farmville, required an expensive crossing of the Appomattox River slightly downstream which became known as the High Bridge.

The Southside Railroad was heavily damaged during the American Civil War. The High Bridge played a key role during Confederate General Robert E. Lee&#x27;s final retreat from Petersburg to Appomattox Courthouse, where the surrender to Union General Ulysses S. Grant took place in April 1865.

After the Civil War, under the leadership of former Confederate General William &quot;Billy&quot; Mahone, the Southside Railroad was rebuilt. In 1870, it was combined with the Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad and the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad to form Mahone&#x27;s Atlantic, Mississippi and Ohio Railroad (AM&amp;O), which extended 400 miles across the southern tier of Virginia from Norfolk on Hampton Roads to Bristol. After the Financial Panic of 1873, the AM&amp;O fell into default on its debt; it was purchased in the early 1880s by new owners who renamed it the Norfolk and Western (N&amp;W). In 1982, it became part of the current Norfolk Southern Railway system.

Due to the high cost of maintaining the High Bridge over the Appomattox River, the line through Farmville was downgraded and eventually abandoned, in favor of the Farmville Belt Line, which had been built on a more direct line between Burkeville and Pamplin City, as had originally been envisioned in the planning for the Southside Railroad.

Another railroad formerly served Farmville. In the late 19th century, the narrow gauge Farmville and Powhatan Railroad was built from Farmville through Cumberland, Powhatan, and Chesterfield counties to reach Bermuda Hundred on the navigable portion of the James River near its confluence with the Appomattox River at City Point. It was later renamed the Tidewater and Western Railroad, but was dismantled in the early 20th century.

===Desegregation===
Prince Edward County is the source of &quot;Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County&quot;, a case incorporated into &quot;Brown v. Board of Education,&quot; which ultimately resulted in the U.S. Supreme Court decision that racially segregated public schools were unconstitutional. This ultimately led to the desegregation of all U.S. public schools. Among the five cases decided under &quot;Brown&quot;, Davis was the only one initiated by students, after they walked out in 1951 to protest overcrowding and poor conditions at their segregated school under Jim Crow laws.

The all-black R.R. Moton High School, named after Robert Russa Moton, a noted educator from neighboring Amelia County, did not have a gymnasium, cafeteria, or teachers&#x27; restrooms. Due to overcrowding, three plywood buildings had been erected, and some students had to take classes in a school bus parked outside. Teachers and students did not have desks or blackboards. The school&#x27;s requests for additional funds were denied by the all-white school board. On Monday, April 23, 1951, Barbara Johns, the sixteen-year-old niece of Reverend Vernon Johns, a civil rights activist, led students who staged a walkout protesting the conditions. The NAACP took up their case when the students agreed to petition for an integrated school rather than improved conditions at their black school. This vote passed by one count. Howard University-trained attorneys Spottswood W. Robinson and Oliver Hill filed suit against the county school system on behalf of the students. As in other Southern states, since the turn of the twentieth century black voters in Virginia had been largely disenfranchised, which resulted in their lacking political power.

In &quot;Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County&quot;, a state court rejected the suit, agreeing with defense attorney T. Justin Moore that Virginia was vigorously equalizing conditions in black and white schools. The state verdict was appealed to the U.S. District Court, which ruled for the plaintiffs, a decision the school district and the state appealed. Subsequently, it was one of five cases incorporated into &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, the landmark case in which the U.S. Supreme Court in 1954 ruled that segregated public schools were unconstitutional.

===Massive Resistance===

In 1956, the Virginia General Assembly passed a series of laws (the Stanley Plan) to implement Massive Resistance, a policy promoted by the Byrd Organization led by U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd, to avoid compliance with the Supreme Court ruling in &quot;Brown&quot; and its direction to integrate public schools.

The state legislature (overwhelmingly dominated by whites since disfranchisement of African Americans in the state in the early 1900s) created a program of &quot;tuition grants,&quot; which could be given to students so they could attend a private school of their choice. In practice, this meant state support of all-white schools that were developed as a way to evade integration of public schools. These newly formed schools became known as the &quot;segregation academies&quot;.

As a result of the &quot;Brown&quot; decision, and changes in Virginia laws, in 1959, the Board of Supervisors for Prince Edward County refused to appropriate &quot;any&quot; funds at all for the County School Board. It effectively closed all public schools rather than integrate them. The Prince Edward County Public Schools remained closed for five years. While other Virginia and some southern school systems resisted integration, Prince Edward County was the only school district in the country to resort to such extreme measures.

During the interruption in access to Prince Edward County&#x27;s public schools, white parents established the Prince Edward Foundation. It founded a series of private schools restricted to white children. These schools were supported by the tuition grants from the state and tax credits from the county. Collectively they became known as &quot;Prince Edward Academy&quot;, one of Virginia&#x27;s &quot;segregation academies&quot;. Prince Edward Academy operated as the &quot;de facto&quot; school system and enrolled K-12 students at a number of facilities throughout the county.

From 1959 to 1964, black students in Prince Edward County had to go to school elsewhere or forgo their education altogether. Some got schooling by living with relatives in nearby communities or at makeshift schools the community created in church basements. Others were educated out of state with funds raised by groups such as the Quakers. In the final year (1963–1964), the NAACP-sponsored Prince Edward Free School picked up some of the slack by educating some of the black youth who had been unable to leave the county to attend public schools elsewhere.

In 1963, federal district courts ordered the public schools to open; Prince Edward County appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. Ruling in &quot;Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County&quot;, the Court unanimously agreed in May 1964 that Prince Edward County&#x27;s actions violated the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment. At that point, county and state supervisors gave in rather than risk prosecution and prison, ending the era of Massive Resistance in Virginia.

The same summer, following the Griffith ruling, 16 students from Queens College (New York) ventured south to Prince Edward County during their &quot;Student Help Project&quot; Program, a precursor to the 1964 Mississippi Freedom Summer. The students served as teachers to the many African-American children who had been denied an education. These volunteers worked with the students to prepare them to resume classes when schools reopened that fall. The volunteers from Queens College were housed among leading African-American families in the county that summer. They used local churches as school houses during the week. Many of the students involved in the program have since donated their archives to the Queens College Department of Special Collections and Archives.

As a result of Prince Edward County&#x27;s actions, some students missed part or all of their education for five years. This group has been called the &quot;Lost Generation&quot; of Prince Edward County&#x27;s youth.

===Private education since 1964===
Even after the re-opening of the public schools, Prince Edward Academy remained segregated. Many of the segregated academies in Virginia eventually closed; others changed their missions and eliminated discriminatory policies. Some yielded on integration only after the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) revoked the tax-free status of non-profit discriminatory private schools. Prince Edward Academy was one of the latter and lost its tax-exempt status in 1978. In 1986, the school began to accept all students regardless of race or ethnicity. It was renamed the Fuqua School in 1992, in honor of J. B. Fuqua, a wealthy businessman who was born in Farmville and was a strong supporter of the school in its early years. Fuqua remains the only large private school in Prince Edward County, but a few other smaller private schools have been opened in recent decades.

===Robert Russa Moton Museum===
The former R.R. Moton High School building in Farmville has been recognized as a nationally significant community landmark. In 1998, it was designated a National Historic Landmark. It now houses the Robert Russa Moton Museum, a center for the study of civil rights in education.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.1%) is water. Most of the county&#x27;s streams drain into the Appomattox River, a tributary of the James River, but in the southeastern corner of the county, streams drain via the Nottoway River into the Chowan River and thence into Albemarle Sound in North Carolina. The highest point in the county is the top of Leighs Mountain at 714 feet above sea level.

===Adjacent counties===
* Cumberland County – north
* Buckingham County – northwest
* Amelia County – northeast
* Appomattox County – west
* Nottoway County – east
* Charlotte County – southwest
* Lunenburg County – southeast

===Major highways===
* (Farmville Rd; merges with US 460 to bypass Farmville. US Business 15 goes through the town of Farmville)
* (Patrick Henry Hwy)
* (Prince Edward Hwy)
* (N. Main St in Farmville)
* (Holly Farms Rd)

==Demographics==
===2020 Census===
===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 19,720 people, 6,561 households, and 4,271 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,527 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 62.17% White, 35.82% Black or African American, 0.18% Native American, 0.55% Asian, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 0.23% from other races, and 0.95% from two or more races. 0.94% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 6,561 households, out of which 29.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.50% were married couples living together, 14.90% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.90% were non-families. 28.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.30% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 20.20% under the age of 18, 23.50% from 18 to 24, 22.50% from 25 to 44, 19.60% from 45 to 64, and 14.20% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females there were 95.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.20 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $31,301, and the median income for a family was $38,509. Males had a median income of $29,487 versus $21,659 for females. The per capita income for the county was $14,510.

===Poverty===
About 14.6 percent of families and 18.9 percent of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.4 percent of those under age 18 and 15.9 percent of those ages 65 and over. Persons below poverty in the year of 2007 were 20.3 percent compared to 9.9 percent of Virginia. Native Americans accounted for 71.8 percent in 2000. There is a relatively large number of children between the ages of 12 and 17. This age group accounts for 27 percent of the poverty.

Unemployment accounted for 10.3 percent in Prince Edward County compared to 7.2 in all of Virginia.

==Education==
Prince Edward County Public Schools, the only school division in the county, operates the following schools, all located on the same multi-school campus in the Town of Farmville:
* Prince Edward County Elementary School
* Prince Edward County Middle School
* Prince Edward County High School

Also located within the multi-school campus is the Prince Edward County Career &amp; Technical Education Center, offering a range of specialized courses, such as business law, carpentry, agriculture and automotive technology.

The Fuqua School, member of the Virginia Association of Independent Schools, is the primary K-12 alternative to the public schools for Prince Edward County, having been founded as a segregation academy. It, like each of the county&#x27;s public schools, is located in Farmville.

The private men&#x27;s college Hampden-Sydney College is located in Prince Edward County, south of Farmville in the unincorporated community of Hampden Sydney, Virginia.

Longwood University, the third-oldest public university in Virginia, is located in Farmville.

==Politics==
Prince Edward County is a competitive county, voting Republican from 1960 to 1992, voting Democratic in 1996, voting Republican in 2000, voting Democratic from 2004 to 2020, and voting Republican in 2024. 










==Communities==
===Towns===
* Farmville (northern part of town in Cumberland County)
* Pamplin City (mostly in Appomattox County)

===Census-designated place===
* Hampden Sydney

===Unincorporated communities===
* Green Bay
* Meherrin
* Prospect
* Rice
* Tuggle
* Israel Hill- Former community for free black people, now part of Farmville.

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince Edward County, Virginia
* Prince Edward County Public Schools Website

==Notable people==
* J. B. Fuqua, businessman, philanthropist, chairman of The Fuqua Companies and Fuqua Enterprises. He was a supporter of the Fuqua School until his death in 2006, and the school adopted his surname in his honor in 1992.
* Joseph Eggleston Johnston, Confederate Army General
* Henry Watkins Allen, (1820-1866), Confederate Army officer, born in Prince Edward County.
* Blanche Kelso Bruce, the first black, full-term US Senator (1875 to 1881), Republican, born a slave in Prince Edward County.
* Charles S. Venable, Confederate Army officer, lawyer, served on the wartime staff of General Robert E. Lee. Born in Prince Edward County.
* Abraham Bedford Venable (1758-1811), a US Representative and Senator from Prince Edward County. He was a lawyer and a president of the Bank of Virginia. He died in a fire in Richmond in 1811.
* Reverend Vernon Johns, noted civil-rights leader
* James West (1931–present) is an inventor with over 250 patents.
* Lieutenant General Samuel V. Wilson, &quot;General Sam,&quot; 5th Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency and 22nd President of Hampden–Sydney College; credited for helping to create Delta Force

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bonastia, Christopher. &quot;Southern stalemate: Five years without public education in Prince Edward County, Virginia&quot; (U of Chicago Press, 2012).
* Brookover, Wilbur B. &quot;Education in Prince Edward County, Virginia, 1953-1993.&quot; &quot;Journal of Negro Education&quot; 62.2 (1993): 149–161. online
* Green, Kristen. &quot;Something Must Be Done About Prince Edward County: A Family, a Virginia Town, a Civil Rights Battle&quot;. Harper, 2015.
* 
* Smith, Robert Collins. &quot;They Closed Their Schools: Prince Edward County, Virginia, 1951-1964&quot; (U of North Carolina Press, 1965).
* Stolarick, Kevin M., et al. &quot;Creativity, tourism and economic development in a rural context: The case of Prince Edward County.&quot; &quot;Journal of Rural and Community Development&quot; 5.1 (2011). online
* Turner, Kara Miles. &quot;Both Victors and Victims: Prince Edward County, Virginia, the NAACP, and&quot; Brown&quot;.&quot; &quot;Virginia Law Review&quot; (2004): 1667–1691. online

==External links==
* Prince Edward County official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q505884" start="0" end="20" title="Prince Edward County, Virginia" label="Prince Edward County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="39" end="51" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="55" end="63" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="75" end="86" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="119" end="130" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375202" start="134" end="143" title="Farmville, Virginia" label="Farmville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="230" end="245" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q461562" start="259" end="272" title="Amelia County, Virginia" label="Amelia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q224215" start="291" end="304" title="Prince Edward, Duke of York and Albany" label="Prince Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="320" end="346" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="371" end="403" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="419" end="430" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036968" start="519" end="526" title="Worsham, Virginia" label="Worsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="556" end="572" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375202" start="586" end="595" title="Farmville, Virginia" label="Farmville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571068" start="741" end="759" title="Southside Railroad (Virginia)" label="Southside Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q511964" start="768" end="778" title="Petersburg, Virginia" label="Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q844012" start="783" end="792" title="Lynchburg, Virginia" label="Lynchburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374144" start="829" end="839" title="Burkeville, Virginia" label="Burkeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373567" start="844" end="856" title="Pamplin City, Virginia" label="Pamplin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030901" start="1025" end="1036" title="High Bridge (Appomattox River)" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1093" end="1111" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030901" start="1117" end="1128" title="High Bridge (Appomattox River)" label="High Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1174" end="1187" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744652" start="1228" end="1249" title="Appomattox Court House National Historical Park" label="Appomattox Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34836" start="1288" end="1304" title="Ulysses S. Grant" label="Ulysses S. Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="1404" end="1436" title="William Mahone" label="William &amp;quot;Billy&amp;quot; Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051140" start="1508" end="1539" title="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad" label="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934675" start="1548" end="1579" title="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad" label="Virginia and Tennessee Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816242" start="1602" end="1641" title="Atlantic, Mississippi and Ohio Railroad" label="Atlantic, Mississippi and Ohio Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="1721" end="1728" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="1732" end="1745" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q503366" start="1749" end="1756" title="Bristol, Virginia" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="1768" end="1791" title="Financial Panic of 1873" label="Financial Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q917079" start="1906" end="1925" title="Norfolk and Western" label="Norfolk and Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="1976" end="2000" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2173" end="2192" title="Farmville Belt Line" label="Farmville Belt Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="2427" end="2439" title="narrow gauge railways" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525700" start="2440" end="2471" title="Farmville and Powhatan Railroad" label="Farmville and Powhatan Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q495116" start="2505" end="2515" title="Cumberland County, Virginia" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q513792" start="2517" end="2525" title="Powhatan County, Virginia" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340608" start="2531" end="2543" title="Chesterfield County, Virginia" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892627" start="2562" end="2577" title="Bermuda Hundred" label="Bermuda Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="2610" end="2621" title="James River (Virginia)" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="2651" end="2667" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123368" start="2671" end="2681" title="City Point, Virginia" label="City Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230561" start="2708" end="2738" title="Tidewater and Western Railroad" label="Tidewater and Western Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379714" start="2851" end="2903" title="Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County" label="Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="2942" end="2969" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3010" end="3028" title="United States Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="3377" end="3390" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349430" start="3443" end="3461" title="Robert Russa Moton" label="Robert Russa Moton"/>
<link wikidata="Q461562" start="3497" end="3510" title="Amelia County, Virginia" label="Amelia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859265" start="3886" end="3899" title="Barbara Rose Johns" label="Barbara Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922160" start="3931" end="3952" title="Vernon Johns" label="Reverend Vernon Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="4044" end="4049" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="4217" end="4234" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580148" start="4253" end="4275" title="Spottswood William Robinson III" label="Spottswood W. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q351903" start="4280" end="4291" title="Oliver Hill (attorney)" label="Oliver Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="4375" end="4390" title="Southern United States" label="Southern states"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="4474" end="4489" title="disenfranchisement after the Reconstruction Era" label="disenfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4674" end="4689" title="T. Justin Moore" label="T. Justin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="4807" end="4826" title="U.S. District Court" label="U.S. District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="5171" end="5196" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600071" start="5226" end="5238" title="Stanley Plan" label="Stanley Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="5253" end="5271" title="Massive Resistance" label="Massive Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004227" start="5298" end="5315" title="Byrd Organization" label="Byrd Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q775382" start="5336" end="5349" title="Harry F. Byrd" label="Harry F. Byrd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446325" start="5923" end="5944" title="segregation academy" label="segregation academies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6243" end="6278" title="Prince Edward County Public Schools" label="Prince Edward County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509437" start="6834" end="6855" title="Fuqua School" label="Prince Edward Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="6965" end="6973" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="7403" end="7410" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7463" end="7488" title="Prince Edward Free School" label="Prince Edward Free School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608836" start="7773" end="7827" title="Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County" label="Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137223" start="7930" end="7953" title="Equal Protection Clause" label="Equal Protection Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760438" start="8186" end="8211" title="Queens College, City University of New York" label="Queens College (New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024031" start="8330" end="8356" title="Mississippi Freedom Summer" label="Mississippi Freedom Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="9416" end="9440" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509437" start="9706" end="9718" title="Fuqua School" label="Fuqua School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493800" start="9740" end="9751" title="J. B. Fuqua" label="J. B. Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="10193" end="10219" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349431" start="10239" end="10264" title="Robert Russa Moton Museum" label="Robert Russa Moton Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="10292" end="10304" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="10351" end="10369" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q495116" start="10815" end="10832" title="Cumberland County, Virginia" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495204" start="10843" end="10860" title="Buckingham County, Virginia" label="Buckingham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q461562" start="10875" end="10888" title="Amelia County, Virginia" label="Amelia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q490325" start="10903" end="10920" title="Appomattox County, Virginia" label="Appomattox County"/>
<link wikidata="Q515220" start="10930" end="10945" title="Nottoway County, Virginia" label="Nottoway County"/>
<link wikidata="Q427732" start="10955" end="10971" title="Charlotte County, Virginia" label="Charlotte County"/>
<link wikidata="Q508192" start="10986" end="11002" title="Lunenburg County, Virginia" label="Lunenburg County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818473" start="11066" end="11072" title="U.S. Route 460 in Virginia" label="US 460"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="11300" end="11306" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="11407" end="11425" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11533" end="11538" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11547" end="11552" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11556" end="11572" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11580" end="11595" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11603" end="11608" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11616" end="11632" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11645" end="11656" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11721" end="11729" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11733" end="11739" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="11866" end="11881" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="12693" end="12710" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="12835" end="12847" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243892" start="13596" end="13628" title="Prince Edward County High School" label="Prince Edward County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509437" start="13861" end="13873" title="Fuqua School" label="Fuqua School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446325" start="14039" end="14058" title="segregation academy" label="segregation academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="14168" end="14190" title="Hampden-Sydney College" label="Hampden-Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377230" start="14281" end="14305" title="Hampden Sydney, Virginia" label="Hampden Sydney, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551429" start="14308" end="14327" title="Longwood University" label="Longwood University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375202" start="14662" end="14671" title="Farmville, Virginia" label="Farmville"/>
<link wikidata="Q495116" start="14698" end="14715" title="Cumberland County, Virginia" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373567" start="14719" end="14731" title="Pamplin City, Virginia" label="Pamplin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q490325" start="14743" end="14760" title="Appomattox County, Virginia" label="Appomattox County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377230" start="14795" end="14809" title="Hampden Sydney, Virginia" label="Hampden Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602314" start="14846" end="14855" title="Green Bay, Prince Edward County, Virginia" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6809485" start="14858" end="14866" title="Meherrin, Virginia" label="Meherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250722" start="14869" end="14877" title="Prospect, Virginia" label="Prospect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322971" start="14880" end="14884" title="Rice, Virginia" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851646" start="14887" end="14893" title="Tuggle, Virginia" label="Tuggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107462693" start="14896" end="14907" title="Israel Hill" label="Israel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977255" start="14988" end="15067" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince Edward County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Prince Edward County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493800" start="15136" end="15147" title="J. B. Fuqua" label="J. B. Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q439669" start="15356" end="15381" title="Joseph Eggleston Johnston" label="Joseph Eggleston Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="15383" end="15399" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q328192" start="15410" end="15429" title="Henry Watkins Allen" label="Henry Watkins Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="15444" end="15460" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q881412" start="15502" end="15521" title="Blanche Bruce" label="Blanche Kelso Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082301" start="15629" end="15647" title="Charles S. Venable" label="Charles S. Venable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="15649" end="15665" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="15722" end="15735" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q329740" start="15769" end="15792" title="Abraham B. Venable" label="Abraham Bedford Venable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856197" start="15904" end="15920" title="Bank of Virginia" label="Bank of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922160" start="15972" end="15984" title="Vernon Johns" label="Vernon Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507196" start="16014" end="16024" title="James West (inventor)" label="James West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412817" start="16099" end="16115" title="Samuel V. Wilson" label="Samuel V. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280571" start="16146" end="16189" title="Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency" label="Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="16212" end="16234" title="Hampden–Sydney College" label="Hampden–Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q209114" start="16267" end="16278" title="Delta Force" label="Delta Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q21782674" start="16631" end="16645" title="Kristen Green" label="Green, Kristen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91264" wikidata="Q513792" url="?curid=91264" title="Powhatan County, Virginia">
<text>Powhatan County () is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. As of the 2020 census, the population was 30,033. Its county seat is Powhatan.

Powhatan County is included in the Greater Richmond Region.

The James River forms the county&#x27;s northern border, and the Appomattox River is on the south side. The county is named for the paramount chief of the powerful confederacy of tribes of Algonquian-speaking Native Americans in the Tidewater in 1607, when the British settled at Jamestown. Historically this Piedmont area had been occupied by the Siouan-speaking Monacan. They moved further west, abandoning villages in this area, under pressure from colonists.

In 1700 French Huguenot refugees settled at a Monacan abandoned village, which they renamed as Manakin Town. It was located about 20 miles above the falls on the James River. French refugees also settled on the other side of the river in two villages now known collectively as Manakin-Sabot in nearby Goochland County to the north.

==History==

===Mowhemencho Indian village===

&quot;See Native American tribes in Virginia&quot;

Long before the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century, all of the territory of Virginia, including the Piedmont area, was populated by various tribes of Native Americans. They were the historic tribes descended from thousands of years of succeeding and varied indigenous cultures. Among the historic tribes in the Piedmont were the Monacan, who were Siouan-speaking and were recorded as having several villages west of what the colonists later called Manakin Town on the James River.

They and other Siouan tribes traditionally competed with and were in conflict with the members of the Powhatan Confederacy, Algonquian-speaking tribes who generally inhabited the coastal Tidewater area along the Atlantic and rivers feeding it. They also were subject to raids by Iroquois from the north, who were based south of the Great Lakes in present-day New York and Pennsylvania. By the end of the 17th century, the Monacan had been decimated by warfare and infectious diseases carried by the mostly English colonists and traders; their survivors were absorbed into other Siouan tribes.

=== Manakin Town ===
In 1700 and 1701, about 700-800 French Huguenot religious refugees on five ships arrived at Jamestown from London, having been promised land grants and settlement in Lower Norfolk County by the Crown. Many of them had been merchants and artisans in London, which was overflowing with refugees from French Catholic persecution after the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685. Others had found temporary refuge in Holland, Switzerland, Germany, and Ireland. As the tobacco plantations along the James River were dependent upon shipping and water transport, the area in the Piedmont above the head of navigation at the fall line had not yet been settled.

Claiming the Norfolk area was unhealthful (although it became an area of entrepreneurs), Francis Nicholson, governor of the colony, and William Byrd II, a wealthy and influential planter, offered the French refugees 10,000 acres to settle at what became known as Manakin Town, on land abandoned by the Monacan Indians about above the falls of the James River. They also offered land on the north side of the James River, in what became Goochland County. They wanted the French there as a buffer from Virginia Indians for the English settlements. Byrd also hoped to develop land that he held in that area. The falls area was later developed as the settlement of Richmond, which became capital of the state.

The first years on the frontier were harsh for the urban French; of the 390 French who settled at Manakin Town, only 150 lived there by 1705. The falls on the river prevented them from traveling downriver and the lack of roads mean that they were very isolated, and essentially cut off from the Jamestown settlement. They ran short of supplies, and initially were ill-suited to carve an agricultural settlement from the frontier. They did use some land that had been cleared by the Monacan. Although they had planned to build a town based on the French village model, it proved impractical, as the most fertile land lay along the James River.

So, they placed their church and glebe lands in the center of the granted acreage and that became the center for their farms. The grant was divided more or less equally, with each grantee in 1710 receiving about 133 acres, stretching in narrow lots from the river, so that each household would have access to the water. By then, many French families had already migrated to other parts of Virginia and North Carolina. The grants would prove too limited for growing families.

The French became established and assimilated in colonial Virginia; services at the Manakin Episcopal Church (King William Parish) were gradually held more in English than French. The French ultimately adopted the English language and elements of culture, intermarried with many planter families of English descent in the area and to the west, and purchased African slaves as laborers when they could afford them. Many of the Huguenot descendants migrated west into the Piedmont and across the Appalachian Mountains into Kentucky and Tennessee, as did neighboring English colonists, as well as south along the coast, with some ultimately settling in Texas. Today that state has the largest number of members in the Huguenot Society, a lineage association.

Present-day State Route 288 and State Route 711 run about a mile east of the former town. The 1895 Huguenot Memorial Chapel and Monument, the fourth church building constructed there, is maintained by the Huguenot Society. It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In addition, the nearby Manakin Episcopal Church, built in 1954, continues full services for a regional congregation.

===Powhatan County===

In May 1777, the Virginia General Assembly created Powhatan County out of land from the eastern portion of Cumberland County between the Appomattox and James rivers. Residents named the county in honor of Chief Powhatan, paramount chief of the Powhatan Confederacy. He had allied with Algonquian-speaking tribes in the Tidewater, numbering about 30,000 in population at the time of the Jamestown settlement. He was also the father of Pocahontas, whom colonists perceived as friendly. While in captivity, she accepted Christianity and married English settler John Rolfe. Many of their descendants were counted among the First Families of Virginia.

For the first two years after the county was formed, Mosby Tavern served as the Powhatan County courthouse. When a new courthouse was built in 1778, the immediate area was named &quot;Scottville&quot; after General Charles Scott, a Revolutionary War soldier. He was later elected governor of the Commonwealth of Kentucky after it was formed in 1792 as a separate state from land ceded by Virginia. The courthouse area was later named Powhatan.

During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the county became more developed with expansive plantations as the frontier moved west. Yeomen farmers moved further into the backcountry where land was more affordable. The larger planters used numerous Black American slaves to cultivate and process tobacco, and later mixed crops, including wheat. Even after Reconstruction, Powhatan County used Convict lease workers (chiefly African American) to build roads in 1878.

The county continued to be organized on an agricultural economy until after World War II. It still has rural areas and historic plantations but is being developed with suburban residential housing and related retail.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water. It is bordered on the north by the James River and on the south by the Appomattox River.

===Adjacent counties===
* Goochland County - north
* Chesterfield County - east
* Amelia County - south
* Cumberland County - west
* Henrico County - east (easternmost tip of Powhatan touches the southwestern point of Henrico)

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* SR 711
* SR 609

==Demographics==
===2020 Census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 22,377 people, 7,258 households, and 5,900 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 7,509 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 81.50% White, 16.91% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.21% Asian, 0.33% from other races, and 0.84% from two or more races. 0.82% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

The largest ancestry groups in Powhatan County are: English American (18%), African American (17%), German (12%), Irish (11%) and Italian (3%)

There were 7,258 households, out of which 37.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.70% were married couples living together, 8.10% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.70% were non-families. 14.60% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.03.

In the county, the population was spread out, with 24.00% under the age of 18, 7.30% from 18 to 24, 34.70% from 25 to 44, 25.60% from 45 to 64, and 8.40% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 122.30 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 126.70 males.

The median income for a household in the county was $53,992, and the median income for a family was $58,142. Males had a median income of $37,948 versus $28,204 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,104. 5.70% of the population and 4.80% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total people living in poverty, 7.90% are under the age of 18 and 8.60% are 65 or older.

==Government==
Board of Supervisors
* District 1: William A. &quot;Bill&quot; Donati, Jr. (R)
* District 2 and Chairman: Steven W. &quot;Steve&quot; McClung (R)
* District 3: Robert W. &quot;Bob&quot; Powers (R)
* District 4: Mark A. Kinney (R)
* District 5 and Vice Chairwoman: Denise L. Morrisette (R)

The County Administrator is appointed by the Board of Supervisors and is Bret Schardein

Elected Constitutional Officers 
* Clerk of the Circuit Court: Teresa Hash Dobbins (I) 
* Commonwealth Attorney: Robert C. &quot;Rob&quot; Cerullo (R)
* Commissioner of Revenue: J.B. &quot;Jamie&quot; Timberlake, II (R) 
* Sheriff: Brad W. Nunnally (I)
* Treasurer: Rebecca C. &quot;Becky&quot; Nunnally (I)











==Education==
Powhatan County Public Schools serves over 4,300 students in the county. It is composed of three Elementary schools: Pocahontas Elementary School, Powhatan Elementary School, and Flat Rock Elementary School. These elementary schools currently educate Kindergarten through 5th grade. Powhatan Middle School was completed in 2018 and educates 6th grade through 8th grade. Powhatan High School, located at 1800 Judes Ferry Road, is the county&#x27;s only secondary school that teaches 9th through 12th grade. The current superintendent of PCPS is Dr. Beth Teigen (2022).

Members of the elected School Board are: 
* District 1 and Vice Chairwoman: Vicki R. Hurt (R)
* District 2: Susan Evans Smith (I)
* District 3: Jeanne M. Wade (R)
* District 4 and Chairman: James E. Taylor, III (R)
* District 5: Michele Leite&#x27; Ward (R)

The Roman Catholic Diocese of Richmond oversees Catholic education in the county, with the Blessed Sacrament Huguenot Catholic School in Powhatan. The school has grades PK2-12 on one campus.

==Notable people==
* William Henry Ashley, American frontiersman, politician, and co-owner of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company
* John Singleton Mosby, born in Powhatan County, was known by his nickname, the &quot;Gray Ghost&quot;, was a Confederate army cavalry commander of the 43rd Battalion in the American Civil War. He later served as the American consul to Hong Kong and also in the U.S. Department of Justice. He also served as a lawyer for the Southern Pacific Railroad.
* Lynne Doughtie, resident of Powhatan and US Chairwoman and CEO of the major accounting firm KPMG, was named to the &quot;Most Powerful Woman&quot; list of &quot;Fortune Magazine&quot;.

==See also==
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Powhatan County, Virginia

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* The County of Powhatan Official Website
* Powhatan&#x27;s Community Website
* Powhatan County Schools
* Powhatan Today</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q513792" start="0" end="15" title="Powhatan County, Virginia" label="Powhatan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="24" end="30" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="46" end="58" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="62" end="70" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="82" end="93" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="126" end="137" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561297" start="141" end="149" title="Powhatan, Virginia" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600736" start="187" end="210" title="Greater Richmond Region" label="Greater Richmond Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="217" end="228" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="278" end="294" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082403" start="345" end="360" title="paramount chief" label="paramount chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="402" end="412" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="422" end="438" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800894" start="446" end="455" title="Tidewater (geographic term)" label="Tidewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="493" end="502" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="561" end="567" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513658" start="577" end="584" title="Monacan (tribe)" label="Monacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="685" end="700" title="French Huguenot" label="French Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033258" start="954" end="967" title="Manakin-Sabot" label="Manakin-Sabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q506191" start="978" end="994" title="Goochland County, Virginia" label="Goochland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979972" start="1067" end="1101" title="Native American tribes in Virginia" label="Native American tribes in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="1215" end="1223" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1265" end="1281" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513658" start="1444" end="1451" title="Monacan people" label="Monacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="1462" end="1468" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849523" start="1699" end="1719" title="Powhatan Confederacy" label="Powhatan Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="1721" end="1731" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="1876" end="1884" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1929" end="1940" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2061" end="2080" title="infectious diseases" label="infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="2251" end="2259" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q323813" start="2304" end="2313" title="Jamestown, Virginia" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693666" start="2378" end="2398" title="Lower Norfolk County" label="Lower Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="2566" end="2581" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="2679" end="2686" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="2687" end="2698" title="Plantations in the American South" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="2709" end="2720" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689375" start="2806" end="2824" title="head of navigation" label="head of navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816534" start="2832" end="2841" title="Atlantic Seaboard fall line" label="fall line"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="2882" end="2889" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482046" start="2958" end="2975" title="Francis Nicholson" label="Francis Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55022486" start="3005" end="3020" title="William Byrd II" label="William Byrd II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979972" start="3369" end="3385" title="Native American tribes in Virginia" label="Virginia Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="3530" end="3538" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="5054" end="5061" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="5062" end="5068" title="slaves" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="5190" end="5211" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5346" end="5351" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5411" end="5427" title="Huguenot Society" label="Huguenot Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508188" start="5465" end="5480" title="Virginia State Route 288" label="State Route 288"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148118" start="5485" end="5500" title="Virginia State Route 711 (Chesterfield and Powhatan Counties)" label="State Route 711"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="5696" end="5732" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="5893" end="5918" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q495116" start="5983" end="6000" title="Cumberland County, Virginia" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="6013" end="6023" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox"/>
<link wikidata="Q578878" start="6081" end="6095" title="Chief Powhatan" label="Chief Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="6310" end="6320" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="6393" end="6405" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="6434" end="6444" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452987" start="6495" end="6521" title="First Families of Virginia" label="First Families of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712898" start="6577" end="6589" title="Mosby Tavern" label="Mosby Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q735235" start="6739" end="6752" title="Charles Scott (governor)" label="Charles Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="6756" end="6773" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="6820" end="6844" title="Kentucky" label="Commonwealth of Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561297" start="6958" end="6966" title="Powhatan, Virginia" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="7064" end="7075" title="plantations in the American South" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="7220" end="7234" title="African-American" label="Black American"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="7327" end="7341" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561743" start="7364" end="7377" title="Convict lease" label="Convict lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="7687" end="7705" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q422487" start="7813" end="7824" title="James River" label="James River"/>
<link wikidata="Q621682" start="7849" end="7865" title="Appomattox River" label="Appomattox River"/>
<link wikidata="Q506191" start="7894" end="7910" title="Goochland County, Virginia" label="Goochland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q340608" start="7921" end="7940" title="Chesterfield County, Virginia" label="Chesterfield County"/>
<link wikidata="Q461562" start="7950" end="7963" title="Amelia County, Virginia" label="Amelia County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495116" start="7974" end="7991" title="Cumberland County, Virginia" label="Cumberland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q341639" start="8001" end="8015" title="Henrico County, Virginia" label="Henrico County"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="8419" end="8425" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="8526" end="8544" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8652" end="8657" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8666" end="8671" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8675" end="8691" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8699" end="8714" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8722" end="8727" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8740" end="8751" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8816" end="8824" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8828" end="8834" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="8901" end="8917" title="English American" label="English American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="8925" end="8941" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="8949" end="8955" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="8963" end="8968" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="8979" end="8986" title="Italian American" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="9105" end="9120" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="9932" end="9949" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q108597356" start="10881" end="10911" title="Powhatan County Public Schools" label="Powhatan County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236884" start="11251" end="11271" title="Powhatan High School" label="Powhatan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643464" start="11399" end="11413" title="Superintendent (education)" label="superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q874969" start="11713" end="11747" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Richmond" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926290" start="11800" end="11842" title="Blessed Sacrament Huguenot Catholic School" label="Blessed Sacrament Huguenot Catholic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561297" start="11846" end="11854" title="Powhatan, Virginia" label="Powhatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345876" start="11922" end="11942" title="William Henry Ashley" label="William Henry Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q623564" start="11999" end="12025" title="Rocky Mountain Fur Company" label="Rocky Mountain Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q114171" start="12028" end="12048" title="John S. Mosby" label="John Singleton Mosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="12136" end="12160" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate army cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q255087" start="12178" end="12192" title="43rd Battalion, Virginia Cavalry" label="43rd Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="12200" end="12218" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="12252" end="12258" title="consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="12262" end="12271" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="12288" end="12314" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="12351" end="12377" title="Southern Pacific Transportation Company" label="Southern Pacific Railroad."/>
<link wikidata="Q493751" start="12472" end="12476" title="KPMG" label="KPMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="12541" end="12557" title="Fortune Magazine" label="Fortune Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977246" start="12581" end="12655" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Powhatan County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Powhatan County, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91265" wikidata="Q342803" url="?curid=91265" title="Portsmouth, Virginia">
<text>Portsmouth is an independent city in southeastern Virginia, United States. It lies across the Elizabeth River from Norfolk. As of the 2020 census, the population was 97,915. It is the ninth-most populous city in Virginia and is part of the Hampton Roads metropolitan area. The Norfolk Naval Shipyard is a historic and active U.S. Navy facility located in Portsmouth.

== History ==

In 1620, the future site of Portsmouth was recognized as a suitable shipbuilding location by John Wood, a shipbuilder, who petitioned King James I of England for a land grant. The surrounding area was soon settled as a plantation community.

Portsmouth was founded by Colonel William Crawford, a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses. It was established as a town in 1752 by an act of the Virginia General Assembly and was named for Portsmouth, England.

In 1767, Andrew Sprowle, a shipbuilder, founded the Gosport Shipyard adjacent to Portsmouth. The Gosport Shipyard at Portsmouth was owned by the Commonwealth of Virginia after the American Revolutionary War and was sold to the new United States federal government.

In 1855, the Portsmouth and Norfolk area suffered an epidemic of yellow fever which killed 1 of every three citizens. It became an independent city from Norfolk County in 1858.

During the American Civil War, in 1861, Virginia joined the Confederate States of America. Fearing that the Confederacy would take control of the shipyard at Portsmouth, the shipyard commander ordered the burning of the shipyard. The Confederate forces did in fact take over the shipyard and did so without armed conflict through an elaborate ruse orchestrated by civilian railroad builder William Mahone (soon to become a famous Confederate officer). The Union forces withdrew to Fort Monroe across Hampton Roads, which was the only land in the area which remained under Union control.

In early 1862, the Confederate ironclad warship CSS &quot;Virginia&quot; was rebuilt using the burned-out hulk of USS &quot;Merrimack&quot;. &quot;Virginia&quot; engaged the Union ironclad USS &quot;Monitor&quot; in the famous Battle of Hampton Roads during the Union blockade of Hampton Roads. The Confederates burned the shipyard again when they left in May 1862.

Following the recapture of Norfolk and Portsmouth by the Union forces, the name of the shipyard was changed to Norfolk Naval Shipyard. The name of the shipyard was derived from its location in Norfolk County. The Norfolk Naval Shipyard today is located entirely within the city limits of Portsmouth, Virginia. The Norfolk Naval Shipyard name has been retained to minimize any confusion with the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, which itself is actually located in Kittery, Maine, across the Piscataqua River from Portsmouth, New Hampshire.

During and after World War II, the shipyard flourished, and suburban development surrounded both Norfolk and Portsmouth. Portsmouth continued as the county seat of Norfolk County until 1963 when the new city of Chesapeake was formed in a political consolidation with the city of South Norfolk. Portsmouth&#x27;s other county neighbor, the former Nansemond County, also consolidated with a smaller city, forming the new city of Suffolk in 1974.
One of the older cities of Hampton Roads, in the early 21st century, Portsmouth was undergoing moderate urban renewal in the downtown.

The APM &quot;MAERSK&quot; marine terminal for container ships opened in 2007 in the West Norfolk section.

===Timeline===

* 1752 – Portsmouth founded by politician William Crawford; named after Portsmouth, England.
* 1779 – Portsmouth sacked by British forces during the American Revolutionary War.
* 1812 – Dismal Swamp Canal opens.
* 1821 – Fire.
* 1822 – Norfolk-Portsmouth steam ferry begins operating.
* 1824 – October 25: Lafayette visits Portsmouth.
* 1836 – Town of Portsmouth incorporated.
* 1837 – Portsmouth &amp; Roanoke Railroad begins operating.
* 1840 – Population: 6,477.
* 1846 – Norfolk County Courthouse built.
* 1850 – Population: 8,626.
* 1855 – Yellow fever outbreak.
* 1858 – City of Portsmouth incorporated as an independent city (separated from Norfolk County).
* 1865 – Zion Baptist Church founded.
* 1867 – Virginia Baptist State Convention organized during a meeting in Portsmouth.
* 1870 – Population: 10,590.
* 1890 – Became a stop on the Atlantic and Danville Railway. 
* 1894 – Annexation of portions of Norfolk County North of the city
* 1900 – Lyceum Theatre in business.
* 1910 – Population: 33,190.
* 1909 – Annexation of portions of Norfolk County West of the city. 
* 1914 – Portsmouth Public Library opens.
* 1919 – Expansion via the annexation of parts of Norfolk County that included the port zone (Pinner&#x27;s Point) along the Elizbeth River to the north and residential areas to the West.
* 1922 – Chevra Thilim Synagogue built.
* 1939 – Lyric Theatre in business.
* 1945 – Portsmouth Public Community Library founded with Bertha Edwards as the founding librarian
* 1948 – The fourth annexation since becoming an independent city, pushing the city boundary westward to Western Branch.
* 1949 – Portsmouth Naval Shipyard Museum established.
* 1950 – Population: 80,039.
* 1952 – Downtown Tunnel opens.
* 1955 – Portsmouth Historical Association founded.
* 1957 – WAVY-TV begins broadcasting.
* 1960 – Population: 114,773. Portsmouth annexes additional portions of Norfolk County, including ten square miles and 36,000 residents.
* 1963 – Public Library&#x27;s &quot;Local History Room&quot; established.
* 1966 – Virginia Sports Hall of Fame and Museum established.
* 1968 – Further annexation of Norfolk County including ten square miles of land, 14 square miles of water area, and 11,000 residents, all within the northern one-third of Western Branch Borough.
* 1974 – Richard Joseph Davis becomes mayor.
* 1981 – &quot;Portsmouth Times&quot; newspaper begins publication.
* 1984 – James W. Holley III becomes mayor.
* 1993 – Bobby Scott becomes U.S. representative for Virginia&#x27;s 3rd congressional district.
* 1998 – Museum of Military History established.
* 2001 – Randy Forbes becomes U.S. representative for Virginia&#x27;s 4th congressional district.
* 2010 – Population: 95,535.
* 2017 – John L. Rowe Jr. becomes mayor.
* 2023 – Rivers Casino Portsmouth, the first permanent Casino in Virginia History, opens in Portsmouth on Victory Blvd, January 23, 2023

== Historic sites ==
===Olde Towne===
The Olde Towne Historic District features one of the largest collections of historically significant homes between Alexandria, Virginia and Charleston, South Carolina. The Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church was built by slaves and free men and is the second-oldest building in Portsmouth and the city&#x27;s oldest black church.

The city contains a number of other historic buildings, as well, including the Pass House, which was built in 1841 by Judge James Murdaugh and occupied by Union troops from 1862 to 1865. Federal forces required Portsmouth residents to obtain a written pass to travel across the Elizabeth River and beyond. These passes were issued from the English basement and thus the name &quot;Pass House&quot; was derived.

===Naval Medical Center Portsmouth===
Formerly the Naval Hospital Portsmouth, the Naval Medical Center Portsmouth is a United States Navy medical center adjacent to the Olde Towne Historic District and Park View Historic District. Founded in 1827, it is the oldest continuously running hospital in the Navy medical system with the motto &quot;First and Finest.&quot;

=== Seaboard Coastline Building ===
Located at 1 High Street in the Olde Towne Historic District, the Seaboard Coastline Building is a historic train station and former headquarters of the Seaboard Air Line railroad company.

===The Hill House===
A four-story 1825 English basement home furnished entirely with original family belongings. It is evident from the furnishings that the Hill family were avid collectors and lived graciously over a period of 150 years. The house remains in its original condition, with limited renovation through the years.

===Cedar Grove Cemetery===
Established in 1832, Cedar Grove Cemetery is the oldest city-owned cemetery in Portsmouth. Listed on the National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia, the cemetery is noted for its funerary art and the civic, business, maritime, religious and military leaders who are buried there. Historical markers placed throughout the cemetery allow for self-guided tours. The cemetery is located between Effingham Street and Fort Lane in Olde Towne Portsmouth. Entrance is through the south gate to the cemetery, located on London Boulevard.

==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Portsmouth has a total area of , of which is land and (28.0%) is water. The city is also bisected by the West Branch of the Elizabeth River which flows from neighboring Suffolk.

===Climate===
Portsmouth experiences a humid subtropical climate. Summers are hot and humid with warm evenings. The mean annual temperature is , with an average annual snowfall of 3 inches and an average annual rainfall of 47 inches. No measurable snow fell in 1999. The wettest seasons are the spring and summer, although rainfall is fairly constant all year round. The highest recorded temperature was 105.0 °F in 1980. The lowest recorded temperature was −3.0 °F on January 21, 1985.

Additionally, the geographic location of the city, with respect to the principal storm tracks, is especially favorable, as it is south of the average path of storms originating in the higher latitudes, and north of the usual tracks of hurricanes and other major tropical storms. Snow falls rarely, averaging per season.
==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2010 census===

As of the 2010 census, there were 95,535 people, 38,170 households, and 25,497 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 41,605 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 53.3% African American, 41.6% White, 0.4% Native American, 1.1% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 1.0% from other races, and 2.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.1% of the population.

There were 38,170 households, out of which 30.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.1% were married couples living together, 10.9% have a female household with no husband present and 33.2% were non-families. 27.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.05.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 25.7% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 29.1% from 25 to 44, 20.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $46,340, and the median income for a family was $53,769. Males had a median income of $39,871 versus $33,140 for females. The per capita income for the city was $23,108. About 13.5% of families and 16.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.1% of those under age 18 and 10.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Arts and culture==

===Tourism===
Portsmouth has a long history as a port town and city. The Olde Towne Business and Historical District is located in the downtown area, where a combination of preservation and redevelopment has been underway. An example is Hawthorn Hotel &amp; Suites at The Governor Dinwiddie Hotel, which was renovated and reopened in 2005 after being closed for more than 10 years. It has been recognized by Historic Hotels of America, a program of the National Trust for Historical Preservation that identifies hotels that have maintained their historical integrity, architecture and ambiance and provides resources for their preservation. The historic hotel was named for Governor Robert Dinwiddie, who was the administrative head of the Colony of Virginia during the time Portsmouth was founded in 1752. It was largely through his efforts that Virginia survived the French and Indian War relatively well. (Dinwiddie County near Petersburg was also named for him).

Other points of interest include the Portsmouth City Park, featuring the narrow-gauge Portsmouth City Railroad with an operating Chance Rides C.P. Huntington locomotive named &quot;Pokey Smokey II&quot;. The original &quot;Pokey Smokey&quot; locomotive was built by Crown Metal Products and ran at the park for many years before being sold at auction. It now runs on the Mideast Railroad in Ederville in Carthage, North Carolina.

In addition, the Railroad Museum of Virginia located at Harbor Center Way features vintage railroad artifacts, rolling stock, and an operating model train layout.

Completed in 2023, the Rivers Casino Portsmouth boasts a casino floor with slots, table games, poker tables, and a sportsbook.

==Sports==
The Portsmouth Cavaliers were a basketball team founded in 2010 and played in the American Basketball Association for the 2011–12 season. Based in Portsmouth, Virginia, the Cavaliers played their home games at the Chick-fil-A Fieldhouse on the campus of Portsmouth Catholic Regional School. The club spent one season in the American Professional Basketball League (APBL) before folding.

Each April since 1953, the city hosts the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament, where college basketball seniors play in front of scouts from the NBA and top European leagues. Many top basketball stars played in the PIT before successful pro careers, including Jimmy Butler, Scottie Pippen, Dennis Rodman, and John Stockton.

==Government==













Portsmouth is governed under the Council-Manager form of government. The current mayor is Navy veteran and businessman Shannon Glover. The City Hall Building, located at 801 Crawford Street, is the regular meeting place of the City Council of The City of Portsmouth, Virginia. The City Council is a legislative body served by six members, elected for four-year terms.
* John S. White, 1852–1853
* Hezekiah Stoakes, 1854
* D. D. Fiske, 1855
* James G. Hodges, 1856–1857
* George W. Grice, 1858–1860
* John O. Lawrence, 1861
* John Nash, 1862
* Daniel Collins, 1863–1865
* James C. White, 1866
* James E. Stoakes, 1868
* E. W. Whipple, 1869
* Philip G. Thomas, 1870–1871
* A. S. Watts, 1872–1874
* John O&#x27;Connor, 1876–1877
* John Thompson Baird, 1878–1894
* L.H. Davis, 1894–1896
* John Thompson Baird, circa 1896–1902
* Jack P. Barnes, circa 1973
* Richard Joseph Davis, 1974–1980
* Julian E. Johansen, circa 1980–1983
* James W. Holley III, 1984–1987
* Gloria Webb, 1987–1996
* James W. Holley III, 1996–2010
* Kenneth I. Wright, 2010–2017
* John Rowe, 2017–present
===Law enforcement===
The Portsmouth Police Department has about 255 sworn law enforcement officers and 380 total employees.

In May 2019, Police Chief Tonya Chapman resigned from her position. She was replaced by Angela Greene who serves as interim chief.

Ten Portsmouth policemen have died in the line of duty, the first in 1871. Four of these died from gunshot wounds.
==Crime==
Crime in the city is much higher than elsewhere in Virginia or the United States generally.

==Education==
===Primary and secondary schools===
Portsmouth Public Schools operates public schools. There are three public high schools in Portsmouth, Virginia, located at three corners of the city. In the northwest section of the city, off Cedar Lane, is Churchland High School. In the downtown section of the city, between London Blvd and High Street, is I.C. Norcom High School. In the southwest section of Portsmouth, on Elmhurst Lane, is Manor High School.

===Higher education===
There are a number of institutions of higher education in and in close proximity to Portsmouth. The city is home to the Tri-Cities Higher Education Center of Old Dominion University (ODU), a public research university founded in 1930 whose main campus is located in Norfolk, Virginia. Portsmouth is also home to the Fred W. Beazley Portsmouth Campus of Tidewater Community College, a two-year higher education institution founded in 1968 in South Hampton Roads with additional campuses located in Chesapeake, Norfolk, and Virginia Beach. Angelos Bible College was established in 1984.

==Media==
Portsmouth&#x27;s daily newspaper is the &quot;Virginian-Pilot&quot; with The Currents being the Portsmouth edition of the Sunday paper. Other papers include the &quot;New Journal and Guide&quot;, and &quot;Inside Business&quot;. &quot;Hampton Roads Magazine&quot; serves as a bi-monthly regional magazine for Portsmouth and the Hampton Roads area. The &quot;Hampton Roads Times&quot; serves as an online magazine for all the Hampton Roads cities and counties. Portsmouth is served by a variety of radio stations on the AM and FM dials, with towers located around the Hampton Roads area.

Portsmouth is also served by several television stations. The Hampton Roads designated market area (DMA) is the 42nd largest in the U.S. with 712,790 homes (0.64% of the total U.S.). The major network television affiliates are WTKR-TV 3 (CBS), WAVY 10 (NBC), WVEC-TV 13 (ABC), WGNT 27 (Independent), WTVZ 33 (MyNetworkTV), WVBT 43 (Fox, with The CW on DT2), and WPXV 49 (ION Television). The Public Broadcasting Service stations are WHRO-TV 15, Hampton/Norfolk and WUND-TV 2, Edenton, NC. Two additional stations also receivable in Portsmouth include independent station WSKY-TV, which broadcasts on channel 4 from the Outer Banks of North Carolina and WGBS-LD broadcasting paid programming on channel 7 from Carrollton. Portsmouth is served by Cox Cable and Verizon FIOS. DirecTV and Dish Network are also popular as an alternative to cable television in Portsmouth.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===

From the earliest development, Portsmouth has been oriented to the water. In the 1830s, it was the first community in Hampton Roads to receive a new land transportation innovation, railroad service. The Portsmouth and Roanoke Railroad, a predecessor of the Seaboard Air Line Railroad, extended to the rapids of the Roanoke River on its fall line near Weldon, North Carolina. It was to be 20 more years before its bigger neighbor, the city of Norfolk, also received a rail line, in 1858, when the Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad was completed. The Atlantic Coast Line Railroad operated passenger trains #36 and #5 to and from its North Portsmouth Station to Rocky Mount, North Carolina until 1954. In earlier years ACL ran trains including the &quot;Tar Heel&quot; all the way south to Wilmington, North Carolina.

From Seaboard Terminal the Seaboard Air Line and then the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad operated #17 and #18 to and from Raleigh, North Carolina, where the train joined with those companies&#x27; &quot;Silver Comet.&quot; The SAL also operated a local all-coach train (#3-11 southbound/#6-10 northbound) to Atlanta from the terminal. The 17/18 trains ended in 1968.

Portsmouth is primarily served by the Norfolk International Airport , now the region&#x27;s major commercial airport. The airport is located near Chesapeake Bay, along the city limits of neighboring Norfolk and Virginia Beach. Seven airlines provide nonstop services to twenty-five destinations. ORF had 3,703,664 passengers take off or land at its facility and 68,778,934 pounds of cargo were processed through its facilities. Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport also provides commercial air service for the Hampton Roads area.&lt;ref name=&quot;Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The Chesapeake Regional Airport provides general aviation services and is located outside the city limits.

In the 21st century, the city has access to lines of CSX Transportation, Norfolk Southern and three short line railroads. Amtrak provides service to points along the Northeast Corridor from Newport News station across the Hampton Roads, and from Norfolk station across the Elizabeth River.

Portsmouth is served by Interstate 264 and Interstate 664, which is part of the Hampton Roads Beltway. U.S. Route 17 and U.S. Route 58 pass through. The Elizabeth River is crossed via the Midtown Tunnel, the Downtown Tunnel and Berkley Bridge combination.

Transportation within the city, as well as the other cities of Hampton Roads, is served by a regional bus service, Hampton Roads Transit.

==Notable people==
* V. C. Andrews (1923–1986), bestselling novelist 
* Cleo Anthony (1981–), American actor 
* James P. Berkeley (1907–1985), USMC general and expert in Military communications
* Marty Brennaman (1942–), long-time Cincinnati Reds radio broadcaster
* Ruth Brown (1928–2006), R&amp;B singer and actress
* Bebe Buell (1953–), Playboy Playmate, fashion model, singer, mother of Liv Tyler
* John T. Casteen III (1943–), President of the University of Virginia, born in Portsmouth
* Deborah Coleman (1956–2018), blues musician
* Fanny Murdaugh Downing (1831–1894), author and poet
* Jamin Elliott (1979–), former NFL wide receiver with the Chicago Bears, New England Patriots, and Atlanta Falcons
* Missy Elliott (1971–), recording artist, award-winning producer, singer-songwriter, dancer, actress and clothing line designer
* Perry Ellis (1940–1986), fashion designer, founded a sportswear house in the mid-1970s
* Dorian Finney-Smith (1993–), Professional basketball player for the Dallas Mavericks
* Mordechai Gifter (1915–2001), among the foremost American religious leaders of Orthodox Jewry in the late 20th century
* Melvin Gregg (1988–), American actor and model
* Chandler Harper, (1914–2004), winner of the 1950 PGA golf championship
* Ken Hatfield, classical guitarist
* James W. Holley III (1926–2012), politician, first African-American mayor of any city in the Hampton Roads region (Portsmouth)
* W. Nathaniel &quot;Nat&quot; Howell (1939–2020), State Dept. Foreign Service officer, former Ambassador to Kuwait; professor emeritus, the University of Virginia
* Chad Hugo (1974–), American record producer and songwriter
* Ben Jones (1941–), actor &quot;Cooter&quot; on &quot;The Dukes of Hazzard&quot;; U.S. Congressman, moved to Portsmouth as a child
* Jillian Kesner-Graver (1949–2007), actress
* Jack T. Kirby (1938–2009), historian of the southern United States, awarded the Bancroft Prize for his 2006 book &quot;Mockingbird Song: Ecological Landscapes of the South&quot;
* Erik S. Kristensen (1972–2005), US Navy SEAL Lieutenant Commander and highest decorated SEAL to be killed in Operation Red Wings
* Rita Lavelle (1947–), assistant administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
* Nathan McCall (1955–), African-American author who grew up in the Cavalier Manor section of Portsmouth, Virginia
* Pete Mikolajewski (1943–), football player
* James Murphy (1967–), metal guitarist, member of the bands Death, Testament, Obituary and Disincarnate
* Wendell Cushing Neville (1870–1930), 14th Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps
* Tommy Newsom (1929–2007), assistant bandleader for the Johnny Carson Band
* Patton Oswalt (1969–), writer, stand-up comedian, and actor
* John L. Porter (1813–1893), President of the first City Council, a naval constructor for United States Navy and the Confederate States Navy.
* Dave Robertson (1889–1970), MLB outfielder 1912–22, played in World Series for New York Giants; born in Portsmouth
* William Russ (1950–), actor
* Dave Smith (1942–), poet, novelist
* Wanda Sykes (1964–), writer, stand-up comedian, and actress
* Ted Thomas Sr. (1935–2020), Pentecostal African-American preacher, pastor of New Community Temple Church of God in Christ
* Clif Tinker (1956–), San Antonio, Texas-based commercial artist
* Mike Watt (1957–), bassist, singer and songwriter
* Nicole Wray (1979–), R&amp;B singer and songwriter
* Ken Bowersox (1956–), astronaut
* Adrienne Warren (1987–), Broadway singer and actress

==Sister cities==
* Portsmouth, United Kingdom
* Dunedin, New Zealand
* Orizaba, Veracruz, Mexico
* Eldoret, Kenya
* Goree Island, Senegal

==See also==

* National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* circa 1916–
* 
* 
==External links==
* City of Portsmouth municipal website
* Portsmouth city directories, 19th–20th c. (via Norfolk Public Library)
* Items related to Portsmouth, Virginia, various dates (via Digital Public Library of America)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="0" end="10" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="17" end="33" title="Independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="50" end="58" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051265" start="94" end="109" title="Elizabeth River (Virginia)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="115" end="122" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="134" end="145" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q919529" start="184" end="220" title="List of cities in Virginia" label="ninth-most populous city in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="240" end="253" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="277" end="299" title="Norfolk Naval Shipyard" label="Norfolk Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="325" end="334" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="522" end="540" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="602" end="612" title="Plantation complexes in the Southern United States" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638989" start="651" end="675" title="William Crawford (Virginia politician)" label="Colonel William Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="693" end="720" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="776" end="801" title="Virginia General Assembly" label="Virginia General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="820" end="830" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758621" start="851" end="865" title="Andrew Sprowle" label="Andrew Sprowle"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="869" end="880" title="shipbuilder" label="shipbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="987" end="1011" title="Commonwealth of Virginia" label="Commonwealth of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1022" end="1048" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="1173" end="1185" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="1239" end="1255" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051012" start="1261" end="1275" title="Norfolk County, Virginia" label="Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1297" end="1315" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1346" end="1375" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q170028" start="1629" end="1633" title="Deception" label="ruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="1659" end="1667" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q925055" start="1676" end="1690" title="William Mahone" label="William Mahone"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="1742" end="1747" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="1767" end="1778" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="1905" end="1921" title="ironclad warship" label="ironclad warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q667163" start="1922" end="1946" title="CSS Virginia" label="CSS &amp;quot;Virginia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q851452" start="1988" end="2013" title="USS Merrimack (1855)" label="USS &amp;quot;Merrimack&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="2048" end="2053" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q857891" start="2063" end="2086" title="USS Monitor" label="USS &amp;quot;Monitor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q868481" start="2101" end="2124" title="Battle of Hampton Roads" label="Battle of Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="2154" end="2167" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999049" start="2352" end="2374" title="Norfolk Naval Shipyard" label="Norfolk Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051012" start="2434" end="2448" title="Norfolk County, Virginia" label="Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778836" start="2636" end="2661" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q973112" start="2699" end="2713" title="Kittery, Maine" label="Kittery, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198225" start="2726" end="2742" title="Piscataqua River" label="Piscataqua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="2748" end="2773" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2793" end="2805" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="2925" end="2936" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051012" start="2940" end="2954" title="Norfolk County, Virginia" label="Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49222" start="2979" end="2997" title="Chesapeake, Virginia" label="city of Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568025" start="3047" end="3068" title="South Norfolk, Virginia" label="city of South Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982388" start="3122" end="3138" title="Nansemond County, Virginia" label="Nansemond County"/>
<link wikidata="Q342428" start="3195" end="3210" title="Suffolk, Virginia" label="city of Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="3247" end="3260" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="3324" end="3337" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638989" start="3522" end="3538" title="William Crawford (Virginia politician)" label="William Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="3552" end="3571" title="Portsmouth, England" label="Portsmouth, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514812" start="3593" end="3599" title="Chesapeake raid" label="sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3629" end="3655" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936090" start="3666" end="3684" title="Dismal Swamp Canal" label="Dismal Swamp Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="3716" end="3723" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936291" start="3786" end="3802" title="Visit of the Marquis de Lafayette to the United States" label="Lafayette visits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440188" start="3866" end="3899" title="Seaboard and Roanoke Railroad" label="Portsmouth &amp;amp; Roanoke Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3927" end="3937" title="1840 United States census#City rankings" label="Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898709" start="3955" end="3980" title="Portsmouth Courthouse" label="Norfolk County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3997" end="4007" title="1850 United States census#City rankings" label="Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="4025" end="4037" title="Yellow fever" label="Yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="4095" end="4111" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051012" start="4128" end="4142" title="Norfolk County, Virginia" label="Norfolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869401" start="4327" end="4356" title="Atlantic and Danville Railway" label="Atlantic and Danville Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q123745564" start="4926" end="4940" title="Bertha Edwards" label="Bertha Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232479" start="5097" end="5129" title="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard Museum" label="Portsmouth Naval Shipyard Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303599" start="5181" end="5196" title="Downtown Tunnel" label="Downtown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946847" start="5265" end="5272" title="WAVY-TV" label="WAVY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934524" start="5515" end="5554" title="Virginia Sports Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Virginia Sports Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326947" start="5773" end="5793" title="Richard Joseph Davis" label="Richard Joseph Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630600" start="5847" end="5856" title="List of newspapers in Virginia" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144802" start="5886" end="5905" title="James W. Holley III" label="James W. Holley III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620166" start="5914" end="5919" title="List of first African-American mayors" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q888668" start="5930" end="5941" title="Bobby Scott (politician)" label="Bobby Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="5950" end="5969" title="U.S. representative" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934057" start="5974" end="6016" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130783" start="6076" end="6088" title="Randy Forbes" label="Randy Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934058" start="6121" end="6163" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 4th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898711" start="6415" end="6443" title="Portsmouth Olde Towne Historic District" label="Olde Towne Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="6526" end="6546" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="6551" end="6577" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q384121" start="6591" end="6625" title="African Methodist Episcopal Church" label="African Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378424" start="7089" end="7105" title="English basement" label="English basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063609" start="7243" end="7274" title="Naval Medical Center Portsmouth" label="Naval Medical Center Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896427" start="7363" end="7390" title="Park View Historic District" label="Park View Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899874" start="7631" end="7658" title="Seaboard Coastline Building" label="Seaboard Coastline Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858581" start="8131" end="8151" title="Cedar Grove Cemetery (Portsmouth, Virginia)" label="Cedar Grove Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977231" start="8215" end="8284" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="8316" end="8328" title="funerary art" label="funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="8699" end="8717" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987637" start="8824" end="8835" title="Western Branch Elizabeth River" label="West Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051265" start="8843" end="8858" title="Elizabeth River (Virginia)" label="Elizabeth River"/>
<link wikidata="Q342428" start="8888" end="8895" title="Suffolk, Virginia" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="8937" end="8962" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82242" start="9367" end="9383" title="January 1985 Arctic outbreak" label="January 21, 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="9770" end="9781" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9998" end="10014" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="10022" end="10027" title="White American" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10034" end="10049" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10056" end="10061" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10068" end="10084" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10142" end="10150" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10154" end="10160" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="11125" end="11142" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="11236" end="11248" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="11395" end="11404" title="port town" label="port town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611796" start="12020" end="12028" title="List of colonial governors of Virginia" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q935269" start="12029" end="12045" title="Robert Dinwiddie" label="Robert Dinwiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="12086" end="12104" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="12215" end="12236" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q340606" start="12255" end="12271" title="Dinwiddie County, Virginia" label="Dinwiddie County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12351" end="12371" title="Portsmouth City Park" label="Portsmouth City Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="12387" end="12399" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12400" end="12424" title="Portsmouth City Railroad" label="Portsmouth City Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083307" start="12443" end="12455" title="Chance Rides" label="Chance Rides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035547" start="12456" end="12471" title="C. P. Huntington" label="C.P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974352" start="12580" end="12600" title="Crown Metal Products" label="Crown Metal Products"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12685" end="12701" title="Mideast Railroad" label="Mideast Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993002" start="12718" end="12742" title="Carthage, North Carolina" label="Carthage, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12762" end="12789" title="Railroad Museum of Virginia" label="Railroad Museum of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q623272" start="12888" end="12906" title="Rail transport modelling" label="model train layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q120497918" start="12932" end="12956" title="Rivers Casino Portsmouth" label="Rivers Casino Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q463481" start="13130" end="13161" title="American Basketball Association (2000–present)" label="American Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q491516" start="13262" end="13273" title="Chick-fil-A" label="Chick-fil-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232474" start="13478" end="13512" title="Portsmouth Invitational Tournament" label="Portsmouth Invitational Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="13520" end="13538" title="college basketball" label="college basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="13580" end="13583" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q498348" start="13695" end="13707" title="Jimmy Butler" label="Jimmy Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193637" start="13709" end="13723" title="Scottie Pippen" label="Scottie Pippen"/>
<link wikidata="Q201608" start="13725" end="13738" title="Dennis Rodman" label="Dennis Rodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q213346" start="13744" end="13757" title="John Stockton" label="John Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="13821" end="13836" title="Council-Manager" label="Council-Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326947" start="14641" end="14661" title="Richard Joseph Davis" label="Richard Joseph Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144802" start="14713" end="14732" title="James W. Holley III" label="James W. Holley III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503343" start="14934" end="14957" title="law enforcement officer" label="law enforcement officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933340" start="15385" end="15410" title="Portsmouth Public Schools" label="Portsmouth Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118245" start="15592" end="15614" title="Churchland High School" label="Churchland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967946" start="15693" end="15716" title="I.C. Norcom High School" label="I.C. Norcom High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033202" start="15779" end="15796" title="Manor High School (Portsmouth, Virginia)" label="Manor High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="15980" end="16003" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800875" start="16175" end="16202" title="Tidewater Community College" label="Tidewater Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762992" start="16360" end="16381" title="Angelos Bible College" label="Angelos Bible College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772825" start="16465" end="16480" title="Virginian-Pilot" label="Virginian-Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982561" start="16586" end="16607" title="New Journal and Guide" label="New Journal and Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885097" start="16625" end="16640" title="Inside Business (newspaper)" label="Inside Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="16747" end="16760" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="16986" end="16999" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="17083" end="17105" title="designated market area" label="designated market area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956237" start="17234" end="17241" title="WTKR-TV" label="WTKR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="17245" end="17248" title="Columbia Broadcasting Service" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946847" start="17251" end="17255" title="WAVY" label="WAVY"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="17260" end="17263" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564820" start="17266" end="17273" title="WVEC-TV" label="WVEC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17278" end="17281" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949861" start="17284" end="17288" title="WGNT" label="WGNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919007" start="17293" end="17304" title="Independent station" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956489" start="17307" end="17311" title="WTVZ" label="WTVZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="17316" end="17327" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956766" start="17330" end="17334" title="WVBT" label="WVBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="17339" end="17342" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="17349" end="17355" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954574" start="17369" end="17373" title="WPXV" label="WPXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="17378" end="17392" title="ION Television" label="ION Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="17399" end="17426" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950404" start="17440" end="17447" title="WHRO-TV" label="WHRO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708186" start="17472" end="17479" title="UNC-TV" label="WUND-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955731" start="17578" end="17585" title="WSKY-TV" label="WSKY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517373" start="17626" end="17637" title="Outer Banks" label="Outer Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949676" start="17660" end="17667" title="WGBS-LD" label="WGBS-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="17681" end="17697" title="paid programming" label="paid programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046649" start="17716" end="17726" title="Carrollton, Virginia" label="Carrollton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179879" start="17752" end="17761" title="Cox Cable" label="Cox Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143420" start="17766" end="17778" title="Verizon FIOS" label="Verizon FIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="17780" end="17787" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199757" start="17792" end="17804" title="Dish Network" label="Dish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="17843" end="17859" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440188" start="18120" end="18151" title="Portsmouth and Roanoke Railroad" label="Portsmouth and Roanoke Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q175292" start="18174" end="18200" title="Seaboard Air Line Railroad" label="Seaboard Air Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="18232" end="18245" title="Roanoke River" label="Roanoke River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028446" start="18268" end="18290" title="Weldon, North Carolina" label="Weldon, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051140" start="18413" end="18444" title="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad" label="Norfolk and Petersburg Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066966" start="18464" end="18492" title="Atlantic Coast Line Railroad" label="Atlantic Coast Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899874" start="18736" end="18753" title="Seaboard Air Line Terminal (Portsmouth, Virginia)" label="Seaboard Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q262673" start="18789" end="18817" title="Seaboard Coast Line Railroad" label="Seaboard Coast Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="18851" end="18874" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515924" start="18932" end="18944" title="Silver Comet (train)" label="Silver Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432196" start="19135" end="19164" title="Norfolk International Airport" label="Norfolk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="19296" end="19303" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="19308" end="19322" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586790" start="19525" end="19572" title="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport" label="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="19618" end="19631" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708129" start="19730" end="19757" title="Chesapeake Regional Airport" label="Chesapeake Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="19887" end="19905" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="19907" end="19923" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038271" start="19934" end="19953" title="short line railroad" label="short line railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="19956" end="19962" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="20000" end="20018" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018931" start="20024" end="20044" title="Newport News station" label="Newport News station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050982" start="20080" end="20095" title="Norfolk station (Amtrak)" label="Norfolk station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450201" start="20149" end="20163" title="Interstate 264 (Virginia)" label="Interstate 264"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819591" start="20205" end="20226" title="Hampton Roads Beltway" label="Hampton Roads Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q407838" start="20228" end="20241" title="U.S. Route 17" label="U.S. Route 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q409923" start="20246" end="20259" title="U.S. Route 58" label="U.S. Route 58"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627313" start="20313" end="20327" title="Midtown Tunnel (Virginia)" label="Midtown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303599" start="20333" end="20348" title="Downtown Tunnel" label="Downtown Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892176" start="20353" end="20367" title="Berkley Bridge (Virginia)" label="Berkley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646293" start="20497" end="20518" title="Hampton Roads Transit" label="Hampton Roads Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q275955" start="20542" end="20555" title="V. C. Andrews" label="V. C. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q33026756" start="20593" end="20605" title="Cleo Anthony" label="Cleo Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q42383353" start="20633" end="20650" title="James P. Berkeley" label="James P. Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="20664" end="20668" title="USMC" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736535" start="20691" end="20714" title="Military communications" label="Military communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777381" start="20717" end="20732" title="Marty Brennaman" label="Marty Brennaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="20752" end="20767" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q144669" start="20788" end="20798" title="Ruth Brown" label="Ruth Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="20812" end="20819" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q275593" start="20841" end="20851" title="Bebe Buell" label="Bebe Buell"/>
<link wikidata="Q168763" start="20912" end="20921" title="Liv Tyler" label="Liv Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259942" start="20924" end="20943" title="John T. Casteen III" label="John T. Casteen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181553" start="21015" end="21030" title="Deborah Coleman" label="Deborah Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q63676312" start="21061" end="21083" title="Fanny Murdaugh Downing" label="Fanny Murdaugh Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570265" start="21115" end="21128" title="Jamin Elliott" label="Jamin Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="21231" end="21244" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q952764" start="21360" end="21371" title="Perry Ellis" label="Perry Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25757154" start="21449" end="21468" title="Dorian Finney-Smith" label="Dorian Finney-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q132893" start="21517" end="21533" title="Dallas Mavericks" label="Dallas Mavericks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909652" start="21536" end="21552" title="Mordechai Gifter" label="Mordechai Gifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q96278348" start="21657" end="21669" title="Melvin Gregg" label="Melvin Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071169" start="21706" end="21721" title="Chandler Harper" label="Chandler Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387763" start="21779" end="21791" title="Ken Hatfield (musician)" label="Ken Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144802" start="21815" end="21834" title="James W. Holley III" label="James W. Holley III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945848" start="21944" end="21979" title="W. Nathaniel Howell" label="W. Nathaniel &amp;quot;Nat&amp;quot; Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="21993" end="22004" title="United States Department of State" label="State Dept."/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="22051" end="22057" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="22083" end="22105" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706641" start="22108" end="22117" title="Chad Hugo" label="Chad Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q506021" start="22169" end="22178" title="Ben Jones (American actor and politician)" label="Ben Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304408" start="22222" end="22242" title="The Dukes of Hazzard" label="The Dukes of Hazzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249250" start="22301" end="22322" title="Jillian Kesner-Graver" label="Jillian Kesner-Graver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115415" start="22346" end="22359" title="Jack T. Kirby" label="Jack T. Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q724144" start="22426" end="22440" title="Bancroft Prize" label="Bancroft Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388810" start="22526" end="22544" title="Erik S. Kristensen" label="Erik S. Kristensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q178033" start="22558" end="22570" title="US Navy SEAL" label="US Navy SEAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354826" start="22635" end="22654" title="Operation Red Wings" label="Operation Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336554" start="22657" end="22669" title="Rita Lavelle" label="Rita Lavelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969234" start="22750" end="22763" title="Nathan McCall" label="Nathan McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006883" start="22865" end="22882" title="Pete Mikolajewski" label="Pete Mikolajewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q630873" start="22910" end="22922" title="James Murphy (guitarist)" label="James Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="22932" end="22937" title="heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192843" start="22969" end="22974" title="Death (metal band)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="22976" end="22985" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q334537" start="22987" end="22995" title="Obituary (band)" label="Obituary"/>
<link wikidata="Q630873" start="23000" end="23012" title="Disincarnate" label="Disincarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961744" start="23015" end="23038" title="Wendell Cushing Neville" label="Wendell Cushing Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115074" start="23052" end="23092" title="Commandant of the United States Marine Corps" label="14th Commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819744" start="23095" end="23107" title="Tommy Newsom" label="Tommy Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="23150" end="23168" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q374065" start="23171" end="23184" title="Patton Oswalt" label="Patton Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243670" start="23233" end="23247" title="John L. Porter" label="John L. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229704" start="23376" end="23390" title="Dave Robertson (baseball)" label="Dave Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="23455" end="23470" title="San Francisco Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q924039" start="23493" end="23505" title="William Russ" label="William Russ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229873" start="23523" end="23533" title="Dave Smith (poet)" label="Dave Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q237194" start="23560" end="23571" title="Wanda Sykes" label="Wanda Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693795" start="23622" end="23636" title="Ted Thomas Sr." label="Ted Thomas Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="23650" end="23661" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q391499" start="23720" end="23743" title="Church of God in Christ" label="Church of God in Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q130332379" start="23746" end="23757" title="Clif Tinker" label="Clif Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q924668" start="23812" end="23821" title="Mike Watt" label="Mike Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396413" start="23864" end="23875" title="Nicole Wray" label="Nicole Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q920936" start="23917" end="23929" title="Ken Bowersox" label="Ken Bowersox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685725" start="23951" end="23966" title="Adrienne Warren" label="Adrienne Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="24025" end="24035" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="24054" end="24061" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q993904" start="24077" end="24084" title="Orizaba" label="Orizaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="24086" end="24094" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q322149" start="24105" end="24112" title="Eldoret" label="Eldoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q244347" start="24122" end="24134" title="Goree Island" label="Goree Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977231" start="24161" end="24230" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Portsmouth, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944483" start="24500" end="24533" title="Digital Public Library of America" label="Digital Public Library of America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91266" wikidata="Q349995" url="?curid=91266" title="Poquoson, Virginia">
<text>Poquoson (), informally known as Bull Island, is an independent city in the Commonwealth of Virginia, United States. As of the 2020 census, the population was 12,460. The Bureau of Economic Analysis combines the city of Poquoson with surrounding York County for statistical purposes.

Poquoson is located on the Virginia Peninsula, in the Hampton Roads metropolitan area.

Poquoson, which was formerly part of York County, became an incorporated town in 1952 and an independent city in 1975. (In Virginia, municipalities incorporated as independent cities are not part of any county.) However, the ties remain close. Over 30 years after Poquoson became a politically independent entity, some constitutional services such as the courts, sheriff and jail continue to be shared with neighboring York County.

Poquoson is one of the oldest continuously named cities in Virginia. It is also one of the few to retain a name which derived from the Native Americans who inhabited the area before colonization by the English began in the 17th century.

==History==
The name of the city is a Native American word which roughly translates to &quot;great marsh.&quot; The term pocosin, with its varied spellings, was a term used by the area&#x27;s inhabitants to describe a low, marshy, woody place covered by water in the winter, but dry in the summer. These Native Americans were Algonquians, a tribal group affiliated through the Powhatan Confederacy, and were defensive to the early colonizers. A petition to have the name of the parish and river changed was an attempt to rid the language of all vestiges of Indian terms. However, &quot;poquoson&quot; has survived through the centuries and has become a proper noun used to designate the present city.

The current city is a remnant of a larger area known from the first days of its settlement in the early 17th century by English colonists as the New Poquoson Parish of the Church of England. In the colonial times before separation of church and state and freedom of religion were established in Virginia and the United States, the church parish boundaries and governmental ones were often the same. In addition to the current city of Poquoson, New Poquoson Parish originally included the areas in York County known today as Poquoson, Tabb, Grafton, Dare and Seaford. This land was opened for settlement in the year 1628 and was occupied by people from the English settlement of the Virginia Colony established at Kecoughtan in 1610 by Sir Thomas Gates which eventually became part of the current City of Hampton. The first reference to Poquoson is believed to be in Colonial records of a land grant of in New Poquoson to Christopher Calthorpe in 1631 by a court in what became the former Elizabeth City County. This area located just outside of the Poquoson city limits in York County is still known in the 21st century as Calthrop Neck.

In 1634, the eight original shires of Virginia were created. Poquoson was located in Charles River Shire. The name was changed to York County in 1642–43. The York River was known earlier as the Charles River, and its name was also changed about the same time.

Poquoson grew as a close-knit rural community of York County for the next 300 years. During the American Revolutionary War, independence was won at nearby Yorktown, a major tourist attraction of the Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia.

One of the first land battles of the American Civil War, the Battle of Big Bethel was fought nearby on June 10, 1861. In the spring of 1862, Union General George B. McClellan put together an ambitious plan known as the Peninsula Campaign to end the war by marching up the peninsula from Union held Fort Monroe and taking the Confederate capitol at Richmond. A copy of his battle plans were obtained by Confederate spy Thomas Nelson Conrad and in response Confederate forces under General John B. Magruder established three lines of defensive positions extending across the peninsula to stop McClellan&#x27;s march towards Richmond. The first line of defense was anchored on the north by a redoubt on Ship Point near the mouth of the Poquoson River. After the Confederates abandoned the position in 1863 the Union Army established a supply depot and a hospital at Ship Point. Several Poquoson residents fought for the Confederacy during the Civil War including Wesley Messick, who was a crewman on the CSS Virginia during the Battle of Hampton Roads.

Poquoson became an incorporated town in 1952, as the citizens of the community wanted to keep their own high school open instead of having their children bused to York High School due to distance. When the town was incorporated, Poquoson&#x27;s small predominantly African American community known as Cary&#x27;s Chapel remained just outside the town limits in York County. The town became an independent city in 1975 in order to maintain this status. The change from incorporated town to independent city status also effectively protected Poquoson from potential annexation suits by the adjacent City of Hampton.

The changes to incorporated town and independent city were part of a wave of municipal changes in southeastern Virginia in the third quarter of the 20th century. Although Poquoson is one of the smaller of 8 independent cities extant in the Hampton Roads region in the 21st century, it is not unique in the area as a city having large areas of undeveloped land and protected wetlands.

Poquoson has long been informally known as &quot;Bull Island&quot; because for centuries farmers in the area let their cattle roam free in the salt marshes. Although only a few small farms remain and the herd of cattle that once grazed in the marshes are long gone, Poquoson residents still call themselves &quot;Bull Islanders&quot;.

==Government and law==
The Poquoson City Council is composed of seven members who are elected by the voters and serve four-year terms. Elections are held in even-numbered years on the first Tuesday in November. Any Poquoson resident who is at least 18 years of age, is a United States citizen and a resident of Virginia is eligible to be a candidate for election. In 2017, Poquoson residents elected a 19-year-old to the City Council.

The city is divided into three precincts with each precinct having two council representatives. Voters cast their ballots for one candidate from each precinct. One representative is elected at large and serves as City Mayor. Persons elected to City Council take office on the first day of January following the election.

The City Council is the policy making body of the city. Its responsibilities include adoption of the City budget; approval of all tax levies; adoption of ordinances; approval of amendments, supplements or repeals to ordinances and the City Code; and appointment of the City Manager, City Clerk, City Attorney, and various local boards, commissions and committees.

The city&#x27;s school board is appointed by the City Council.

Over 30 years after Poquoson became an independent city from York County, some constitutional services such as the courts, sheriff and jail continue to be shared with neighboring York County.

== Politics ==
Historically, Poquoson voters have trended strongly towards conservative candidates at the national, state, and local levels and since the decline of the Byrd Organization, Republicans. Poquoson is part of Virginia&#x27;s 1st congressional district, represented by Republican Rob Wittman but was temporarily redistricted into the 2nd district in 2016. Rigell retired from the United States House of Representatives in 2016 and was succeeded by Republican Scott Taylor. Taylor was defeated in 2018 by Democrat Elaine Luria.

At the state level, Poquoson is represented by Tommy Norment, a Republican and current Minority Leader of the Virginia State Senate, as members of District 3 of the Virginia Senate and A.C. Cordoza, a Republican, as part of the 91st District of the Virginia House of Delegates. The mayor and city council members are elected in nonpartisan elections; the current mayor, Gordon &quot;Big G&quot; Helsel., became mayor in 2016 after Gordon Helsel was elected to the House of Delegates.





==Media==
Poquoson&#x27;s daily newspaper is the &quot;Daily Press&quot;. Other papers include the &quot;New Journal and Guide&quot;, &quot;The Virginian-Pilot&quot;, and &quot;Inside Business&quot;.

Poquoson has a weekly paper, The Yorktown Crier / The Poquoson Post. The Hampton Roads Magazine serves as a bi-monthly regional magazine for Poquoson and the Hampton Roads area. &quot;Hampton Roads Times&quot; serves as an online magazine for all the Hampton Roads cities and counties.

Poquoson is served by a variety of radio stations on the AM and FM dials, with towers located around the Hampton Roads area.

Poquoson is also served by several television stations. The Norfolk-Portsmouth-Newport News designated market area (DMA), of which Poquoson is included, is the 44th largest in the U.S. with 709,730 homes (0.62% of the total U.S.). The major network television affiliates are WTKR-TV 3 (CBS), WAVY 10 (NBC), WVEC-TV 13 (ABC), WGNT 27 (CW), WTVZ 33 (MyNetworkTV), WVBT 43 (Fox), and WPXV 49 (ION Television). The Public Broadcasting Service station is WHRO-TV 15. Newport News residents also can receive independent stations, such as WSKY broadcasting on channel 4 from the Outer Banks of North Carolina and WGBS-LD broadcasting on channel 11 from Hampton. Poquoson is served by Cox Cable which provides LNC 5, a local 24-hour cable news television network. DirecTV, Verizon FiOS and Dish Network are also popular as an alternative to cable television in Poquoson.

==Geography==
Poquoson is located at (37.133153, -76.373881).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (80.4%) is water.

The city is a peninsula containing twenty square miles and is located between the Poquoson River on the north, Back River and Wythe Creek (the Old Poquoson River) on the south, the Chesapeake Bay on the east, and York County on the west. The city also shares a border with the City of Hampton and a water boundary across Chesapeake Bay with Northampton County.

===Climate===
Poquoson&#x27;s mild four season climate means outdoor activities can be enjoyed year round. The weather in Poquoson is temperate and seasonal. Summers are hot and humid with cool evenings. The mean annual temperature is , with an average annual snowfall of and an average annual rainfall of . No measurable snow fell in 1999. The wettest seasons are the spring and summer, although rainfall is fairly constant all year round. The highest recorded temperature was in 1980. The lowest recorded temperature was on January 21, 1985.

Additionally, the geographic location of the city, with respect to the principal storm tracks, is generally favorable, as it is south of the usual path of storms originating in the higher latitudes, and north of the usual tracks of hurricanes and other major tropical storms. However, when in the path of a storm the City of Poquoson is subject to severe flooding due to its very low elevation above sea level. Poquoson was significantly impacted by the most destructive storm of 2003, Hurricane Isabel, which caused the worst flooding the Hampton Roads area had seen since the 1933 Chesapeake–Potomac hurricane 70 years earlier. During Hurricane Isabel, most of the city was under several feet of water due to the storm surge. Six years later the November 2009 Mid-Atlantic nor&#x27;easter again flooded much of the city. A mandatory evacuation order was issued during Hurricane Irene in 2011 which also caused significant flooding in Poquoson. As a result of these floods, many homes in Poquoson have been elevated on raised foundations.

===National protected area===
*Plum Tree Island National Wildlife Refuge

==Infrastructure==
Poquoson is served by two airports. Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport, located in Newport News, and Norfolk International Airport, in Norfolk, both cater to passengers from Hampton Roads. The primary airport for the Virginia Peninsula is the Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport.

Norfolk International Airport , serves the region. The airport is located near Chesapeake Bay, along the city limits of Norfolk and Virginia Beach. Seven airlines provide nonstop services to twenty five destinations. ORF had 3,703,664 passengers take off or land at its facility and 68,778,934 pounds of cargo were processed through its facilities. The Williamsburg-Jamestown Airport provides general aviation services and is located in Williamsburg.

Amtrak serves nearby Newport News, Virginia and Williamsburg, Virginia with three trains a day. The line runs west along the Virginia Peninsula to Richmond and points beyond. Connecting buses are available to Norfolk and Virginia Beach. A high-speed rail connection at Richmond to both the Northeast Corridor and the Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor are also under study.
Poquoson is served by two state highways:

*Route 171, also known as Victory Boulevard entering Poquoson from York County before becoming Little Florida Road, then Poquoson Avenue, and finally Messick Road.
*Route 172, also known as Wythe Creek Road entering Poquoson from Hampton before terminating at Yorktown Road and Hunt&#x27;s Neck Road.

The Newport News Waterworks was begun as a project of Collis P. Huntington as part of the development of the lower peninsula with the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, the coal piers on the harbor of Hampton Roads, and massive shipyard which were the major sources of industrial growth which helped found Newport News as a new independent city in 1896. It includes reservoirs at Skiffe&#x27;s Creek and another near Walker&#x27;s Dam on the Chickahominy River. A regional water provider, in modern times it is owned and operated by the City of Newport News, and serves over 400,000 people in the cities of Hampton, Newport News, Poquoson, and portions of York County and James City County.

The City provides wastewater services for residents and transports wastewater to the regional Hampton Roads Sanitation District treatment plants.

Poquoson has access to four area hospitals, served by Riverside Medical Center and Bon Secours Mary Immaculate Hospital in Newport News and the Sentara Careplex and the V.A. Medical Center in Hampton.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 12,150 people, 4,166 households, and 3,370 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,300 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 95.1% White, 0.6% African American, 0.3% Native American, 2.1% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.8% of the population.

There were 4,166 households, out of which 39.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.4% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.1% were non-families. 15.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.08.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 26.8% under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $86,611, and the median income for a family was $96,419. Males had a median income of $71,025 versus
$43,864 for females. The per capita income for the city was $37,988. About 2.9% of families and 4.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.5% of those under age 18 and 6.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Culture==
Prior to World War II and Cold War-era expansions of nearby military bases and defense industries, and white flight from the nearby cities of Hampton and Newport News following the racial integration of schools that rapidly turned the area into a bedroom community, Poquoson was a sleepy rural area with many small family farms, commercial wharves, seafood packing houses, and boat yards that built and repaired log canoes, oyster buy-boats, and Chesapeake Bay deadrise work boats used by the local waterman. The annual Poquoson Seafood Festival which celebrates Poquoson&#x27;s heritage is the biggest event in Poquoson. Events at the Friday - Sunday festival include work boat races, singers/bands, vendors, food, crafts, children&#x27;s entertainment, carnival rides, and sometimes even fireworks.

The Poquoson Museum, founded in 2003, is located on a 16-acre parcel that contains a circa 1900 farm house, agricultural out buildings, frontage along the marshes of Topping Creek and a country store known as ‘Miss Becky’s Store’ that served local residents for many years. In April 2013 the museum completed work on a marsh walk that incorporates 750 feet of raised platforms with signs highlighting different native wildlife and plant life.

==Education==

The city is served by Poquoson City Public Schools. There are 4 public schools in Poquoson. There is the Poquoson Primary School for Kindergarten, and 1st and 2nd grades. Poquoson Elementary School serves the 3rd, 4th, and 5th grades. Poquoson Middle School offers 6th, 7th, and 8th grade classes. Poquoson High School has grades 9–12. Poquoson&#x27;s mascot is the Bull Islander in reference to city folklore, which is often shortened to &quot;bull&quot; or &quot;islander&quot; for simplicity.

There are no private schools or colleges in Poquoson and York County. However, there are institutions of each type close by on the Virginia Peninsula. Some of the private schools include Hampton Roads Academy, Our Lady of Mt. Carmel Catholic School, Peninsula Catholic High School, and Denbigh Baptist Christian School, all in Newport News.

Higher education is available at Thomas Nelson Community College, with campuses in Hampton and James City County, Old Dominion University and Norfolk State University in Norfolk, Christopher Newport University in Newport News, Hampton University in Hampton, and the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg.

==Sister cities and schools==
Poquoson&#x27;s sister city is:
* Le Bar-sur-Loup, Alpes-Maritimes, France.

Poquoson has two current partner schools.
* Balboa Academy, Panama
* Uruguayan American School, Uruguay

==Notable people==

*Baiju Bhatt, Robinhood co-founder
*Kyle Crockett, Cleveland Indians baseball player
*Kitty O&#x27;Brien Joyner, NASA&#x27;s first female engineer
*Chad Pinder, Oakland Athletics baseball player

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==References==


==External links==

*City of Poquoson
*Poquoson City Public Schools
*Poquoson.com
*Hampton Roads Economic Development Alliance - serving Poquoson</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q349995" start="0" end="8" title="Poquoson, Virginia" label="Poquoson"/>
<link wikidata="Q349995" start="33" end="44" title="Poquoson, Virginia" label="Bull Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266818" start="52" end="68" title="independent city (United States)" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="76" end="88" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="92" end="100" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="127" end="138" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443033" start="171" end="198" title="Bureau of Economic Analysis" label="Bureau of Economic Analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="246" end="257" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="312" end="330" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="339" end="352" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="410" end="421" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="433" end="450" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="865" end="873" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1008" end="1015" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1082" end="1097" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q688784" start="1165" end="1172" title="pocosin" label="pocosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1348" end="1364" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="1370" end="1381" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849523" start="1421" end="1441" title="Powhatan Confederacy" label="Powhatan Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1918" end="1935" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="1966" end="1996" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="2001" end="2020" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672977" start="2280" end="2284" title="Tabb, Virginia" label="Tabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12833382" start="2286" end="2293" title="Grafton, Virginia" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222465" start="2295" end="2299" title="Dare, Virginia" label="Dare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440372" start="2304" end="2311" title="Seaford, Virginia" label="Seaford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="2428" end="2443" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382489" start="2459" end="2469" title="Kecoughtan, Virginia" label="Kecoughtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990626" start="2485" end="2497" title="Thomas Gates (governor)" label="Thomas Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="2542" end="2557" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="City of Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688168" start="2734" end="2755" title="Elizabeth City County, Virginia" label="Elizabeth City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460109" start="2913" end="2931" title="shires of Virginia" label="shires of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082085" start="2970" end="2989" title="Charles River Shire" label="Charles River Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506187" start="3015" end="3026" title="York County, Virginia" label="York County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258289" start="3043" end="3053" title="York River (Virginia)" label="York River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3242" end="3268" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773704" start="3345" end="3383" title="Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia" label="Historic Triangle of Colonial Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3423" end="3441" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q794695" start="3447" end="3467" title="Battle of Big Bethel" label="Battle of Big Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q310192" start="3541" end="3560" title="George B. McClellan" label="George B. McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154050" start="3605" end="3623" title="Peninsula Campaign" label="Peninsula Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438639" start="3684" end="3695" title="Fort Monroe" label="Fort Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="3734" end="3742" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792703" start="3804" end="3824" title="Thomas Nelson Conrad" label="Thomas Nelson Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298040" start="3874" end="3890" title="John B. Magruder" label="John B. Magruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229872" start="4119" end="4133" title="Poquoson River" label="Poquoson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q667163" start="4387" end="4399" title="CSS Virginia" label="CSS Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868481" start="4411" end="4434" title="Battle of Hampton Roads" label="Battle of Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="4456" end="4473" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="4591" end="4596" title="Desegregation busing" label="bused"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055464" start="4600" end="4616" title="York High School (Virginia)" label="York High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="4702" end="4718" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="7228" end="7240" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004227" start="7322" end="7339" title="Byrd Organization" label="Byrd Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="7341" end="7352" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11066302" start="7374" end="7416" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district" label="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 1st congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q541251" start="7444" end="7455" title="Rob Wittman" label="Rob Wittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934056" start="7498" end="7510" title="Virginia&amp;#x27;s 2nd congressional district" label="2nd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7544" end="7582" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089502" start="7623" end="7635" title="Scott Taylor (politician)" label="Scott Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7668" end="7676" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58323073" start="7677" end="7689" title="Elaine Luria" label="Elaine Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819746" start="7739" end="7752" title="Tommy Norment" label="Tommy Norment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747983" start="7802" end="7823" title="Virginia State Senate" label="Virginia State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q110800189" start="7877" end="7889" title="A.C. Cordoza" label="A.C. Cordoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q320275" start="7941" end="7968" title="Virginia House of Delegates" label="Virginia House of Delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585263" start="8123" end="8136" title="Gordon Helsel" label="Gordon Helsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209347" start="8236" end="8247" title="Daily Press (Virginia)" label="Daily Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982561" start="8286" end="8307" title="New Journal and Guide" label="New Journal and Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772825" start="8321" end="8340" title="The Virginian-Pilot" label="The Virginian-Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885097" start="8358" end="8373" title="Inside Business (newspaper)" label="Inside Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="8540" end="8553" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="8633" end="8646" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="8774" end="8787" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="8887" end="8909" title="designated market area" label="designated market area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956237" start="9070" end="9077" title="WTKR-TV" label="WTKR-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="9081" end="9084" title="Columbia Broadcasting Service" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946847" start="9087" end="9091" title="WAVY" label="WAVY"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="9096" end="9099" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564820" start="9102" end="9109" title="WVEC-TV" label="WVEC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="9114" end="9117" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949861" start="9120" end="9124" title="WGNT" label="WGNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="9129" end="9131" title="The CW Television Network" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956489" start="9134" end="9138" title="WTVZ" label="WTVZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="9143" end="9154" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956766" start="9157" end="9161" title="WVBT" label="WVBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="9166" end="9169" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954574" start="9176" end="9180" title="WPXV" label="WPXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="9185" end="9199" title="ION Television" label="ION Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="9206" end="9233" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="Public Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950404" start="9245" end="9252" title="WHRO-TV" label="WHRO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955731" start="9327" end="9331" title="WSKY-TV" label="WSKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949676" start="9401" end="9408" title="WGBS-LD" label="WGBS-LD"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="9441" end="9448" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179879" start="9472" end="9481" title="Cox Cable" label="Cox Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664220" start="9497" end="9502" title="LNC 5" label="LNC 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892363" start="9520" end="9530" title="United States cable news" label="cable news"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056839" start="9551" end="9558" title="DirecTV" label="DirecTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143420" start="9560" end="9572" title="Verizon FiOS" label="Verizon FiOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199757" start="9577" end="9589" title="Dish Network" label="Dish Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q184452" start="9628" end="9644" title="cable television" label="cable television"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="9739" end="9766" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="9853" end="9862" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229872" start="9921" end="9935" title="Poquoson River" label="Poquoson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q798327" start="9950" end="9960" title="Back River (Virginia)" label="Back River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9965" end="9976" title="Wythe Creek" label="Wythe Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q216868" start="10020" end="10034" title="Chesapeake Bay" label="Chesapeake Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49290" start="10180" end="10198" title="Northampton County, Virginia" label="Northampton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="10523" end="10527" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q82242" start="10727" end="10743" title="January 1985 Arctic outbreak" label="January 21, 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q166468" start="11232" end="11248" title="Hurricane Isabel" label="Hurricane Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q206612" start="11324" end="11357" title="1933 Chesapeake–Potomac hurricane" label="1933 Chesapeake–Potomac hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="11461" end="11472" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064727" start="11494" end="11536" title="November 2009 Mid-Atlantic nor&amp;#x27;easter" label="November 2009 Mid-Atlantic nor&amp;#x27;easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187621" start="11616" end="11631" title="Hurricane Irene" label="Hurricane Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205358" start="11818" end="11859" title="Plum Tree Island National Wildlife Refuge" label="Plum Tree Island National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586790" start="11916" end="11963" title="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport" label="Newport News/Williamsburg International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432196" start="11994" end="12023" title="Norfolk International Airport" label="Norfolk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432196" start="12186" end="12215" title="Norfolk International Airport" label="Norfolk International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="12306" end="12313" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49259" start="12318" end="12332" title="Virginia Beach, Virginia" label="Virginia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="12638" end="12644" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q335017" start="12659" end="12681" title="Newport News, Virginia" label="Newport News, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="12686" end="12708" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="12763" end="12781" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="12785" end="12793" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q678233" start="12928" end="12946" title="Northeast Corridor" label="Northeast Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569345" start="12955" end="12989" title="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor" label="Southeast High Speed Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507951" start="13056" end="13065" title="Virginia State Route 171" label="Route 171"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507955" start="13220" end="13229" title="Virginia State Route 172" label="Route 172"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109882" start="13411" end="13431" title="Collis P. Huntington" label="Collis P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070560" start="13491" end="13518" title="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway" label="Chesapeake and Ohio Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137831" start="13524" end="13533" title="coal pier" label="coal pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011895" start="13552" end="13565" title="Hampton Roads" label="Hampton Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q82610" start="13579" end="13587" title="Newport News Shipbuilding" label="shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535124" start="13731" end="13750" title="Skiffe&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="Skiffe&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072150" start="13768" end="13785" title="Walker&amp;#x27;s Dam" label="Walker&amp;#x27;s Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072150" start="13793" end="13811" title="Chickahominy River" label="Chickahominy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="14669" end="14675" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="14774" end="14792" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14897" end="14902" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14909" end="14925" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14932" end="14947" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14954" end="14959" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14966" end="14982" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="14994" end="15005" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15040" end="15048" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="15052" end="15058" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="15211" end="15226" title="marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="16022" end="16039" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="16131" end="16143" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16238" end="16250" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="16255" end="16263" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="16332" end="16344" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="16410" end="16428" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433334" start="16544" end="16556" title="family farms" label="family farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666830" start="16641" end="16650" title="log canoe" label="log canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116365" start="16653" end="16668" title="oyster buy-boat" label="oyster buy-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092843" start="16675" end="16698" title="Chesapeake Bay deadrise" label="Chesapeake Bay deadrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="17554" end="17568" title="public school (government funded)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229871" start="17788" end="17808" title="Poquoson High School" label="Poquoson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q693690" start="17935" end="17939" title="bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553780" start="18118" end="18136" title="Virginia Peninsula" label="Virginia Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712453" start="18174" end="18195" title="Hampton Roads Academy" label="Hampton Roads Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792702" start="18362" end="18393" title="Thomas Nelson Community College" label="Thomas Nelson Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q337688" start="18424" end="18441" title="James City County, Virginia" label="James City County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="18443" end="18466" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q632506" start="18471" end="18495" title="Norfolk State University" label="Norfolk State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444675" start="18508" end="18538" title="Christopher Newport University" label="Christopher Newport University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797817" start="18556" end="18574" title="Hampton University" label="Hampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="18595" end="18622" title="College of William and Mary" label="College of William and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="18626" end="18638" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q728033" start="18705" end="18720" title="Le Bar-sur-Loup" label="Le Bar-sur-Loup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="18722" end="18737" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850199" start="18792" end="18806" title="Balboa Academy" label="Balboa Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872176" start="18817" end="18842" title="Uruguayan American School" label="Uruguayan American School"/>
<link wikidata="Q55760424" start="18874" end="18885" title="Baiju Bhatt" label="Baiju Bhatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155123" start="18887" end="18896" title="Robinhood (company)" label="Robinhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233732" start="18909" end="18922" title="Kyle Crockett" label="Kyle Crockett"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="18924" end="18941" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23847406" start="18959" end="18984" title="Kitty O&amp;#x27;Brien Joyner" label="Kitty O&amp;#x27;Brien Joyner"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="18986" end="18990" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26405645" start="19021" end="19032" title="Chad Pinder" label="Chad Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="19034" end="19051" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="91267" wikidata="Q513744" url="?curid=91267" title="Pittsylvania County, Virginia">
<text>Pittsylvania County is a county located in the Commonwealth of Virginia. At the 2020 census, the population was 60,501. The county seat is Chatham.

Pittsylvania County is included in the Danville, VA Micropolitan Statistical Area.

The largest undeveloped uranium deposit in the United States (7th largest in the world) is located in Pittsylvania County. (see &quot;Uranium mining in Virginia&quot;.)

==History==
Originally &quot;Pittsylvania&quot; was a name suggested for an unrealized British colony to be located primarily in what is now West Virginia. Pittsylvania County would not have been within this proposed colony, which subsequently was named Vandalia.

Pittsylvania County was formed in 1767 with territory annexed from Halifax County. It was named for William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham, who served as Prime Minister of Great Britain from 1766 to 1768, and who opposed some harsh colonial policies of the period.

In 1777 the western part of Pittsylvania County was partitioned off to became Patrick Henry County.

Maud Clement&#x27;s &quot;History of Pittsylvania County&quot; notes the following:
&quot;Despite the settlers&#x27; intentions, towns failed to develop for two reasons: the generally low level of economic activity in the area and the competition from plantation settlements already providing the kind of marketing and purchasing services typically offered by a town. Plantation settlements along the rivers, particularly at ferrying points, became commercial centers. The most important for early Pittsylvania was that of Sam Pannill, a Scots-Irishman, who at the end of the eighteenth century, while still a young man, set up a plantation town at Green Hill on the north side of the Staunton River in Campbell County. (Clement 15)

&quot;Its economy was tobacco-dominated and reliant on a growing slave labor force. It was a county without towns or a commercial center. Plantation villages on the major river thoroughfares were the only centers of trade, until the emergence of Danville. (Clement 23)&quot;

The city of Danville&#x27;s history up through the antebellum period overall is an expression of the relationship between the town and the planters who influenced its development.

==Geography==

According to the United States Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.9%) is water. It is the largest county in Virginia by land area and second-largest by total area. The county is bounded on the north by the Roanoke River (this stretch of the river is known as the Staunton River), bisected by the Banister River running eastward through the center, and is drained on the south by the Dan River, flowing eastward.

===Districts===
The county is divided into seven districts:

* Banister
* Callands-Gretna
* Chatham-Blairs
* Dan River
* Staunton River
* Tunstall
* Westover
===Adjacent counties and cities===
In Virginia:
* Bedford County - Northwest (across Smith Mountain Lake)
* Campbell County - North/Northeast
* Franklin County - West/Northwest
* Halifax County - East
* Henry County - West/Southwest
* Danville - South (independent city partially within borders of Pittsylvania County)

In North Carolina: 
* Caswell County, North Carolina - South/Southeast
* Rockingham County, North Carolina - South/Southwest

===Major highways===
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Demographics==
===2020 census===

&quot;Note: the US Census treats Hispanic/Latino as an ethnic category. This table excludes Latinos from the racial categories and assigns them to a separate category. Hispanics/Latinos can be of any race.&quot;

===2010 Census===
According to the 2010 United States Census, there are 60,949 people, and 26,687 households in the county. The population density was . There were 31,656 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 76.20% White, 21.50% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 0.50% Asian, 0.37% from other races, and 1.40% from two or more races. 2.70% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 26,687 households, out of which 30.40% had children under the age of 18 living with them. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.93.

The median income for a household in the county was $44,356. The per capita income for the county was $23,597. About 12.60% of the population were below the poverty line.

==Government==
Pittsylvania County is governed by an elected seven-member Board of Supervisors. Management of the county is vested in a Board-appointed County Administrator.

There are also five elected Constitutional Officers:
* Clerk of the Circuit Court: Angie Reece Harris (R)
* Commonwealth&#x27;s Attorney: Robert Bryan Haskins (R)
* Sheriff: Michael &quot;Mike&quot; Taylor (I)
* Commissioner of Revenue: Robin Goard (I)
* Treasurer: Vincent Shorter (I)

{{PresHead|place=Pittsylvania County, Virginia|source=}}

{{PresRow|2024|Republican|24,310|9,599|247|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2020|Republican|23,751|10,115|361|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2016|Republican|21,554|9,199|845|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2012|Republican|19,263|10,858|560|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2008|Republican|18,730|11,415|288|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2004|Republican|17,673|9,274|470|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|2000|Republican|15,760|7,834|661|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1996|Republican|12,127|7,681|1,906|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1992|Republican|11,467|7,675|2,752|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1988|Republican|12,229|6,612|360|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1984|Republican|15,743|7,791|290|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1980|Republican|12,022|7,653|605|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1976|Republican|9,173|7,929|811|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1972|Republican|12,108|4,429|200|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1968|American Independent|5,096|5,427|9,367|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1964|Republican|7,120|5,228|25|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1960|Democratic|3,788|4,089|77|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1956|Democratic|2,870|4,136|788|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1952|Democratic|2,893|3,976|31|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1948|Democratic|1,164|3,149|1,353|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1944|Democratic|1,224|3,492|8|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1940|Democratic|728|3,710|17|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1936|Democratic|556|3,694|5|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1932|Democratic|656|3,124|60|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1928|Republican|2,598|1,688|0|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1924|Democratic|880|2,563|113|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1920|Democratic|1,162|2,715|19|Virginia}}
{{PresRow|1916|Democratic|801|2,012|40|Virginia}}
{{PresFoot|1912|Democratic|527|1,558|341|Virginia}}

==Communities==
===Incorporated Towns===
* Chatham
* Gretna
* Hurt

===Census-designated places===
* Blairs
* Motley
* Mount Hermon

===Other unincorporated communities===
{{div col|colwidth=15em}}
* Ajax
* Bachelors Hall
* Banister
* Beaver Park
* Brosville
* Brights
* Brutus
* Buford
* Callahans Hills
* Callands
* Cartersville
* Cascade
* Cedar Forest
* Cedar Hill
* Chalk Level
* Climax
* Coles Hill
* Dry Fork
* Dundee
* Ebenezer
* Flint Hill
* Galveston
* Glenland
* Grady
* Green Acres
* Green Pond
* Greenfield
* Grit
* Henrys Mill
* Hermosa
* Hill Grove
* Hinesville
* Hollywood
* Hopewell
* Java
* Keeling
* Kentuck
* Lakewood
* Laniers Mill
* Laurel Grove
* Leaksville Junction
* Level Run
* Lucks
* Markham
* Motleys Mill
* Mount Airy
* Mount Cross
* Mountain Hill
* Museville
* Natal
* Peytonsburg
* Pickaway
* Pickerel
* Pittsville
* Pleasant Gap
* Pleasant Grove
* Pullens
* Ray
* Red Oak Hollow
* Redeye
* Renan
* Riceville
* Ridgeway
* Ringgold
* Rondo
* Sandy River
* Sharon
* Sheva
* Shockoe
* Soapstone
* Sonans
* Spring Garden
* Stony Mill
* Straightstone
* Sutherlin
* Swansonville
* Sycamore
* Tightsqueeze
* Toshes
* Transco Village
* Weal
* West Fork
* Whitfield
* Whitmell
* Whittles
* Witt
* Woodlake Park
* Woodlawn
* Worlds
* Vance
* Vandola
{{div col end}}

==See also==
* List of Virginia counties
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Pittsylvania County, Virginia
* Uranium mining in the US, Virginia

==References==
{{reflist|30em}}

==External links==
* Pittsylvania County Official Website
* WMDV TV44/Danville

{{Geographic Location
|Centre = Pittsylvania County, Virginia
|North = Bedford County
|Northeast = Campbell County
|East = Halifax County
|Southeast = Caswell County, North Carolina
|South = City of Danville
|Southwest = Rockingham County, North Carolina
|West = Henry County
|Northwest = Franklin County

{{Pittsylvania County, Virginia}}
{{Virginia}}

{{coord|36.82|-79.40|display=title|type:adm2nd_region:US-VA_source:UScensus1990}}

{{authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q513744" start="0" end="19" title="Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Pittsylvania County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="25" end="31" title="county (United States)" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028423" start="47" end="59" title="Commonwealth (U.S. state)" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="63" end="71" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="80" end="91" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="124" end="135" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375371" start="139" end="146" title="Chatham, Virginia" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="188" end="196" title="Danville, Virginia" label="Danville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221336" start="201" end="230" title="Danville, Virginia micropolitan area" label="Micropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="257" end="264" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="367" end="393" title="Uranium mining in the United States#Virginia" label="Uranium mining in Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="544" end="557" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661886" start="657" end="665" title="Vandalia (colony)" label="Vandalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505886" start="735" end="749" title="Halifax County, Virginia" label="Halifax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q208663" start="768" end="801" title="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham" label="William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="817" end="848" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965670" start="1007" end="1027" title="Patrick Henry County, Virginia" label="Patrick Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="1282" end="1292" title="plantations in the American South" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="1715" end="1729" title="Staunton River" label="Staunton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="1829" end="1834" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="2010" end="2018" title="Danville, Virginia" label="Danville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2253" end="2280" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="2479" end="2492" title="Roanoke River" label="Roanoke River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="2536" end="2550" title="Staunton River" label="Staunton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855797" start="2569" end="2583" title="Banister River" label="Banister River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159151" start="2656" end="2665" title="Dan River (Virginia)" label="Dan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855795" start="2749" end="2757" title="Banister, Virginia" label="Banister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375371" start="2778" end="2785" title="Chatham, Virginia" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924229" start="2786" end="2792" title="Blairs, Virginia" label="Blairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159151" start="2795" end="2804" title="Dan River (Virginia)" label="Dan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584933" start="2807" end="2821" title="Roanoke River" label="Staunton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q494216" start="2894" end="2908" title="Bedford County, Virginia" label="Bedford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332083" start="2929" end="2948" title="Smith Mountain Lake" label="Smith Mountain Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q495171" start="2952" end="2967" title="Campbell County, Virginia" label="Campbell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502036" start="2988" end="3003" title="Franklin County, Virginia" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505886" start="3023" end="3037" title="Halifax County, Virginia" label="Halifax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505841" start="3047" end="3059" title="Henry County, Virginia" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="3079" end="3087" title="Danville, Virginia" label="Danville"/>
<link wikidata="Q504428" start="3186" end="3216" title="Caswell County, North Carolina" label="Caswell County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q505422" start="3237" end="3270" title="Rockingham County, North Carolina" label="Rockingham County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3609" end="3634" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="3702" end="3720" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3829" end="3834" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3843" end="3848" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3852" end="3868" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3876" end="3891" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3899" end="3904" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3917" end="3928" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3993" end="4001" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4005" end="4011" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4267" end="4284" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4359" end="4371" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177777" start="4526" end="4546" title="County administrator" label="County Administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375371" start="6485" end="6492" title="Chatham, Virginia" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373402" start="6495" end="6501" title="Gretna, Virginia" label="Gretna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376954" start="6504" end="6508" title="Hurt, Virginia" label="Hurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924229" start="6543" end="6549" title="Blairs, Virginia" label="Blairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024729" start="6552" end="6558" title="Motley, Virginia" label="Motley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024941" start="6561" end="6573" title="Mount Hermon, Virginia" label="Mount Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699575" start="6642" end="6646" title="Ajax, Virginia" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838847" start="6649" end="6663" title="Bachelors Hall, Virginia" label="Bachelors Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855795" start="6666" end="6674" title="Banister, Virginia" label="Banister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878145" start="6677" end="6688" title="Beaver Park, Virginia" label="Beaver Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975417" start="6691" end="6700" title="Brosville, Virginia" label="Brosville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967778" start="6703" end="6710" title="Brights, Virginia" label="Brights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979880" start="6713" end="6719" title="Brutus, Virginia" label="Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986029" start="6722" end="6728" title="Buford, Virginia" label="Buford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021724" start="6731" end="6746" title="Callahans Hills, Virginia" label="Callahans Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021769" start="6749" end="6757" title="Callands, Virginia" label="Callands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047260" start="6760" end="6772" title="Cartersville, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Cartersville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048084" start="6775" end="6782" title="Cascade, Virginia" label="Cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056679" start="6785" end="6797" title="Cedar Forest, Virginia" label="Cedar Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056749" start="6800" end="6810" title="Cedar Hill, Virginia" label="Cedar Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068803" start="6813" end="6824" title="Chalk Level, Virginia" label="Chalk Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133633" start="6827" end="6833" title="Climax, Virginia" label="Climax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144655" start="6836" end="6846" title="Coles Hill, Virginia" label="Coles Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309512" start="6849" end="6857" title="Dry Fork, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Dry Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314791" start="6860" end="6866" title="Dundee, Virginia" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331633" start="6869" end="6877" title="Ebenezer, Virginia" label="Ebenezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459513" start="6880" end="6890" title="Flint Hill, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Flint Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519416" start="6893" end="6902" title="Galveston, Virginia" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568573" start="6905" end="6913" title="Glenland, Virginia" label="Glenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592102" start="6916" end="6921" title="Grady, Virginia" label="Grady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602263" start="6924" end="6935" title="Green Acres, Virginia" label="Green Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603084" start="6938" end="6948" title="Green Pond, Virginia" label="Green Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603941" start="6951" end="6961" title="Greenfield, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609705" start="6964" end="6968" title="Grit, Virginia" label="Grit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731282" start="6971" end="6982" title="Henrys Mill, Virginia" label="Henrys Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742066" start="6985" end="6992" title="Hermosa, Virginia" label="Hermosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762139" start="6995" end="7005" title="Hill Grove, Virginia" label="Hill Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712541" start="7008" end="7018" title="Hinesville, Virginia" label="Hinesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882517" start="7021" end="7030" title="Hollywood, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5900216" start="7033" end="7041" title="Hopewell, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Hopewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164911" start="7044" end="7048" title="Java, Virginia" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382801" start="7051" end="7058" title="Keeling, Virginia" label="Keeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q914486" start="7061" end="7068" title="Kentuck, Virginia" label="Kentuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479357" start="7071" end="7079" title="Lakewood, Virginia" label="Lakewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487085" start="7082" end="7094" title="Laniers Mill, Virginia" label="Laniers Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499809" start="7097" end="7109" title="Laurel Grove, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Laurel Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283521" start="7112" end="7131" title="Leaksville Junction, Virginia" label="Leaksville Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535052" start="7134" end="7143" title="Level Run, Virginia" label="Level Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697788" start="7146" end="7151" title="Lucks, Virginia" label="Lucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770977" start="7154" end="7161" title="Markham, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917925" start="7164" end="7176" title="Motleys Mill, Virginia" label="Motleys Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919302" start="7179" end="7189" title="Mount Airy, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Mount Airy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920312" start="7192" end="7203" title="Mount Cross, Virginia" label="Mount Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6924975" start="7206" end="7219" title="Mountain Hill, Virginia" label="Mountain Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941160" start="7222" end="7231" title="Museville, Virginia" label="Museville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967947" start="7234" end="7239" title="Natal, Virginia" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179642" start="7242" end="7253" title="Peytonsburg, Virginia" label="Peytonsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190756" start="7256" end="7264" title="Pickaway, Virginia" label="Pickaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190795" start="7267" end="7275" title="Pickerel, Virginia" label="Pickerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199515" start="7278" end="7288" title="Pittsville, Virginia" label="Pittsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203789" start="7291" end="7303" title="Pleasant Gap, Virginia" label="Pleasant Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203811" start="7306" end="7320" title="Pleasant Grove, Virginia" label="Pleasant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259435" start="7323" end="7330" title="Pullens, Virginia" label="Pullens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297108" start="7333" end="7336" title="Ray, Virginia" label="Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304681" start="7339" end="7353" title="Red Oak Hollow, Virginia" label="Red Oak Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305812" start="7356" end="7362" title="Redeye, Virginia" label="Redeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312529" start="7365" end="7370" title="Renan, Virginia" label="Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323140" start="7373" end="7382" title="Riceville, Virginia" label="Riceville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713131" start="7385" end="7393" title="Ridgeway, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Ridgeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334876" start="7396" end="7404" title="Ringgold, Virginia" label="Ringgold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365557" start="7407" end="7412" title="Rondo, Virginia" label="Rondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417439" start="7415" end="7426" title="Sandy River, Virginia" label="Sandy River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489958" start="7429" end="7435" title="Sharon, Virginia" label="Sharon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495694" start="7438" end="7443" title="Sheva, Virginia" label="Sheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499923" start="7446" end="7453" title="Shockoe, Virginia" label="Shockoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549836" start="7456" end="7465" title="Soapstone, Virginia" label="Soapstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560790" start="7468" end="7474" title="Sonans, Virginia" label="Sonans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580502" start="7477" end="7490" title="Spring Garden, Virginia" label="Spring Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619577" start="7493" end="7503" title="Stony Mill, Virginia" label="Stony Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621114" start="7506" end="7519" title="Straightstone, Virginia" label="Straightstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650017" start="7522" end="7531" title="Sutherlin, Virginia" label="Sutherlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653750" start="7534" end="7546" title="Swansonville, Virginia" label="Swansonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713279" start="7549" end="7557" title="Sycamore, Virginia" label="Sycamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801667" start="7560" end="7572" title="Tightsqueeze, Virginia" label="Tightsqueeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827611" start="7575" end="7581" title="Toshes, Virginia" label="Toshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833885" start="7584" end="7599" title="Transco Village, Virginia" label="Transco Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977990" start="7602" end="7606" title="Weal, Virginia" label="Weal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985171" start="7609" end="7618" title="West Fork, Virginia" label="West Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996449" start="7621" end="7630" title="Whitfield, Virginia" label="Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996624" start="7633" end="7641" title="Whitmell, Virginia" label="Whitmell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713528" start="7644" end="7652" title="Whittles, Virginia" label="Whittles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028531" start="7655" end="7659" title="Witt, Virginia" label="Witt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032794" start="7662" end="7675" title="Woodlake Park, Virginia" label="Woodlake Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032984" start="7678" end="7686" title="Woodlawn, Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="Woodlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036710" start="7689" end="7695" title="Worlds, Virginia" label="Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914004" start="7698" end="7703" title="Vance, Virginia" label="Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914543" start="7706" end="7713" title="Vandola, Virginia" label="Vandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q919529" start="7746" end="7771" title="List of Virginia counties" label="List of Virginia counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063214" start="7774" end="7852" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Pittsylvania County, Virginia" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Pittsylvania County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7855" end="7889" title="Uranium mining in the United States#Virginia" label="Uranium mining in the US, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494216" start="8075" end="8089" title="Bedford County, Virginia" label="Bedford County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495171" start="8103" end="8118" title="Campbell County, Virginia" label="Campbell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505886" start="8127" end="8141" title="Halifax County, Virginia" label="Halifax County"/>
<link wikidata="Q504428" start="8155" end="8185" title="Caswell County, North Carolina" label="Caswell County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q511922" start="8195" end="8211" title="Danville, Virginia" label="City of Danville"/>
<link wikidata="Q505422" start="8225" end="8258" title="Rockingham County, North Carolina" label="Rockingham County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q505841" start="8267" end="8279" title="Henry County, Virginia" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502036" start="8293" end="8308" title="Franklin County, Virginia" label="Franklin County"/>
</links>
</doc>
