<doc id="490620" wikidata="Q492038" url="?curid=490620" title="Human brain">
<text>The human brain is the central organ of the nervous system, and with the spinal cord, comprises the central nervous system. It consists of the cerebrum, the brainstem and the cerebellum. The brain controls most of the activities of the body, processing, integrating, and coordinating the information it receives from the sensory nervous system. The brain integrates the instructions sent to the rest of the body.

The cerebrum, the largest part of the human brain, consists of two cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere has an inner core composed of white matter, and an outer surface – the cerebral cortex – composed of grey matter. The cortex has an outer layer, the neocortex, and an inner allocortex. The neocortex is made up of six neuronal layers, while the allocortex has three or four. Each hemisphere is divided into four lobes – the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes. The frontal lobe is associated with executive functions including self-control, planning, reasoning, and abstract thought, while the occipital lobe is dedicated to vision. Within each lobe, cortical areas are associated with specific functions, such as the sensory, motor, and association regions. Although the left and right hemispheres are broadly similar in shape and function, some functions are associated with one side, such as language in the left and visual-spatial ability in the right. The hemispheres are connected by commissural nerve tracts, the largest being the corpus callosum.

The cerebrum is connected by the brainstem to the spinal cord. The brainstem consists of the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla oblongata. The cerebellum is connected to the brainstem by three pairs of nerve tracts called cerebellar peduncles. Within the cerebrum is the ventricular system, consisting of four interconnected ventricles in which cerebrospinal fluid is produced and circulated. Underneath the cerebral cortex are several structures, including the thalamus, the epithalamus, the pineal gland, the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, and the subthalamus; the limbic structures, including the amygdalae and the hippocampi, the claustrum, the various nuclei of the basal ganglia, the basal forebrain structures, and three circumventricular organs. Brain structures that are not on the midplane exist in pairs; for example, there are two hippocampi and two amygdalae. 

The cells of the brain include neurons and supportive glial cells. There are more than 86 billion neurons in the brain, and a more or less equal number of other cells. Brain activity is made possible by the interconnections of neurons and their release of neurotransmitters in response to nerve impulses. Neurons connect to form neural pathways, neural circuits, and elaborate network systems. The whole circuitry is driven by the process of neurotransmission.

The brain is protected by the skull, suspended in cerebrospinal fluid, and isolated from the bloodstream by the blood–brain barrier. However, the brain is still susceptible to damage, disease, and infection. Damage can be caused by trauma, or a loss of blood supply known as a stroke. The brain is susceptible to degenerative disorders, such as Parkinson&#x27;s disease, dementias including Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, and multiple sclerosis. Psychiatric conditions, including schizophrenia and clinical depression, are thought to be associated with brain dysfunctions. The brain can also be the site of tumours, both benign and malignant; these mostly originate from other sites in the body.

The study of the anatomy of the brain is neuroanatomy, while the study of its function is neuroscience. Numerous techniques are used to study the brain. Specimens from other animals, which may be examined microscopically, have traditionally provided much information. Medical imaging technologies such as functional neuroimaging, and electroencephalography (EEG) recordings are important in studying the brain. The medical history of people with brain injury has provided insight into the function of each part of the brain. Neuroscience research has expanded considerably, and research is ongoing.

In culture, the philosophy of mind has for centuries attempted to address the question of the nature of consciousness and the mind–body problem. The pseudoscience of phrenology attempted to localise personality attributes to regions of the cortex in the 19th century. In science fiction, brain transplants are imagined in tales such as the 1942 &quot;Donovan&#x27;s Brain&quot;.
==Structure==

=== Gross anatomy ===

The adult human brain weighs on average about which is about 2% of the total body weight, with a volume of around 1260 cm3 in men and 1130 cm3 in women. There is substantial individual variation, with the standard reference range for men being and for women .

The cerebrum, consisting of the cerebral hemispheres, forms the largest part of the brain and overlies the other brain structures. The outer region of the hemispheres, the cerebral cortex, is grey matter, consisting of cortical layers of neurons. Each hemisphere is divided into four main lobes – the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe. Three other lobes are included by some sources which are a &quot;central lobe&quot;, a limbic lobe, and an insular lobe. The central lobe comprises the precentral gyrus and the postcentral gyrus and is included since it forms a distinct functional role.

The brainstem, resembling a stalk, attaches to and leaves the cerebrum at the start of the midbrain area. The brainstem includes the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla oblongata. Behind the brainstem is the cerebellum ().

The cerebrum, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord are covered by three membranes called meninges. The membranes are the tough dura mater; the middle arachnoid mater and the more delicate inner pia mater. Between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater is the subarachnoid space and subarachnoid cisterns, which contain the cerebrospinal fluid. The outermost membrane of the cerebral cortex is the basement membrane of the pia mater called the glia limitans and is an important part of the blood–brain barrier. In 2023 a fourth meningeal membrane has been proposed known as the subarachnoid lymphatic-like membrane. The living brain is very soft, having a gel-like consistency similar to soft tofu. The cortical layers of neurons constitute much of the cerebral grey matter, while the deeper subcortical regions of myelinated axons, make up the white matter. The white matter of the brain makes up about half of the total brain volume.
====Cerebrum====


The cerebrum is the largest part of the brain and is divided into nearly symmetrical left and right hemispheres by a deep groove, the longitudinal fissure. Asymmetry between the lobes is noted as a petalia. The hemispheres are connected by five commissures that span the longitudinal fissure, the largest of these is the corpus callosum.
Each hemisphere is conventionally divided into four main lobes; the frontal lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe, named according to the skull bones that overlie them. Each lobe is associated with one or two specialised functions though there is some functional overlap between them. The surface of the brain is folded into ridges (gyri) and grooves (sulci), many of which are named, usually according to their position, such as the frontal gyrus of the frontal lobe or the central sulcus separating the central regions of the hemispheres. There are many small variations in the secondary and tertiary folds.

The outer part of the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex, made up of grey matter arranged in layers. It is thick, and deeply folded to give a convoluted appearance. Beneath the cortex is the cerebral white matter. The largest part of the cerebral cortex is the neocortex, which has six neuronal layers. The rest of the cortex is of allocortex, which has three or four layers.

The cortex is mapped by divisions into about fifty different functional areas known as Brodmann&#x27;s areas. These areas are distinctly different when seen under a microscope. The cortex is divided into two main functional areas – a motor cortex and a sensory cortex. The primary motor cortex, which sends axons down to motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord, occupies the rear portion of the frontal lobe, directly in front of the somatosensory area. The primary sensory areas receive signals from the sensory nerves and tracts by way of relay nuclei in the thalamus. Primary sensory areas include the visual cortex of the occipital lobe, the auditory cortex in parts of the temporal lobe and insular cortex, and the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe. The remaining parts of the cortex are called the association areas. These areas receive input from the sensory areas and lower parts of the brain and are involved in the complex cognitive processes of perception, thought, and decision-making. The main functions of the frontal lobe are to control attention, abstract thinking, behaviour, problem-solving tasks, and physical reactions and personality. The occipital lobe is the smallest lobe; its main functions are visual reception, visual-spatial processing, movement, and colour recognition. There is a smaller occipital lobule in the lobe known as the cuneus. The temporal lobe controls auditory and visual memories, language, and some hearing and speech.

The cerebrum contains the ventricles where the cerebrospinal fluid is produced and circulated. Below the corpus callosum is the septum pellucidum, a membrane that separates the lateral ventricles. Beneath the lateral ventricles is the thalamus and to the front and below is the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus leads on to the pituitary gland. At the back of the thalamus is the brainstem.

The basal ganglia, also called basal nuclei, are a set of structures deep within the hemispheres involved in behaviour and movement regulation. The largest component is the striatum, others are the globus pallidus, the substantia nigra and the subthalamic nucleus. The striatum is divided into a ventral striatum, and dorsal striatum, subdivisions that are based upon function and connections. The ventral striatum consists of the nucleus accumbens and the olfactory tubercle whereas the dorsal striatum consists of the caudate nucleus and the putamen. The putamen and the globus pallidus lie separated from the lateral ventricles and thalamus by the internal capsule, whereas the caudate nucleus stretches around and abuts the lateral ventricles on their outer sides. At the deepest part of the lateral sulcus between the insular cortex and the striatum is a thin neuronal sheet called the claustrum.

Below and in front of the striatum are a number of basal forebrain structures. These include the nucleus basalis, diagonal band of Broca, substantia innominata, and the medial septal nucleus. These structures are important in producing the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine, which is then distributed widely throughout the brain. The basal forebrain, in particular the nucleus basalis, is considered to be the major cholinergic output of the central nervous system to the striatum and neocortex.

====Cerebellum====

The cerebellum is divided into an anterior lobe, a posterior lobe, and the flocculonodular lobe. The anterior and posterior lobes are connected in the middle by the vermis. Compared to the cerebral cortex, the cerebellum has a much thinner outer cortex that is narrowly furrowed into numerous curved transverse fissures.
Viewed from underneath between the two lobes is the third lobe the flocculonodular lobe. The cerebellum rests at the back of the cranial cavity, lying beneath the occipital lobes, and is separated from these by the cerebellar tentorium, a sheet of fibre.

It is connected to the brainstem by three pairs of nerve tracts called cerebellar peduncles. The superior pair connects to the midbrain; the middle pair connects to the medulla, and the inferior pair connects to the pons. The cerebellum consists of an inner medulla of white matter and an outer cortex of richly folded grey matter. The cerebellum&#x27;s anterior and posterior lobes appear to play a role in the coordination and smoothing of complex motor movements, and the flocculonodular lobe in the maintenance of balance although debate exists as to its cognitive, behavioural and motor functions.

====Brainstem====

The brainstem lies beneath the cerebrum and consists of the midbrain, pons and medulla. It lies in the back part of the skull, resting on the part of the base known as the clivus, and ends at the foramen magnum, a large opening in the occipital bone. The brainstem continues below this as the spinal cord, protected by the vertebral column.

Ten of the twelve pairs of cranial nerves emerge directly from the brainstem. The brainstem also contains many cranial nerve nuclei and nuclei of peripheral nerves, as well as nuclei involved in the regulation of many essential processes including breathing, control of eye movements and balance. The reticular formation, a network of nuclei of ill-defined formation, is present within and along the length of the brainstem. Many nerve tracts, which transmit information to and from the cerebral cortex to the rest of the body, pass through the brainstem.

===Microanatomy===
The human brain is primarily composed of neurons, glial cells, neural stem cells, and blood vessels. Types of neuron include interneurons, pyramidal cells including Betz cells, motor neurons (upper and lower motor neurons), and cerebellar Purkinje cells. Betz cells are the largest cells (by size of cell body) in the nervous system. The adult human brain is estimated to contain 86±8 billion neurons, with a roughly equal number (85±10 billion) of non-neuronal cells. Out of these neurons, 16 billion (19%) are located in the cerebral cortex, and 69 billion (80%) are in the cerebellum.

Types of glial cell are astrocytes (including Bergmann glia), oligodendrocytes, ependymal cells (including tanycytes), radial glial cells, microglia, and a subtype of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells. Astrocytes are the largest of the glial cells. They are stellate cells with many processes radiating from their cell bodies. Some of these processes end as perivascular endfeet on capillary walls. The glia limitans of the cortex is made up of astrocyte endfeet processes that serve in part to contain the cells of the brain.

Mast cells are white blood cells that interact in the neuroimmune system in the brain. Mast cells in the central nervous system are present in a number of structures including the meninges; they mediate neuroimmune responses in inflammatory conditions and help to maintain the blood–brain barrier, particularly in brain regions where the barrier is absent. Mast cells serve the same general functions in the body and central nervous system, such as effecting or regulating allergic responses, innate and adaptive immunity, autoimmunity, and inflammation. Mast cells serve as the main effector cell through which pathogens can affect the biochemical signaling that takes place between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system.

Some 400 genes are shown to be brain-specific. In all neurons, ELAVL3 is expressed, and in pyramidal cells, NRGN and REEP2 are also expressed. GAD1 – essential for the biosynthesis of the neurotransmitter GABA – is expressed in interneurons. Proteins expressed in glial cells include astrocyte markers GFAP and S100B whereas myelin basic protein and the transcription factor OLIG2 are expressed in oligodendrocytes.

===Cerebrospinal fluid===
Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear, colourless transcellular fluid that circulates around the brain in the subarachnoid space, in the ventricular system, and in the central canal of the spinal cord. It also fills some gaps in the subarachnoid space, known as subarachnoid cisterns. The four ventricles, two lateral, a third, and a fourth ventricle, all contain a choroid plexus that produces cerebrospinal fluid. The third ventricle lies in the midline and is connected to the lateral ventricles. A single duct, the cerebral aqueduct between the pons and the cerebellum, connects the third ventricle to the fourth ventricle. Three separate openings, the middle and two lateral apertures, drain the cerebrospinal fluid from the fourth ventricle to the cisterna magna, one of the major cisterns. From here, cerebrospinal fluid circulates around the brain and spinal cord in the subarachnoid space, between the arachnoid mater and pia mater.
At any one time, there is about 150mL of cerebrospinal fluid – most within the subarachnoid space. It is constantly being regenerated and absorbed, and is replaced about once every 5–6 hours.

A glymphatic system has been described as the lymphatic drainage system of the brain. The brain-wide glymphatic pathway includes drainage routes from the cerebrospinal fluid, and from the meningeal lymphatic vessels that are associated with the dural sinuses, and run alongside the cerebral blood vessels. The pathway drains interstitial fluid from the tissue of the brain.

===Blood supply===

The internal carotid arteries supply oxygenated blood to the front of the brain and the vertebral arteries supply blood to the back of the brain. These two circulations join in the circle of Willis, a ring of connected arteries that lies in the interpeduncular cistern between the midbrain and pons.

The internal carotid arteries are branches of the common carotid arteries. They enter the cranium through the carotid canal, travel through the cavernous sinus and enter the subarachnoid space. They then enter the circle of Willis, with two branches, the anterior cerebral arteries emerging. These branches travel forward and then upward along the longitudinal fissure, and supply the front and midline parts of the brain. One or more small anterior communicating arteries join the two anterior cerebral arteries shortly after they emerge as branches. The internal carotid arteries continue forward as the middle cerebral arteries. They travel sideways along the sphenoid bone of the eye socket, then upwards through the insula cortex, where final branches arise. The middle cerebral arteries send branches along their length.

The vertebral arteries emerge as branches of the left and right subclavian arteries. They travel upward through transverse foramina which are spaces in the cervical vertebrae. Each side enters the cranial cavity through the foramen magnum along the corresponding side of the medulla. They give off one of the three cerebellar branches. The vertebral arteries join in front of the middle part of the medulla to form the larger basilar artery, which sends multiple branches to supply the medulla and pons, and the two other anterior and superior cerebellar branches. Finally, the basilar artery divides into two posterior cerebral arteries. These travel outwards, around the superior cerebellar peduncles, and along the top of the cerebellar tentorium, where it sends branches to supply the temporal and occipital lobes. Each posterior cerebral artery sends a small posterior communicating artery to join with the internal carotid arteries.

====Blood drainage====

Cerebral veins drain deoxygenated blood from the brain. The brain has two main networks of veins: an exterior or superficial network, on the surface of the cerebrum that has three branches, and an interior network. These two networks communicate via anastomosing (joining) veins. The veins of the brain drain into larger cavities of the dural venous sinuses usually situated between the dura mater and the covering of the skull. Blood from the cerebellum and midbrain drains into the great cerebral vein. Blood from the medulla and pons of the brainstem have a variable pattern of drainage, either into the spinal veins or into adjacent cerebral veins.

The blood in the deep part of the brain drains, through a venous plexus into the cavernous sinus at the front, and the superior and inferior petrosal sinuses at the sides, and the inferior sagittal sinus at the back. Blood drains from the outer brain into the large superior sagittal sinus, which rests in the midline on top of the brain. Blood from here joins with blood from the straight sinus at the confluence of sinuses.

Blood from here drains into the left and right transverse sinuses. These then drain into the sigmoid sinuses, which receive blood from the cavernous sinus and superior and inferior petrosal sinuses. The sigmoid drains into the large internal jugular veins.

====The blood–brain barrier====
The larger arteries throughout the brain supply blood to smaller capillaries. These smallest of blood vessels in the brain, are lined with cells joined by tight junctions and so fluids do not seep in or leak out to the same degree as they do in other capillaries; this creates the blood–brain barrier. Pericytes play a major role in the formation of the tight junctions. The barrier is less permeable to larger molecules, but is still permeable to water, carbon dioxide, oxygen, and most fat-soluble substances (including anaesthetics and alcohol). The blood-brain barrier is not present in the circumventricular organswhich are structures in the brain that may need to respond to changes in body fluidssuch as the pineal gland, area postrema, and some areas of the hypothalamus. There is a similar blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier, which serves the same purpose as the blood–brain barrier, but facilitates the transport of different substances into the brain due to the distinct structural characteristics between the two barrier systems.

==Development==


At the beginning of the third week of development, the embryonic ectoderm forms a thickened strip called the neural plate. By the fourth week of development the neural plate has widened to give a broad cephalic end, a less broad middle part and a narrow caudal end. These swellings are known as the primary brain vesicles and represent the beginnings of the forebrain (prosencephalon), midbrain (mesencephalon), and hindbrain (rhombencephalon).

Neural crest cells (derived from the ectoderm) populate the lateral edges of the plate at the neural folds. In the fourth weekduring the neurulation stagethe neural folds close to form the neural tube, bringing together the neural crest cells at the neural crest. The neural crest runs the length of the tube with cranial neural crest cells at the cephalic end and caudal neural crest cells at the tail. Cells detach from the crest and migrate in a craniocaudal (head to tail) wave inside the tube. Cells at the cephalic end give rise to the brain, and cells at the caudal end give rise to the spinal cord.

The tube flexes as it grows, forming the crescent-shaped cerebral hemispheres at the head. The cerebral hemispheres first appear on day 32.
Early in the fourth week, the cephalic part bends sharply forward in a cephalic flexure. This flexed part becomes the forebrain (prosencephalon); the adjoining curving part becomes the midbrain (mesencephalon) and the part caudal to the flexure becomes the hindbrain (rhombencephalon). These areas are formed as swellings known as the three primary brain vesicles. In the fifth week of development five secondary brain vesicles have formed. The forebrain separates into two vesicles – an anterior telencephalon and a posterior diencephalon. The telencephalon gives rise to the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, and related structures. The diencephalon gives rise to the thalamus and hypothalamus. The hindbrain also splits into two areas – the metencephalon and the myelencephalon. The metencephalon gives rise to the cerebellum and pons. The myelencephalon gives rise to the medulla oblongata. Also during the fifth week, the brain divides into repeating segments called neuromeres. In the hindbrain these are known as rhombomeres.

A characteristic of the brain is the cortical folding known as gyrification. For just over five months of prenatal development the cortex is smooth. By the gestational age of 24 weeks, the wrinkled morphology showing the fissures that begin to mark out the lobes of the brain is evident. Why the cortex wrinkles and folds is not well-understood, but gyrification has been linked to intelligence and neurological disorders, and a number of gyrification theories have been proposed. These theories include those based on mechanical buckling, axonal tension, and differential tangential expansion. What is clear is that gyrification is not a random process, but rather a complex developmentally predetermined process which generates patterns of folds that are consistent between individuals and most species.

The first groove to appear in the fourth month is the lateral cerebral fossa. The expanding caudal end of the hemisphere has to curve over in a forward direction to fit into the restricted space. This covers the fossa and turns it into a much deeper ridge known as the lateral sulcus and this marks out the temporal lobe. By the sixth month other sulci have formed that demarcate the frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes. A gene present in the human genome (ARHGAP11B) may play a major role in gyrification and encephalisation.
==Function==
===Motor control===
The frontal lobe is involved in reasoning, motor control, emotion, and language. It contains the motor cortex, which is involved in planning and coordinating movement; the prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for higher-level cognitive functioning; and Broca&#x27;s area, which is essential for language production. The motor system of the brain is responsible for the generation and control of movement. Generated movements pass from the brain through nerves to motor neurons in the body, which control the action of muscles. The corticospinal tract carries movements from the brain, through the spinal cord, to the torso and limbs. The cranial nerves carry movements related to the eyes, mouth and face.

Gross movement – such as locomotion and the movement of arms and legs – is generated in the motor cortex, divided into three parts: the primary motor cortex, found in the precentral gyrus and has sections dedicated to the movement of different body parts. These movements are supported and regulated by two other areas, lying anterior to the primary motor cortex: the premotor area and the supplementary motor area. The hands and mouth have a much larger area dedicated to them than other body parts, allowing finer movement; this has been visualised in a motor homunculus. Impulses generated from the motor cortex travel along the corticospinal tract along the front of the medulla and cross over (decussate) at the medullary pyramids. These then travel down the spinal cord, with most connecting to interneurons, in turn connecting to lower motor neurons within the grey matter that then transmit the impulse to move to muscles themselves. The cerebellum and basal ganglia, play a role in fine, complex and coordinated muscle movements. Connections between the cortex and the basal ganglia control muscle tone, posture and movement initiation, and are referred to as the extrapyramidal system.

===Sensory===
The sensory nervous system is involved with the reception and processing of sensory information. This information is received through the cranial nerves, through tracts in the spinal cord, and directly at centres of the brain exposed to the blood. The brain also receives and interprets information from the special senses of vision, smell, hearing, and taste. Mixed motor and sensory signals are also integrated.

From the skin, the brain receives information about fine touch, pressure, pain, vibration and temperature. From the joints, the brain receives information about joint position. The sensory cortex is found just near the motor cortex, and, like the motor cortex, has areas related to sensation from different body parts. Sensation collected by a sensory receptor on the skin is changed to a nerve signal, that is passed up a series of neurons through tracts in the spinal cord. The dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway contains information about fine touch, vibration and position of joints. The pathway fibres travel up the back part of the spinal cord to the back part of the medulla, where they connect with second-order neurons that immediately send fibres across the midline. These fibres then travel upwards into the ventrobasal complex in the thalamus where they connect with third-order neurons which send fibres up to the sensory cortex. The spinothalamic tract carries information about pain, temperature, and gross touch. The pathway fibres travel up the spinal cord and connect with second-order neurons in the reticular formation of the brainstem for pain and temperature, and also terminate at the ventrobasal complex of the thalamus for gross touch.

Vision is generated by light that hits the retina of the eye. Photoreceptors in the retina transduce the sensory stimulus of light into an electrical nerve signal that is sent to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe. Visual signals leave the retinas through the optic nerves.
Optic nerve fibres from the retinas&#x27; nasal halves cross to the opposite sides joining the fibres from the temporal halves of the opposite retinas to form the optic tracts.
The arrangements of the eyes&#x27; optics and the visual pathways mean vision from the left visual field is received by the right half of each retina, is processed by the right visual cortex, and vice versa. 
The optic tract fibres reach the brain at the lateral geniculate nucleus, and travel through the optic radiation to reach the visual cortex.

Hearing and balance are both generated in the inner ear. Sound results in vibrations of the ossicles which continue finally to the hearing organ, and change in balance results in movement of liquids within the inner ear. This creates a nerve signal that passes through the vestibulocochlear nerve. From here, it passes through to the cochlear nuclei, the superior olivary nucleus, the medial geniculate nucleus, and finally the auditory radiation to the auditory cortex.

The sense of smell is generated by receptor cells in the epithelium of the olfactory mucosa in the nasal cavity. This information passes via the olfactory nerve which goes into the skull through a relatively permeable part. This nerve transmits to the neural circuitry of the olfactory bulb from where information is passed to the olfactory cortex.
Taste is generated from receptors on the tongue and passed along the facial and glossopharyngeal nerves into the solitary nucleus in the brainstem. Some taste information is also passed from the pharynx into this area via the vagus nerve. Information is then passed from here through the thalamus into the gustatory cortex.

===Regulation===
Autonomic functions of the brain include the regulation, or rhythmic control of the heart rate and rate of breathing, and maintaining homeostasis.

Blood pressure and heart rate are influenced by the vasomotor centre of the medulla, which causes arteries and veins to be somewhat constricted at rest. It does this by influencing the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems via the vagus nerve. Information about blood pressure is generated by baroreceptors in aortic bodies in the aortic arch, and passed to the brain along the afferent fibres of the vagus nerve. Information about the pressure changes in the carotid sinus comes from carotid bodies located near the carotid artery and this is passed via a nerve joining with the glossopharyngeal nerve. This information travels up to the solitary nucleus in the medulla. Signals from here influence the vasomotor centre to adjust vein and artery constriction accordingly.

The brain controls the rate of breathing, mainly by respiratory centres in the medulla and pons. The respiratory centres control respiration, by generating motor signals that are passed down the spinal cord, along the phrenic nerve to the diaphragm and other muscles of respiration. This is a mixed nerve that carries sensory information back to the centres. There are four respiratory centres, three with a more clearly defined function, and an apneustic centre with a less clear function. In the medulla a dorsal respiratory group causes the desire to breathe in and receives sensory information directly from the body. Also in the medulla, the ventral respiratory group influences breathing out during exertion. In the pons the pneumotaxic centre influences the duration of each breath, and the apneustic centre seems to have an influence on inhalation. The respiratory centres directly senses blood carbon dioxide and pH. Information about blood oxygen, carbon dioxide and pH levels are also sensed on the walls of arteries in the peripheral chemoreceptors of the aortic and carotid bodies. This information is passed via the vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves to the respiratory centres. High carbon dioxide, an acidic pH, or low oxygen stimulate the respiratory centres. The desire to breathe in is also affected by pulmonary stretch receptors in the lungs which, when activated, prevent the lungs from overinflating by transmitting information to the respiratory centres via the vagus nerve.

The hypothalamus in the diencephalon, is involved in regulating many functions of the body. Functions include neuroendocrine regulation, regulation of the circadian rhythm, control of the autonomic nervous system, and the regulation of fluid, and food intake. The circadian rhythm is controlled by two main cell groups in the hypothalamus. The anterior hypothalamus includes the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus which through gene expression cycles, generates a roughly 24 hour circadian clock. In the circadian day an ultradian rhythm takes control of the sleeping pattern. Sleep is an essential requirement for the body and brain and allows the closing down and resting of the body&#x27;s systems. There are also findings that suggest that the daily build-up of toxins in the brain are removed during sleep. Whilst awake the brain consumes a fifth of the body&#x27;s total energy needs. Sleep necessarily reduces this use and gives time for the restoration of energy-giving ATP. The effects of sleep deprivation show the absolute need for sleep.

The lateral hypothalamus contains orexinergic neurons that control appetite and arousal through their projections to the ascending reticular activating system. The hypothalamus controls the pituitary gland through the release of peptides such as oxytocin, and vasopressin, as well as dopamine into the median eminence. Through the autonomic projections, the hypothalamus is involved in regulating functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, breathing, sweating, and other homeostatic mechanisms. The hypothalamus also plays a role in thermal regulation, and when stimulated by the immune system, is capable of generating a fever. The hypothalamus is influenced by the kidneys: when blood pressure falls, the renin released by the kidneys stimulates a need to drink. The hypothalamus also regulates food intake through autonomic signals, and hormone release by the digestive system.

===Language===


While language functions were traditionally thought to be localised to Wernicke&#x27;s area and Broca&#x27;s area, it is now mostly accepted that a wider network of cortical regions contributes to language functions.

The study on how language is represented, processed, and acquired by the brain is called neurolinguistics, which is a large multidisciplinary field drawing from cognitive neuroscience, cognitive linguistics, and psycholinguistics.

===Lateralisation===

The cerebrum has a contralateral organisation with each hemisphere of the brain interacting primarily with one half of the body: the left side of the brain interacts with the right side of the body, and vice versa. This is theorized to be caused by a developmental axial twist. Motor connections from the brain to the spinal cord, and sensory connections from the spinal cord to the brain, both cross sides in the brainstem. Visual input follows a more complex rule: the optic nerves from the two eyes come together at a point called the optic chiasm, and half of the fibres from each nerve split off to join the other. The result is that connections from the left half of the retina, in both eyes, go to the left side of the brain, whereas connections from the right half of the retina go to the right side of the brain. Because each half of the retina receives light coming from the opposite half of the visual field, the functional consequence is that visual input from the left side of the world goes to the right side of the brain, and vice versa. Thus, the right side of the brain receives somatosensory input from the left side of the body, and visual input from the left side of the visual field.

The left and right sides of the brain appear symmetrical, but they function asymmetrically. For example, the counterpart of the left-hemisphere motor area controlling the right hand is the right-hemisphere area controlling the left hand. There are, however, several important exceptions, involving language and spatial cognition. The left frontal lobe is dominant for language. If a key language area in the left hemisphere is damaged, it can leave the victim unable to speak or understand, whereas equivalent damage to the right hemisphere would cause only minor impairment to language skills.

A substantial part of current understanding of the interactions between the two hemispheres has come from the study of &quot;split-brain patients&quot;—people who underwent surgical transection of the corpus callosum in an attempt to reduce the severity of epileptic seizures. These patients do not show unusual behaviour that is immediately obvious, but in some cases can behave almost like two different people in the same body, with the right hand taking an action and then the left hand undoing it. These patients, when briefly shown a picture on the right side of the point of visual fixation, are able to describe it verbally, but when the picture is shown on the left, are unable to describe it, but may be able to give an indication with the left hand of the nature of the object shown.

===Emotion===
Emotions are generally defined as two-step multicomponent processes involving elicitation, followed by psychological feelings, appraisal, expression, autonomic responses, and action tendencies. Attempts to localise basic emotions to certain brain regions have been controversial; some research found no evidence for specific locations corresponding to emotions, but instead found circuitry involved in general emotional processes. The amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, mid and anterior insular cortex and lateral prefrontal cortex, appeared to be involved in generating the emotions, while weaker evidence was found for the ventral tegmental area, ventral pallidum and nucleus accumbens in incentive salience. Others, however, have found evidence of activation of specific regions, such as the basal ganglia in happiness, the subcallosal cingulate cortex in sadness, and amygdala in fear.

===Cognition===

The brain is responsible for cognition, which functions through numerous processes and executive functions. Executive functions include the ability to filter information and tune out irrelevant stimuli with attentional control and cognitive inhibition, the ability to process and manipulate information held in working memory, the ability to think about multiple concepts simultaneously and switch tasks with cognitive flexibility, the ability to inhibit impulses and prepotent responses with inhibitory control, and the ability to determine the relevance of information or appropriateness of an action. Higher order executive functions require the simultaneous use of multiple basic executive functions, and include planning, prospection and fluid intelligence (i.e., reasoning and problem solving).

The prefrontal cortex plays a significant role in mediating executive functions. Planning involves activation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), anterior cingulate cortex, angular prefrontal cortex, right prefrontal cortex, and supramarginal gyrus. Working memory manipulation involves the DLPFC, inferior frontal gyrus, and areas of the parietal cortex. Inhibitory control involves multiple areas of the prefrontal cortex, as well as the caudate nucleus and subthalamic nucleus.

==Physiology==

===Neurotransmission===
Brain activity is made possible by the interconnections of neurons that are linked together to reach their targets. A neuron consists of a cell body, axon, and dendrites. Dendrites are often extensive branches that receive information in the form of signals from the axon terminals of other neurons. The signals received may cause the neuron to initiate an action potential (an electrochemical signal or nerve impulse) which is sent along its axon to the axon terminal, to connect with the dendrites or with the cell body of another neuron. An action potential is initiated at the initial segment of an axon, which contains a specialised complex of proteins. When an action potential reaches the axon terminal it triggers the release of a neurotransmitter at a synapse that propagates a signal that acts on the target cell. These chemical neurotransmitters include dopamine, serotonin, GABA, glutamate, and acetylcholine. GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, and glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter. Neurons link at synapses to form neural pathways, neural circuits, and large elaborate network systems such as the salience network and the default mode network, and the activity between them is driven by the process of neurotransmission.

===Metabolism===
The brain consumes up to 20% of the energy used by the human body, more than any other organ. In humans, blood glucose is the primary source of energy for most cells and is critical for normal function in a number of tissues, including the brain. The human brain consumes approximately 60% of blood glucose in fasted, sedentary individuals. Brain metabolism normally relies upon blood glucose as an energy source, but during times of low glucose (such as fasting, endurance exercise, or limited carbohydrate intake), the brain uses ketone bodies for fuel with a smaller need for glucose. The brain can also utilize lactate during exercise. The brain stores glucose in the form of glycogen, albeit in significantly smaller amounts than that found in the liver or skeletal muscle. Long-chain fatty acids cannot cross the blood–brain barrier, but the liver can break these down to produce ketone bodies. However, short-chain fatty acids (e.g., butyric acid, propionic acid, and acetic acid) and the medium-chain fatty acids, octanoic acid and heptanoic acid, can cross the blood–brain barrier and be metabolised by brain cells.

Although the human brain represents only 2% of the body weight, it receives 15% of the cardiac output, 20% of total body oxygen consumption, and 25% of total body glucose utilization. The brain mostly uses glucose for energy, and deprivation of glucose, as can happen in hypoglycemia, can result in loss of consciousness. The energy consumption of the brain does not vary greatly over time, but active regions of the cortex consume somewhat more energy than inactive regions, which forms the basis for the functional neuroimaging methods of PET and fMRI. These techniques provide a three-dimensional image of metabolic activity. A preliminary study showed that brain metabolic requirements in humans peak at about five years old.

The function of sleep is not fully understood; however, there is evidence that sleep enhances the clearance of metabolic waste products, some of which are potentially neurotoxic, from the brain and may also permit repair. Evidence suggests that the increased clearance of metabolic waste during sleep occurs via increased functioning of the glymphatic system. Sleep may also have an effect on cognitive function by weakening unnecessary connections.

==Research==
The brain is not fully understood, and research is ongoing. Neuroscientists, along with researchers from allied disciplines, study how the human brain works. The boundaries between the specialties of neuroscience, neurology and other disciplines such as psychiatry have faded as they are all influenced by basic research in neuroscience.

Neuroscience research has expanded considerably. The &quot;Decade of the Brain&quot;, an initiative of the United States Government in the 1990s, is considered to have marked much of this increase in research, and was followed in 2013 by the BRAIN Initiative. The Human Connectome Project was a five-year study launched in 2009 to analyse the anatomical and functional connections of parts of the brain, and has provided much data.
An emerging phase in research may be that of simulating brain activity.

===Methods===
Information about the structure and function of the human brain comes from a variety of experimental methods, including animals and humans. Information about brain trauma and stroke has provided information about the function of parts of the brain and the effects of brain damage. Neuroimaging is used to visualise the brain and record brain activity. Electrophysiology is used to measure, record and monitor the electrical activity of the cortex. Measurements may be of local field potentials of cortical areas, or of the activity of a single neuron. An electroencephalogram can record the electrical activity of the cortex using electrodes placed non-invasively on the scalp.

Invasive measures include electrocorticography, which uses electrodes placed directly on the exposed surface of the brain. This method is used in cortical stimulation mapping, used in the study of the relationship between cortical areas and their systemic function. By using much smaller microelectrodes, single-unit recordings can be made from a single neuron that give a high spatial resolution and high temporal resolution. This has enabled the linking of brain activity to behaviour, and the creation of neuronal maps.

The development of cerebral organoids has opened ways for studying the growth of the brain, and of the cortex, and for understanding disease development, offering further implications for therapeutic applications.

===Imaging===
Functional neuroimaging techniques show changes in brain activity that relate to the function of specific brain areas. One technique is functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) which has the advantages over earlier methods of SPECT and PET of not needing the use of radioactive materials and of offering a higher resolution. Another technique is functional near-infrared spectroscopy. These methods rely on the haemodynamic response that shows changes in brain activity in relation to changes in blood flow, useful in mapping functions to brain areas. Resting state fMRI
looks at the interaction of brain regions whilst the brain is not performing a specific task. This is also used to show the default mode network.

Any electrical current generates a magnetic field; neural oscillations induce weak magnetic fields, and in functional magnetoencephalography the current produced can show localised brain function in high resolution. Tractography uses MRI and image analysis to create 3D images of the nerve tracts of the brain. Connectograms give a graphical representation of the neural connections of the brain.

Differences in brain structure can be measured in some disorders, notably schizophrenia and dementia. Different biological approaches using imaging have given more insight for example into the disorders of depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. A key source of information about the function of brain regions is the effects of damage to them.

Advances in neuroimaging have enabled objective insights into mental disorders, leading to faster diagnosis, more accurate prognosis, and better monitoring.

===Gene and protein expression===
Bioinformatics is a field of study that includes the creation and advancement of databases, and computational and statistical techniques, that can be used in studies of the human brain, particularly in the areas of gene and protein expression. Bioinformatics and studies in genomics, and functional genomics, generated the need for DNA annotation, a transcriptome technology, identifying genes, their locations and functions. GeneCards is a major database.

, just under 20,000 protein-coding genes are seen to be expressed in the human, and some 400 of these genes are brain-specific. The data that has been provided on gene expression in the brain has fuelled further research into a number of disorders. The long term use of alcohol for example, has shown altered gene expression in the brain, and cell-type specific changes that may relate to alcohol use disorder. These changes have been noted in the synaptic transcriptome in the prefrontal cortex, and are seen as a factor causing the drive to alcohol dependence, and also to other substance abuses.

Other related studies have also shown evidence of synaptic alterations and their loss, in the ageing brain. Changes in gene expression alter the levels of proteins in various neural pathways and this has been shown to be evident in synaptic contact dysfunction or loss. This dysfunction has been seen to affect many structures of the brain and has a marked effect on inhibitory neurons resulting in a decreased level of neurotransmission, and subsequent cognitive decline and disease.

==Clinical significance==
===Injury===
Injury to the brain can manifest in many ways. Traumatic brain injury, for example received in contact sport, after a fall, or a traffic or work accident, can be associated with both immediate and longer-term problems. Immediate problems may include bleeding within the brain, this may compress the brain tissue or damage its blood supply. Bruising to the brain may occur. Bruising may cause widespread damage to the nerve tracts that can lead to a condition of diffuse axonal injury. A fractured skull, injury to a particular area, deafness, and concussion are also possible immediate developments. In addition to the site of injury, the opposite side of the brain may be affected, termed a contrecoup injury. Longer-term issues that may develop include posttraumatic stress disorder, and hydrocephalus. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy can develop following multiple head injuries.

===Disease===
Neurodegenerative diseases result in progressive damage to, or loss of neurons affecting different functions of the brain, that worsen with age. Common types are dementias including Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, alcoholic dementia, vascular dementia, and Parkinson&#x27;s disease dementia. Other rarer infectious, genetic, or metabolic types include Huntington&#x27;s disease, motor neuron diseases, HIV dementia, syphilis-related dementia and Wilson&#x27;s disease. Neurodegenerative diseases can affect different parts of the brain, and can affect movement, memory, and cognition. Rare prion diseases including Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease and its variant, and kuru are fatal neurodegenerative diseases.

Cerebral atherosclerosis is atherosclerosis that affects the brain. It results from the build-up of plaques formed of cholesterol, in the large arteries of the brain, and can be mild to significant. When significant, arteries can become narrowed enough to reduce blood flow. It contributes to the development of dementia, and has protein similarities to those found in Alzheimer&#x27;s disease.

The brain, although protected by the blood–brain barrier, can be affected by infections including viruses, bacteria and fungi. Infection may be of the meninges (meningitis), the brain matter (encephalitis), or within the brain matter (such as a cerebral abscess).

===Tumours===
Brain tumours can be either benign or cancerous. Most malignant tumours arise from another part of the body, most commonly from the lung, breast and skin. Cancers of brain tissue can also occur, and originate from any tissue in and around the brain. Meningioma, cancer of the meninges around the brain, is more common than cancers of brain tissue. Cancers within the brain may cause symptoms related to their size or position, with symptoms including headache and nausea, or the gradual development of focal symptoms such as gradual difficulty seeing, swallowing, talking, or as a change of mood. Cancers are in general investigated through the use of CT scans and MRI scans. A variety of other tests including blood tests and lumbar puncture may be used to investigate for the cause of the cancer and evaluate the type and stage of the cancer. The corticosteroid dexamethasone is often given to decrease the swelling of brain tissue around a tumour. Surgery may be considered, however given the complex nature of many tumours or based on tumour stage or type, radiotherapy or chemotherapy may be considered more suitable.

===Mental disorders===
Mental disorders, such as depression, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, Tourette syndrome, and addiction, are known to relate to the functioning of the brain. Treatment for mental disorders may include psychotherapy, psychiatry, social intervention and personal recovery work or cognitive behavioural therapy; the underlying issues and associated prognoses vary significantly between individuals.

===Epilepsy===
Epileptic seizures are thought to relate to abnormal electrical activity. Seizure activity can manifest as absence of consciousness, focal effects such as limb movement or impediments of speech, or be generalized in nature. Status epilepticus refers to a seizure or series of seizures that have not terminated within five minutes. Seizures have a large number of causes, however many seizures occur without a definitive cause being found. In a person with epilepsy, risk factors for further seizures may include sleeplessness, drug and alcohol intake, and stress. Seizures may be assessed using blood tests, EEG and various medical imaging techniques based on the medical history and medical examination findings. In addition to treating an underlying cause and reducing exposure to risk factors, anticonvulsant medications can play a role in preventing further seizures.

===Congenital===
Some brain disorders, such as Tay–Sachs disease, are congenital and linked to genetic and chromosomal mutations. A rare group of congenital cephalic disorders known as lissencephaly is characterised by the lack of, or inadequacy of, cortical folding. Normal development of the brain can be affected during pregnancy by nutritional deficiencies, teratogens, infectious diseases, and by the use of recreational drugs, including alcohol (which may result in fetal alcohol spectrum disorders).
Most cerebral arteriovenous malformations are congenital, these tangled networks of blood vessels may remain without symptoms but at their worst may rupture and cause intracranial hemorrhaging.

===Stroke===

A stroke is a decrease in blood supply to an area of the brain causing cell death and brain injury. This can lead to a wide range of symptoms, including the &quot;FAST&quot; symptoms of facial droop, arm weakness, and speech difficulties (including with speaking and finding words or forming sentences). Symptoms relate to the function of the affected area of the brain and can point to the likely site and cause of the stroke. Difficulties with movement, speech, or sight usually relate to the cerebrum, whereas imbalance, double vision, vertigo and symptoms affecting more than one side of the body usually relate to the brainstem or cerebellum.

Most strokes result from loss of blood supply, typically because of an embolus, rupture of a fatty plaque causing thrombus, or narrowing of small arteries. Strokes can also result from bleeding within the brain. Transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs) are strokes in which symptoms resolve within 24 hours. Investigation into the stroke will involve a medical examination (including a neurological examination) and the taking of a medical history, focusing on the duration of the symptoms and risk factors (including high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation, and smoking). Further investigation is needed in younger patients. An ECG and biotelemetry may be conducted to identify atrial fibrillation; an ultrasound can investigate narrowing of the carotid arteries; an echocardiogram can be used to look for clots within the heart, diseases of the heart valves or the presence of a patent foramen ovale. Blood tests are routinely done as part of the workup including diabetes tests and a lipid profile.

Some treatments for stroke are time-critical. These include clot dissolution or surgical removal of a clot for ischaemic strokes, and decompression for haemorrhagic strokes. As stroke is time critical, hospitals and even pre-hospital care of stroke involves expedited investigations – usually a CT scan to investigate for a haemorrhagic stroke and a CT or MR angiogram to evaluate arteries that supply the brain. MRI scans, not as widely available, may be able to demonstrate the affected area of the brain more accurately, particularly with ischaemic stroke.

Having experienced a stroke, a person may be admitted to a stroke unit, and treatments may be directed as preventing future strokes, including ongoing anticoagulation (such as aspirin or clopidogrel), antihypertensives, and lipid-lowering drugs. A multidisciplinary team including speech pathologists, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, and psychologists plays a large role in supporting a person affected by a stroke and their rehabilitation. A history of stroke increases the risk of developing dementia by around 70%, and recent stroke increases the risk by around 120%.

===Brain death===

Brain death refers to an irreversible total loss of brain function. This is characterised by coma, loss of reflexes, and apnoea, however, the declaration of brain death varies geographically and is not always accepted. In some countries there is also a defined syndrome of brainstem death. Declaration of brain death can have profound implications as the declaration, under the principle of medical futility, will be associated with the withdrawal of life support, and as those with brain death often have organs suitable for organ donation. The process is often made more difficult by poor communication with patients&#x27; families.

When brain death is suspected, reversible differential diagnoses such as, electrolyte, neurological and drug-related cognitive suppression need to be excluded. Testing for reflexes can be of help in the decision, as can the absence of response and breathing. Clinical observations, including a total lack of responsiveness, a known diagnosis, and neural imaging evidence, may all play a role in the decision to pronounce brain death.

==Society and culture==
Neuroanthropology is the study of the relationship between culture and the brain. It explores how the brain gives rise to culture, and how culture influences brain development. Cultural differences and their relation to brain development and structure are researched in different fields.

===The mind===

The philosophy of the mind studies such issues as the problem of understanding consciousness and the mind–body problem. The relationship between the brain and the mind is a significant challenge both philosophically and scientifically. This is because of the difficulty in explaining how mental activities, such as thoughts and emotions, can be implemented by physical structures such as neurons and synapses, or by any other type of physical mechanism. This difficulty was expressed by Gottfried Leibniz in the analogy known as &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Mill&quot;:

Doubt about the possibility of a mechanistic explanation of thought drove René Descartes, and most other philosophers along with him, to dualism: the belief that the mind is to some degree independent of the brain. There has always, however, been a strong argument in the opposite direction. There is clear empirical evidence that physical manipulations of, or injuries to, the brain (for example by drugs or by lesions, respectively) can affect the mind in potent and intimate ways. In the 19th century, the case of Phineas Gage, a railway worker who was injured by a stout iron rod passing through his brain, convinced both researchers and the public that cognitive functions were localised in the brain. Following this line of thinking, a large body of empirical evidence for a close relationship between brain activity and mental activity has led most neuroscientists and contemporary philosophers to be materialists, believing that mental phenomena are ultimately the result of, or reducible to, physical phenomena.

===Brain size===

The size of the brain and a person&#x27;s intelligence are not strongly related. Studies tend to indicate small to moderate correlations (averaging around 0.3 to 0.4) between brain volume and IQ. The most consistent associations are observed within the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes, the hippocampi, and the cerebellum, but these only account for a relatively small amount of variance in IQ, which itself has only a partial relationship to general intelligence and real-world performance.

Other animals, including whales and elephants, have larger brains than humans. However, when the brain-to-body mass ratio is taken into account, the human brain is almost twice as large as that of a bottlenose dolphin, and three times as large as that of a chimpanzee. However, a high ratio does not of itself demonstrate intelligence: very small animals have high ratios and the treeshrew has the largest quotient of any mammal.

===In popular culture===
Earlier ideas about the relative importance of the different organs of the human body sometimes emphasised the heart.
Modern Western popular conceptions, in contrast, have placed increasing focus on the brain.

Research has disproved some common misconceptions about the brain. These include both ancient and modern myths. It is not true (for example) that neurons are not replaced after the age of two; nor that normal humans use only ten per cent of the brain. Popular culture has also oversimplified the lateralisation of the brain by suggesting that functions are completely specific to one side of the brain or the other. Akio Mori coined the term &quot;game brain&quot; for the unreliably supported theory that spending long periods playing video games harmed the brain&#x27;s pre-frontal region, and impaired the expression of emotion and creativity.

Historically, particularly in the early-19th century, the brain featured in popular culture through phrenology, a pseudoscience that assigned personality attributes to different regions of the cortex. The cortex remains important in popular culture as covered in books and satire.

The human brain can feature in science fiction, with themes such as brain transplants and cyborgs (beings with features like partly artificial brains). The 1942 science-fiction book (adapted three times for the cinema) &quot;Donovan&#x27;s Brain&quot; tells the tale of an isolated brain kept alive &quot;in vitro&quot;, gradually taking over the personality of the book&#x27;s protagonist.
==History==
=== Early history ===

The Edwin Smith Papyrus, an ancient Egyptian medical treatise written in the 17th century BC, contains the earliest recorded reference to the brain. The hieroglyph for brain, occurring eight times in this papyrus, describes the symptoms, diagnosis, and prognosis of two traumatic injuries to the head. The papyrus mentions the external surface of the brain, the effects of injury (including seizures and aphasia), the meninges, and cerebrospinal fluid.

In the fifth century BC, Alcmaeon of Croton in Magna Grecia, first considered the brain to be the seat of the mind. Also in the fifth century BC in Athens, the unknown author of &quot;On the Sacred Disease&quot;, a medical treatise which is part of the Hippocratic Corpus and traditionally attributed to Hippocrates, believed the brain to be the seat of intelligence. Aristotle, in his biology initially believed the heart to be the seat of intelligence, and saw the brain as a cooling mechanism for the blood. He reasoned that humans are more rational than the beasts because, among other reasons, they have a larger brain to cool their hot-bloodedness. Aristotle did describe the meninges and distinguished between the cerebrum and cerebellum.

Herophilus of Chalcedon in the fourth and third centuries BC distinguished the cerebrum and the cerebellum, and provided the first clear description of the ventricles; and with Erasistratus of Ceos experimented on living brains. Their works are now mostly lost, and we know about their achievements due mostly to secondary sources. Some of their discoveries had to be re-discovered a millennium after their deaths. Anatomist physician Galen in the second century AD, during the time of the Roman Empire, dissected the brains of sheep, monkeys, dogs, and pigs. He concluded that, as the cerebellum was denser than the brain, it must control the muscles, while as the cerebrum was soft, it must be where the senses were processed. Galen further theorised that the brain functioned by movement of animal spirits through the ventricles.

===Renaissance===
In 1316, Mondino de Luzzi&#x27;s &quot;Anathomia&quot; began the modern study of brain anatomy.
Niccolò Massa discovered in 1536 that the ventricles were filled with fluid. Archangelo Piccolomini of Rome was the first to distinguish between the cerebrum and cerebral cortex. In 1543 Andreas Vesalius published his seven-volume &quot;De humani corporis fabrica&quot;. The seventh book covered the brain and eye, with detailed images of the ventricles, cranial nerves, pituitary gland, meninges, structures of the eye, the vascular supply to the brain and spinal cord, and an image of the peripheral nerves. Vesalius rejected the common belief that the ventricles were responsible for brain function, arguing that many animals have a similar ventricular system to humans, but no true intelligence.

René Descartes proposed the theory of dualism to tackle the issue of the brain&#x27;s relation to the mind. He suggested that the pineal gland was where the mind interacted with the body, serving as the seat of the soul and as the connection through which animal spirits passed from the blood into the brain. This dualism likely provided impetus for later anatomists to further explore the relationship between the anatomical and functional aspects of brain anatomy.

Thomas Willis is considered a second pioneer in the study of neurology and brain science. He wrote &quot;Cerebri Anatome&quot; () in 1664, followed by &quot;Cerebral Pathology&quot; in 1667. In these he described the structure of the cerebellum, the ventricles, the cerebral hemispheres, the brainstem, and the cranial nerves, studied its blood supply; and proposed functions associated with different areas of the brain. The circle of Willis was named after his investigations into the blood supply of the brain, and he was the first to use the word &quot;neurology&quot;. Willis removed the brain from the body when examining it, and rejected the commonly held view that the cortex only consisted of blood vessels, and the view of the last two millennia that the cortex was only incidentally important.

In the middle of 19th century Emil du Bois-Reymond and Hermann von Helmholtz were able to use a galvanometer to show that electrical impulses passed at measurable speeds along nerves, refuting the view of their teacher Johannes Peter Müller that the nerve impulse was a vital function that could not be measured. Richard Caton in 1875 demonstrated electrical impulses in the cerebral hemispheres of rabbits and monkeys. In the 1820s, Jean Pierre Flourens pioneered the experimental method of damaging specific parts of animal brains describing the effects on movement and behavior.

===Modern period===

Studies of the brain became more sophisticated with the use of the microscope and the development of a silver staining method by Camillo Golgi during the 1880s. This was able to show the intricate structures of single neurons. This was used by Santiago Ramón y Cajal and led to the formation of the neuron doctrine, the then revolutionary hypothesis that the neuron is the functional unit of the brain. He used microscopy to uncover many cell types, and proposed functions for the cells he saw. For this, Golgi and Cajal are considered the founders of twentieth century neuroscience, both sharing the Nobel prize in 1906 for their studies and discoveries in this field.

Charles Sherrington published his influential 1906 work &quot;The Integrative Action of the Nervous System&quot; examining the function of reflexes, evolutionary development of the nervous system, functional specialisation of the brain, and layout and cellular function of the central nervous system. In 1942 he coined the term &quot;enchanted loom&quot; as a metaphor for the brain. John Farquhar Fulton, founded the &quot;Journal of Neurophysiology&quot; and published the first comprehensive textbook on the physiology of the nervous system during 1938. Neuroscience during the twentieth century began to be recognised as a distinct unified academic discipline, with David Rioch, Francis O. Schmitt, and Stephen Kuffler playing critical roles in establishing the field. Rioch originated the integration of basic anatomical and physiological research with clinical psychiatry at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, starting in the 1950s. During the same period, Schmitt established the Neuroscience Research Program, an inter-university and international organisation, bringing together biology, medicine, psychological and behavioural sciences. The word neuroscience itself arises from this program.

Paul Broca associated regions of the brain with specific functions, in particular language in Broca&#x27;s area, following work on brain-damaged patients. John Hughlings Jackson described the function of the motor cortex by watching the progression of epileptic seizures through the body. Carl Wernicke described a region associated with language comprehension and production. Korbinian Brodmann divided regions of the brain based on the appearance of cells. By 1950, Sherrington, Papez, and MacLean had identified many of the brainstem and limbic system functions. The capacity of the brain to re-organise and change with age, and a recognised critical development period, were attributed to neuroplasticity, pioneered by Margaret Kennard, who experimented on monkeys during the 1930-40s.

Harvey Cushing (1869–1939) is recognised as the first proficient brain surgeon in the world. In 1937, Walter Dandy began the practice of vascular neurosurgery by performing the first surgical clipping of an intracranial aneurysm.

==Comparative anatomy==

The human brain has many properties that are common to all vertebrate brains. Many of its features are common to all mammalian brains, most notably a six-layered cerebral cortex and a set of associated structures, including the hippocampus and amygdala. The cortex is proportionally larger in humans than in many other mammals. Humans have more association cortex, sensory and motor parts than smaller mammals such as the rat and the cat.

As a primate brain, the human brain has a much larger cerebral cortex, in proportion to body size, than most mammals, and a highly developed visual system.

As a hominid brain, the human brain is substantially enlarged even in comparison to the brain of a typical monkey. The sequence of human evolution from &quot;Australopithecus&quot; (four million years ago) to &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; (modern humans) was marked by a steady increase in brain size. As brain size increased, this altered the size and shape of the skull, from about 600 cm3 in &quot;Homo habilis&quot; to an average of about 1520 cm3 in &quot;Homo neanderthalensis&quot;. Differences in DNA, gene expression, and gene–environment interactions help explain the differences between the function of the human brain and other primates.

== See also ==

*Outline of the human brain
*Outline of neuroscience
*Brain health and pollution
*Cerebral atrophy
*Cortical spreading depression
*Evolution of human intelligence
*Large-scale brain networks
*Superficial veins of the brain

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==External links==

* Brain facts and figures – Washington.edu
*Human brain – National Geographic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="4" end="15" title="Human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q712378" start="31" end="36" title="organ (anatomy)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="44" end="58" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="73" end="84" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="100" end="122" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="143" end="151" title="cerebrum" label="cerebrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="157" end="166" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="175" end="185" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="236" end="240" title="human body" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="321" end="343" title="sensory nervous system" label="sensory nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q551808" start="481" end="500" title="cerebral hemisphere" label="cerebral hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="549" end="561" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="590" end="605" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="620" end="631" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="668" end="677" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q258903" start="692" end="702" title="allocortex" label="allocortex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="736" end="751" title="Cerebral cortex#Layers of neocortex" label="neuronal layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724242" start="830" end="835" title="lobes of the brain" label="lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="842" end="849" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="851" end="859" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="861" end="869" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="875" end="889" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="928" end="947" title="executive functions" label="executive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405524" start="958" end="970" title="self-control" label="self-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q309100" start="972" end="980" title="planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="982" end="988" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="997" end="1013" title="abstraction" label="abstract thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="1025" end="1039" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451122" start="1149" end="1156" title="sensory cortex" label="sensory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="1158" end="1163" title="motor cortex" label="motor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1169" end="1180" title="Cerebral cortex#Association areas" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080497" start="1292" end="1316" title="lateralization of brain function" label="associated with one side"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="1326" end="1334" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478222" start="1351" end="1373" title="spatial visualization ability" label="visual-spatial ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152886" start="1421" end="1445" title="commissural fiber" label="commissural nerve tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="1469" end="1484" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="1580" end="1588" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192570" start="1594" end="1598" title="pons" label="pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="1608" end="1625" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="1631" end="1641" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457374" start="1690" end="1701" title="nerve tract" label="nerve tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064076" start="1710" end="1729" title="cerebellar peduncle" label="cerebellar peduncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="1759" end="1777" title="ventricular system" label="ventricular system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1813" end="1823" title="Ventricular system#Structure" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="1833" end="1852" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="1950" end="1958" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849277" start="1964" end="1975" title="epithalamus" label="epithalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="1981" end="1993" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="1999" end="2011" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="2017" end="2032" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066549" start="2042" end="2053" title="subthalamus" label="subthalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="2059" end="2076" title="limbic system" label="limbic structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="2092" end="2101" title="Amygdala" label="amygdalae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48360" start="2110" end="2120" title="Hippocampus" label="hippocampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q429036" start="2126" end="2135" title="claustrum" label="claustrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934178" start="2149" end="2155" title="Nucleus (neuroanatomy)" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="2163" end="2176" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407681" start="2182" end="2197" title="basal forebrain" label="basal forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q205925" start="2220" end="2243" title="circumventricular organ" label="circumventricular organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243699" start="2371" end="2389" title="Brain cell" label="cells of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="2398" end="2404" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="2421" end="2432" title="neuroglia" label="glial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="2623" end="2639" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="2656" end="2670" title="action potential" label="nerve impulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472302" start="2696" end="2710" title="neural pathway" label="neural pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="2713" end="2727" title="neural circuit" label="neural circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304076" start="2744" end="2759" title="large-scale brain networks" label="network systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q969316" start="2809" end="2826" title="neurotransmission" label="neurotransmission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2864" title="Skull#Humans" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="2879" end="2898" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="2922" end="2933" title="circulatory system" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="2941" end="2960" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="3005" end="3011" title="brain damage" label="damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062122" start="3013" end="3020" title="Central nervous system disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="3026" end="3035" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135341" start="3061" end="3067" title="closed head injury" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="3106" end="3112" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="3142" end="3164" title="neurodegeneration" label="degenerative disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="3174" end="3198" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="3200" end="3208" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="3220" end="3244" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="3250" end="3268" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="3270" end="3291" title="Psychiatric condition" label="Psychiatric condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="3304" end="3317" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="3322" end="3341" title="major depressive disorder" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="3431" end="3438" title="brain tumors" label="tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417240" start="3445" end="3451" title="benign tumour" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3456" end="3465" title="cancer" label="malignant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="3480" end="3518" title="metastasis" label="originate from other sites in the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q948647" start="3562" end="3574" title="neuroanatomy" label="neuroanatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="3611" end="3623" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075980" start="3674" end="3683" title="Biological specimen" label="Specimens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="3717" end="3741" title="histology" label="examined microscopically"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="3789" end="3804" title="Medical imaging" label="Medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="3826" end="3849" title="functional neuroimaging" label="functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="3855" end="3877" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="3936" end="3951" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="3967" end="3979" title="brain damage" label="brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="4137" end="4155" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="4225" end="4238" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="4247" end="4264" title="mind–body problem" label="mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="4270" end="4283" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="4287" end="4297" title="phrenology" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4389" end="4426" title="Brain transplant#In science fiction" label="In science fiction, brain transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296821" start="4472" end="4492" title="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain" label="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022113" start="4657" end="4660" title="cubic centimetre" label="cm3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626599" start="4752" end="4767" title="reference range" label="reference range"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="4803" end="4811" title="cerebrum" label="cerebrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q551808" start="4831" end="4850" title="cerebral hemisphere" label="cerebral hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="4971" end="4986" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="4991" end="5002" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5018" end="5033" title="Cerebral cortex#Layers" label="cortical layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="5037" end="5043" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724242" start="5088" end="5093" title="lobes of the brain" label="lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="5100" end="5112" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="5114" end="5127" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="5129" end="5142" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="5148" end="5162" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345481" start="5251" end="5262" title="limbic lobe" label="limbic lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="5271" end="5283" title="Insular cortex" label="insular lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272263" start="5316" end="5332" title="precentral gyrus" label="precentral gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q956517" start="5341" end="5358" title="postcentral gyrus" label="postcentral gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="5423" end="5432" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="5510" end="5518" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192570" start="5566" end="5570" title="pons" label="pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="5580" end="5597" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla oblongata"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="5627" end="5637" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="5734" end="5742" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394389" start="5772" end="5782" title="dura mater" label="dura mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647112" start="5795" end="5810" title="arachnoid mater" label="arachnoid mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647118" start="5839" end="5848" title="pia mater" label="pia mater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5903" end="5921" title="Meninges#Subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442272" start="5926" end="5947" title="subarachnoid cisterns" label="subarachnoid cisterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="5967" end="5986" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366825" start="6087" end="6100" title="glia limitans" label="glia limitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="6133" end="6152" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q116141964" start="6221" end="6257" title="subarachnoid lymphatic-like membrane" label="subarachnoid lymphatic-like membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="6405" end="6416" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="6458" end="6464" title="myelin" label="myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="6469" end="6473" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="6488" end="6500" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6671" end="6682" title="Symmetry in biology#Bilateral symmetry" label="symmetrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q551808" start="6698" end="6708" title="cerebral hemisphere" label="hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420988" start="6732" end="6752" title="longitudinal fissure" label="longitudinal fissure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6796" end="6803" title="Paleoneurobiology#Asymmetry" label="petalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6843" end="6854" title="Commissural fiber#Structure" label="commissures"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="6919" end="6934" title="corpus callosum" label="corpus callosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724242" start="6993" end="6998" title="lobes of the brain" label="lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="7004" end="7016" title="frontal lobe" label="frontal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="7018" end="7031" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="7033" end="7046" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="7052" end="7066" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="7091" end="7102" title="skull" label="skull bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19468049" start="7266" end="7272" title="gyrification" label="folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758383" start="7286" end="7290" title="gyrus" label="gyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560248" start="7305" end="7310" title="sulcus (neuroanatomy)" label="sulci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505905" start="7387" end="7400" title="frontal gyrus" label="frontal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q972250" start="7428" end="7442" title="central sulcus" label="central sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="7602" end="7617" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="7630" end="7641" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="7761" end="7773" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q726562" start="7822" end="7831" title="neocortex" label="neocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q258903" start="7893" end="7903" title="allocortex" label="allocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q639842" start="7952" end="7958" title="brain mapping" label="mapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q924684" start="8025" end="8046" title="Brodmann&amp;#x27;s areas" label="Brodmann&amp;#x27;s areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="8090" end="8113" title="Histology" label="seen under a microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="8172" end="8184" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451122" start="8191" end="8205" title="sensory cortex" label="sensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707" start="8211" end="8231" title="primary motor cortex" label="primary motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="8259" end="8271" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243173" start="8403" end="8424" title="primary sensory areas" label="primary sensory areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635510" start="8450" end="8463" title="sensory nerve" label="sensory nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457374" start="8469" end="8475" title="nerve tract" label="tracts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8486" end="8498" title="Thalamus#Thalamic nuclei" label="relay nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="8506" end="8514" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75785" start="8550" end="8563" title="visual cortex" label="visual cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q848340" start="8571" end="8585" title="occipital lobe" label="occipital lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18676" start="8591" end="8606" title="auditory cortex" label="auditory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="8623" end="8636" title="temporal lobe" label="temporal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="8641" end="8655" title="insular cortex" label="insular cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="8665" end="8685" title="somatosensory cortex" label="somatosensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="8693" end="8706" title="parietal lobe" label="parietal lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="8757" end="8774" title="association areas" label="association areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="8886" end="8905" title="cognition" label="cognitive processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="8909" end="8919" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="8921" end="8928" title="thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="8934" end="8949" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818236" start="8997" end="9014" title="Attentional control" label="control attention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9232" end="9250" title="Color vision#Color in the human brain" label="colour recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q961620" start="9313" end="9319" title="cuneus" label="cuneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18651" start="9348" end="9356" title="Echoic memory" label="auditory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936607" start="9361" end="9376" title="visual memory" label="visual memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486792" start="9378" end="9386" title="Language processing in the brain" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="9444" end="9454" title="ventricular system" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514754" start="9546" end="9563" title="septum pellucidum" label="septum pellucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="9595" end="9613" title="lateral ventricles" label="lateral ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="9653" end="9661" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="9696" end="9708" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="9743" end="9758" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="9811" end="9824" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319792" start="9980" end="9988" title="striatum" label="striatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759633" start="10005" end="10020" title="globus pallidus" label="globus pallidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="10026" end="10042" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270424" start="10051" end="10070" title="subthalamic nucleus" label="subthalamic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="10238" end="10255" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086516" start="10264" end="10282" title="olfactory tubercle" label="olfactory tubercle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132309" start="10327" end="10342" title="caudate nucleus" label="caudate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q550934" start="10351" end="10358" title="putamen" label="putamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q604747" start="10458" end="10474" title="internal capsule" label="internal capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256980" start="10603" end="10617" title="lateral sulcus" label="lateral sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="10630" end="10644" title="insular cortex" label="insular cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q429036" start="10698" end="10707" title="claustrum" label="claustrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407681" start="10761" end="10776" title="basal forebrain" label="basal forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813830" start="10807" end="10822" title="nucleus basalis" label="nucleus basalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270363" start="10824" end="10846" title="diagonal band of Broca" label="diagonal band of Broca"/>
<link wikidata="Q626274" start="10848" end="10869" title="substantia innominata" label="substantia innominata"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027490" start="10879" end="10900" title="medial septal nucleus" label="medial septal nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="10950" end="10966" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="10968" end="10981" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862743" start="11124" end="11135" title="cholinergic" label="cholinergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771370" start="11259" end="11272" title="anterior lobe of cerebellum" label="anterior lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154883" start="11276" end="11290" title="posterior lobe of cerebellum" label="posterior lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459948" start="11300" end="11320" title="flocculonodular lobe" label="flocculonodular lobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078809" start="11390" end="11396" title="cerebellar vermis" label="vermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q503944" start="11675" end="11689" title="posterior cranial fossa" label="cranial cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089501" start="11761" end="11781" title="cerebellar tentorium" label="cerebellar tentorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457374" start="11853" end="11864" title="nerve tract" label="nerve tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064076" start="11873" end="11892" title="cerebellar peduncle" label="cerebellar peduncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643594" start="11899" end="11912" title="superior cerebellar peduncle" label="superior pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841657" start="11943" end="11954" title="middle cerebellar peduncle" label="middle pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111409" start="11988" end="12001" title="inferior cerebellar peduncle" label="inferior pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502518" start="12320" end="12327" title="Equilibrioception" label="balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="12485" end="12493" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192570" start="12495" end="12499" title="pons" label="pons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189033" start="12504" end="12511" title="medulla oblongata" label="medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q503944" start="12528" end="12550" title="posterior cranial fossa" label="back part of the skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423729" start="12579" end="12583" title="base of the skull" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319750" start="12597" end="12603" title="clivus (anatomy)" label="clivus"/>
<link wikidata="Q426139" start="12621" end="12635" title="foramen magnum" label="foramen magnum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12645" end="12652" title=":wikt:foramen" label="opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q16317" start="12660" end="12674" title="occipital bone" label="occipital bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="12718" end="12729" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q482853" start="12748" end="12764" title="vertebral column" label="vertebral column"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="12794" end="12807" title="cranial nerve" label="cranial nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620205" start="12878" end="12898" title="cranial nerve nucleus" label="cranial nerve nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934178" start="12903" end="12909" title="nucleus (neuroanatomy)" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="12913" end="12930" title="nerve" label="peripheral nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="13015" end="13024" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="13068" end="13087" title="reticular formation" label="reticular formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457374" start="13197" end="13208" title="nerve tract" label="nerve tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="13384" end="13390" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177105" start="13393" end="13403" title="glial cell" label="glial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944097" start="13406" end="13422" title="neural stem cell" label="neural stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="13429" end="13441" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500732" start="13468" end="13479" title="interneuron" label="interneuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116409" start="13482" end="13496" title="pyramidal cell" label="pyramidal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q850597" start="13508" end="13517" title="Betz cell" label="Betz cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="13520" end="13532" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875059" start="13535" end="13540" title="upper motor neuron" label="upper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916640" start="13545" end="13563" title="lower motor neuron" label="lower motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570272" start="13582" end="13595" title="Purkinje cell" label="Purkinje cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="13956" end="13965" title="astrocyte" label="astrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387286" start="13978" end="13991" title="Bergmann glia" label="Bergmann glia"/>
<link wikidata="Q916698" start="13994" end="14009" title="oligodendrocyte" label="oligodendrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134467" start="14012" end="14026" title="ependymal cell" label="ependymal cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419042" start="14039" end="14047" title="tanycyte" label="tanycyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387286" start="14051" end="14068" title="radial glial cell" label="radial glial cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622829" start="14071" end="14080" title="microglia" label="microglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086819" start="14099" end="14130" title="oligodendrocyte progenitor cell" label="oligodendrocyte progenitor cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42413417" start="14189" end="14202" title="stellate cell" label="stellate cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="14245" end="14256" title="soma (biology)" label="cell bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="14302" end="14309" title="endfeet" label="endfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="14313" end="14322" title="capillary" label="capillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366825" start="14334" end="14347" title="glia limitans" label="glia limitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="14376" end="14403" title="Astrocyte endfeet" label="astrocyte endfeet processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="14459" end="14468" title="Mast cell" label="Mast cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="14474" end="14490" title="white blood cell" label="white blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002296" start="14513" end="14531" title="neuroimmune system" label="neuroimmune system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14602" end="14624" title="Mast cell#In the nervous system" label="a number of structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="14952" end="14958" title="Innate immune system" label="innate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="14963" end="14980" title="Adaptive immune system" label="adaptive immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="14982" end="14994" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="15000" end="15012" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347290" start="15043" end="15056" title="effector cell" label="effector cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077315" start="15096" end="15200" title="gut-brain axis" label="biochemical signaling that takes place between the gastrointestinal tract and the central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="15212" end="15216" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17916200" start="15266" end="15272" title="ELAVL3" label="ELAVL3"/>
<link wikidata="Q22676708" start="15311" end="15315" title="NRGN" label="NRGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q18040182" start="15320" end="15325" title="REEP2" label="REEP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18025214" start="15346" end="15350" title="GAD1" label="GAD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="15408" end="15412" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q905442" start="15505" end="15509" title="Glial fibrillary acidic protein" label="GFAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031359" start="15514" end="15519" title="S100B" label="S100B"/>
<link wikidata="Q410974" start="15528" end="15548" title="myelin basic protein" label="myelin basic protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18035130" start="15578" end="15583" title="OLIG2" label="OLIG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="15689" end="15708" title="transcellular fluid" label="transcellular fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="15749" end="15767" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="15776" end="15794" title="ventricular system" label="ventricular system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190634" start="15807" end="15820" title="central canal" label="central canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442272" start="15901" end="15922" title="subarachnoid cisterns" label="subarachnoid cisterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929623" start="15949" end="15956" title="lateral ventricle" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q662322" start="15960" end="15965" title="third ventricle" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069121" start="15973" end="15989" title="fourth ventricle" label="fourth ventricle"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="16005" end="16019" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540833" start="16099" end="16111" title="Interventricular foramina (neuroanatomy)" label="is connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256181" start="16148" end="16152" title="duct (anatomy)" label="duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q623016" start="16158" end="16175" title="cerebral aqueduct" label="cerebral aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331256" start="16296" end="16302" title="Medial aperture" label="middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824021" start="16311" end="16327" title="lateral aperture" label="lateral aperture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122306" start="16393" end="16407" title="cisterna magna" label="cisterna magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15474254" start="16776" end="16793" title="glymphatic system" label="glymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325288" start="16962" end="16989" title="meningeal lymphatic vessels" label="meningeal lymphatic vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322802" start="17019" end="17032" title="dural sinuses" label="dural sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="17099" end="17117" title="interstitial fluid" label="interstitial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q515848" start="17173" end="17198" title="internal carotid arteries" label="internal carotid arteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17206" end="17222" title="Blood#Oxygen transport" label="oxygenated blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q516546" start="17257" end="17275" title="vertebral arteries" label="vertebral arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177" start="17338" end="17342" title="anastomosis" label="join"/>
<link wikidata="Q487595" start="17350" end="17366" title="circle of Willis" label="circle of Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056264" start="17414" end="17437" title="interpeduncular cistern" label="interpeduncular cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q214275" start="17520" end="17543" title="common carotid arteries" label="common carotid arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="17560" end="17567" title="cranium" label="cranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q857942" start="17580" end="17593" title="carotid canal" label="carotid canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457751" start="17614" end="17629" title="cavernous sinus" label="cavernous sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="17644" end="17662" title="subarachnoid space" label="subarachnoid space"/>
<link wikidata="Q487595" start="17684" end="17700" title="circle of Willis" label="circle of Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q498935" start="17725" end="17751" title="anterior cerebral arteries" label="anterior cerebral arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420988" start="17818" end="17838" title="longitudinal fissure" label="longitudinal fissure"/>
<link wikidata="Q598769" start="17911" end="17942" title="anterior communicating artery" label="anterior communicating arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q498179" start="18076" end="18100" title="middle cerebral arteries" label="middle cerebral arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16321" start="18133" end="18146" title="sphenoid bone" label="sphenoid bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156075" start="18154" end="18164" title="orbit (anatomy)" label="eye socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="18191" end="18204" title="insula cortex" label="insula cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q490059" start="18362" end="18381" title="subclavian arteries" label="subclavian arteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18410" end="18429" title="Vertebra#Cervical vertebrae" label="transverse foramina"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="18454" end="18472" title="cervical vertebrae" label="cervical vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q488727" start="18596" end="18632" title="Posterior inferior cerebellar artery" label="one of the three cerebellar branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q500339" start="18724" end="18738" title="basilar artery" label="basilar artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q707277" start="18820" end="18828" title="Anterior inferior cerebellar artery" label="anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q707592" start="18833" end="18861" title="Superior cerebellar artery" label="superior cerebellar branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q492482" start="18908" end="18935" title="posterior cerebral arteries" label="posterior cerebral arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q185438" start="19162" end="19192" title="posterior communicating artery" label="posterior communicating artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064104" start="19262" end="19276" title="Cerebral veins" label="Cerebral veins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19283" end="19301" title="Blood#Oxygen transport" label="deoxygenated blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="19353" end="19357" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5934112" start="19375" end="19394" title="Superior cerebral veins" label="superficial network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047801" start="19459" end="19475" title="Internal cerebral veins" label="interior network"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177" start="19512" end="19524" title="anastomosis" label="anastomosing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322802" start="19599" end="19619" title="dural venous sinuses" label="dural venous sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q585980" start="19746" end="19765" title="great cerebral vein" label="great cerebral vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577475" start="19869" end="19881" title="spinal veins" label="spinal veins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19933" end="19937" title="Anatomical terms of location#deep" label="deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920194" start="19974" end="19987" title="venous plexus" label="venous plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457751" start="19997" end="20012" title="cavernous sinus" label="cavernous sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643664" start="20035" end="20043" title="superior petrosal sinus" label="superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029401" start="20048" end="20071" title="inferior petrosal sinus" label="inferior petrosal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12764815" start="20096" end="20119" title="inferior sagittal sinus" label="inferior sagittal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115976" start="20182" end="20205" title="superior sagittal sinus" label="superior sagittal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621088" start="20297" end="20311" title="straight sinus" label="straight sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845565" start="20319" end="20340" title="confluence of sinuses" label="confluence of sinuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5860395" start="20390" end="20406" title="transverse sinus" label="transverse sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292294" start="20436" end="20449" title="sigmoid sinus" label="sigmoid sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q540598" start="20576" end="20597" title="internal jugular vein" label="internal jugular vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="20698" end="20709" title="capillaries" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="20729" end="20741" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053832" start="20788" end="20802" title="tight junction" label="tight junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="20914" end="20933" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q500446" start="20935" end="20943" title="Pericyte" label="Pericyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="21155" end="21166" title="anaesthetic" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205925" start="21228" end="21252" title="circumventricular organs" label="circumventricular organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="21348" end="21360" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q640532" start="21362" end="21375" title="area postrema" label="area postrema"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="21399" end="21411" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21432" end="21465" title="Choroid plexus#Function" label="blood–cerebrospinal fluid barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="21731" end="21742" title="human embryonic development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="21748" end="21754" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="21758" end="21766" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314823" start="21802" end="21814" title="neural plate" label="neural plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054543" start="21895" end="21903" title="cephalization" label="cephalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="21992" end="22014" title="Brain vesicle" label="primary brain vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q507027" start="22051" end="22060" title="forebrain" label="forebrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q185080" start="22079" end="22087" title="midbrain" label="midbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="22109" end="22118" title="hindbrain" label="hindbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348455" start="22139" end="22157" title="Neural crest" label="Neural crest cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002059" start="22233" end="22244" title="neural fold" label="neural fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388375" start="22276" end="22293" title="neurulation" label="neurulation stage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22297" end="22315" title="Neural fold#Folding mechanism" label="neural folds close"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127402" start="22328" end="22339" title="neural tube" label="neural tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348455" start="22389" end="22401" title="neural crest" label="neural crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189092" start="22575" end="22582" title="cell migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063274" start="22756" end="22762" title="Flexure (embryology)" label="flexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063274" start="22958" end="22974" title="cephalic flexure" label="cephalic flexure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="23228" end="23250" title="brain vesicle" label="primary brain vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299613" start="23290" end="23314" title="brain vesicle" label="secondary brain vesicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q75855" start="23384" end="23397" title="telencephalon" label="telencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="23414" end="23426" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500793" start="23629" end="23642" title="metencephalon" label="metencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456825" start="23651" end="23665" title="myelencephalon" label="myelencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423946" start="23831" end="23849" title="segmentation (biology)" label="repeating segments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338678" start="23857" end="23866" title="neuromere" label="neuromere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137072" start="23876" end="23885" title="hindbrain" label="hindbrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397549" start="23905" end="23915" title="rhombomere" label="rhombomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q19468049" start="23982" end="23994" title="gyrification" label="gyrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="24025" end="24045" title="prenatal development" label="prenatal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339235" start="24318" end="24339" title="neurological disorder" label="neurological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24348" end="24379" title="Gyrification#Theories on causality in gyrification" label="number of gyrification theories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24438" end="24457" title="Gyrification#Mechanical buckling" label="mechanical buckling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24459" end="24473" title="Gyrification#Axonal tension" label="axonal tension"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24479" end="24512" title="Gyrification#Differential tangential expansion" label="differential tangential expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256980" start="24995" end="25009" title="lateral sulcus" label="lateral sulcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18048112" start="25186" end="25195" title="ARHGAP11B" label="ARHGAP11B"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="25386" end="25398" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="25461" end="25478" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="25545" end="25562" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915553" start="25612" end="25624" title="motor system" label="motor system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996165" start="25661" end="25683" title="motor control" label="generation and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133903" start="25755" end="25767" title="motor neuron" label="motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="25810" end="25816" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19915308" start="25823" end="25842" title="corticospinal tract" label="corticospinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="25889" end="25900" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="25930" end="25944" title="cranial nerves" label="cranial nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q925958" start="26024" end="26034" title="Animal locomotion" label="locomotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="26091" end="26103" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18707" start="26135" end="26155" title="primary motor cortex" label="primary motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272263" start="26170" end="26186" title="precentral gyrus" label="precentral gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="26325" end="26333" title="anterior" label="anterior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998090" start="26367" end="26380" title="premotor area" label="premotor area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467403" start="26389" end="26413" title="supplementary motor area" label="supplementary motor area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26555" end="26571" title="Cortical homunculus#Types" label="motor homunculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19915308" start="26631" end="26650" title="corticospinal tract" label="corticospinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042992" start="26698" end="26707" title="decussate" label="decussate"/>
<link wikidata="Q949769" start="26716" end="26734" title="medullary pyramids (brainstem)" label="medullary pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="26763" end="26774" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163153" start="26800" end="26811" title="spinal interneuron" label="interneuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916640" start="26836" end="26854" title="lower motor neuron" label="lower motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="26867" end="26878" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="26960" end="26973" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385425" start="27172" end="27193" title="extrapyramidal system" label="extrapyramidal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11101" start="27214" end="27236" title="sensory nervous system" label="sensory nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="27286" end="27305" title="sense" label="sensory information"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574866" start="27518" end="27531" title="special sense" label="special sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="27536" end="27542" title="visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="27544" end="27549" title="Olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="27551" end="27558" title="hearing" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="27564" end="27569" title="taste" label="taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298583" start="27571" end="27602" title="Sensory-motor coupling" label="Mixed motor and sensory signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="27677" end="27687" title="touch" label="fine touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="27689" end="27697" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="27699" end="27703" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="27705" end="27714" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="27719" end="27730" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="27786" end="27800" title="proprioception" label="joint position"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451122" start="27806" end="27820" title="sensory cortex" label="sensory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142126" start="27969" end="27985" title="sensory receptor" label="sensory receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757985" start="28105" end="28143" title="dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway" label="dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28336" end="28356" title="dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway#Second-order neurons" label="second-order neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042992" start="28374" end="28404" title="Decussation" label="send fibres across the midline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920336" start="28448" end="28467" title="ventrobasal complex" label="ventrobasal complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28508" end="28527" title="dorsal column–medial lemniscus pathway#Third-order neurons" label="third-order neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700458" start="28576" end="28595" title="spinothalamic tract" label="spinothalamic tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="28748" end="28767" title="reticular formation" label="reticular formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="28891" end="28897" title="Visual perception" label="Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="28934" end="28940" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="28953" end="28967" title="Photoreceptor cell" label="Photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q445081" start="28982" end="28991" title="visual phototransduction" label="transduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="29016" end="29021" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="29041" end="29053" title="action potential" label="nerve signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75785" start="29074" end="29087" title="visual cortex" label="visual cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="29156" end="29168" title="optic nerves" label="optic nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071710" start="29225" end="29252" title="Optic chiasm" label="cross to the opposite sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079316" start="29333" end="29345" title="optic tracts" label="optic tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364768" start="29439" end="29451" title="visual field" label="visual field"/>
<link wikidata="Q719179" start="29602" end="29628" title="lateral geniculate nucleus" label="lateral geniculate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511666" start="29653" end="29668" title="optic radiation" label="optic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="29698" end="29705" title="Hearing" label="Hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502518" start="29710" end="29717" title="Equilibrioception" label="balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212344" start="29744" end="29753" title="inner ear" label="inner ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q816052" start="29790" end="29798" title="ossicles" label="ossicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566641" start="29825" end="29842" title="Hair cell" label="the hearing organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q596832" start="29889" end="29917" title="Vestibular system" label="liquids within the inner ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q319317" start="29971" end="29994" title="vestibulocochlear nerve" label="vestibulocochlear nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q387776" start="30032" end="30047" title="cochlear nuclei" label="cochlear nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881782" start="30053" end="30077" title="superior olivary nucleus" label="superior olivary nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694103" start="30083" end="30108" title="medial geniculate nucleus" label="medial geniculate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269743" start="30126" end="30144" title="auditory radiation" label="auditory radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18676" start="30152" end="30167" title="auditory cortex" label="auditory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="30183" end="30188" title="Olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q460276" start="30205" end="30219" title="Olfactory receptor neuron" label="receptor cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052544" start="30227" end="30237" title="olfactory epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086517" start="30245" end="30261" title="olfactory mucosa" label="olfactory mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156104" start="30269" end="30281" title="nasal cavity" label="nasal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209704" start="30315" end="30330" title="olfactory nerve" label="olfactory nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084533" start="30365" end="30392" title="cribiform plate" label="a relatively permeable part"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="30446" end="30460" title="olfactory bulb" label="olfactory bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054094" start="30501" end="30517" title="olfactory system" label="olfactory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="30519" end="30524" title="Taste" label="Taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454532" start="30543" end="30566" title="Taste receptor" label="receptors on the tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q242160" start="30588" end="30594" title="Facial nerve" label="facial"/>
<link wikidata="Q334143" start="30599" end="30621" title="glossopharyngeal nerve" label="glossopharyngeal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q119744" start="30632" end="30648" title="solitary nucleus" label="solitary nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="30745" end="30756" title="vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621034" start="30825" end="30841" title="gustatory cortex" label="gustatory cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="30861" end="30870" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="Autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082898" start="30921" end="30937" title="Neuroscience of rhythm" label="rhythmic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="30945" end="30955" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q754250" start="30960" end="30977" title="respiratory rate" label="rate of breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="30995" end="31006" title="homeostasis" label="homeostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="31009" end="31023" title="Blood pressure" label="Blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073121" start="31028" end="31038" title="heart rate" label="heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664916" start="31061" end="31077" title="vasomotor center" label="vasomotor centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="31194" end="31205" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185589" start="31210" end="31240" title="parasympathetic nervous system" label="parasympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190140" start="31250" end="31261" title="vagus nerve" label="vagus nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q808732" start="31312" end="31324" title="baroreceptor" label="baroreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778753" start="31329" end="31342" title="aortic body" label="aortic bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q616032" start="31350" end="31361" title="aortic arch" label="aortic arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532399" start="31397" end="31412" title="general visceral afferent fibers" label="afferent fibres"/>
<link wikidata="Q956224" start="31479" end="31492" title="carotid sinus" label="carotid sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532008" start="31504" end="31518" title="carotid body" label="carotid bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q214275" start="31536" end="31550" title="common carotid artery" label="carotid artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956395" start="31576" end="31581" title="Hering&amp;#x27;s nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q334143" start="31599" end="31621" title="glossopharyngeal nerve" label="glossopharyngeal nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q119744" start="31658" end="31674" title="solitary nucleus" label="solitary nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q754250" start="31816" end="31833" title="respiratory rate" label="rate of breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315911" start="31845" end="31863" title="respiratory center" label="respiratory centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="31922" end="31933" title="respiration (physiology)" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q737313" start="32011" end="32024" title="phrenic nerve" label="phrenic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="32032" end="32041" title="Thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q754337" start="32052" end="32074" title="muscles of respiration" label="muscles of respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q937076" start="32086" end="32097" title="spinal nerve" label="mixed nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="32347" end="32357" title="inhalation" label="breathe in"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197000" start="32477" end="32490" title="exhalation" label="breathing out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315911" start="32524" end="32542" title="pneumotaxic center" label="pneumotaxic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315911" start="32591" end="32607" title="apneustic center" label="apneustic centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="32696" end="32710" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="32715" end="32717" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="32743" end="32749" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="32751" end="32765" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168702" start="32828" end="32852" title="peripheral chemoreceptor" label="peripheral chemoreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259548" start="33114" end="33140" title="pulmonary stretch receptor" label="pulmonary stretch receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="33296" end="33308" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192419" start="33316" end="33328" title="diencephalon" label="diencephalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10599959" start="33402" end="33416" title="neuroendocrine" label="neuroendocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="33447" end="33463" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="33480" end="33504" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156516" start="33671" end="33694" title="suprachiasmatic nucleus" label="suprachiasmatic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093077" start="33703" end="33733" title="ventrolateral preoptic nucleus" label="ventrolateral preoptic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="33800" end="33815" title="circadian clock" label="circadian clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121352" start="33824" end="33837" title="circadian clock" label="circadian day"/>
<link wikidata="Q377893" start="33841" end="33857" title="ultradian rhythm" label="ultradian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="33897" end="33902" title="Sleep" label="Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002656" start="34211" end="34216" title="Neuroscience of sleep" label="Sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="34298" end="34301" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364801" start="34318" end="34335" title="sleep deprivation" label="sleep deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125841" start="34375" end="34395" title="lateral hypothalamus" label="lateral hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q410857" start="34405" end="34411" title="orexin" label="orexin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28578" start="34438" end="34446" title="appetite" label="appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="34451" end="34458" title="arousal" label="arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="34492" end="34529" title="ascending reticular activating system" label="ascending reticular activating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="34561" end="34576" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q169960" start="34617" end="34625" title="oxytocin" label="oxytocin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="34631" end="34642" title="vasopressin" label="vasopressin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="34655" end="34663" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337712" start="34673" end="34688" title="median eminence" label="median eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="34996" end="35001" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q258915" start="35081" end="35086" title="renin" label="renin"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="35344" end="35364" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="35369" end="35386" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346577" start="35438" end="35446" title="Cortex (anatomy)" label="cortical"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="35548" end="35556" title="language acquisition" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q215948" start="35580" end="35596" title="neurolinguistics" label="neurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="35652" end="35674" title="cognitive neuroscience" label="cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="35676" end="35697" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179488" start="35703" end="35720" title="psycholinguistics" label="psycholinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380073" start="35764" end="35790" title="contralateral brain" label="contralateral organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122613301" start="36010" end="36021" title="Axial Twist theory" label="axial twist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042992" start="36140" end="36151" title="decussation" label="cross sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071710" start="36283" end="36295" title="optic chiasm" label="optic chiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q551840" start="37672" end="37683" title="split-brain" label="split-brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="38357" end="38364" title="Emotion" label="Emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538117" start="38435" end="38446" title="Human intelligence (intelligence gathering)" label="elicitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="38792" end="38800" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q18717" start="38802" end="38822" title="orbitofrontal cortex" label="orbitofrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422654" start="38841" end="38855" title="insular cortex" label="insular cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="38868" end="38885" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q640562" start="38979" end="39001" title="ventral tegmental area" label="ventral tegmental area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920292" start="39003" end="39019" title="ventral pallidum" label="ventral pallidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476178" start="39024" end="39041" title="nucleus accumbens" label="nucleus accumbens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014281" start="39045" end="39063" title="incentive salience" label="incentive salience"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="39149" end="39162" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223851" start="39181" end="39192" title="corpus callosum" label="subcallosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892702" start="39193" end="39209" title="cingulate cortex" label="cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="39226" end="39234" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="39291" end="39300" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="39335" end="39344" title="cognitive process" label="processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="39349" end="39367" title="executive function" label="executive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818236" start="39469" end="39488" title="attentional control" label="attentional control"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403816" start="39493" end="39513" title="cognitive inhibition" label="cognitive inhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11337567" start="39573" end="39587" title="working memory" label="working memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687352" start="39653" end="39665" title="task switching (psychology)" label="switch tasks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141208" start="39671" end="39692" title="cognitive flexibility" label="cognitive flexibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549918" start="39717" end="39725" title="impulse (psychology)" label="impulses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033829" start="39730" end="39748" title="prepotent response" label="prepotent response"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033829" start="39755" end="39773" title="inhibitory control" label="inhibitory control"/>
<link wikidata="Q309100" start="39979" end="39987" title="planning" label="planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868018" start="39989" end="40000" title="prospection" label="prospection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434146" start="40005" end="40023" title="fluid intelligence" label="fluid intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="40031" end="40040" title="reasoning" label="reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="40045" end="40060" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q18680" start="40068" end="40085" title="prefrontal cortex" label="prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q72788" start="40181" end="40211" title="dorsolateral prefrontal cortex" label="dorsolateral prefrontal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121931" start="40221" end="40246" title="anterior cingulate cortex" label="anterior cingulate cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528202" start="40304" end="40323" title="supramarginal gyrus" label="supramarginal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558534" start="40373" end="40395" title="inferior frontal gyrus" label="inferior frontal gyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q815334" start="40414" end="40429" title="parietal cortex" label="parietal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033829" start="40431" end="40449" title="Inhibitory control" label="Inhibitory control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132309" start="40515" end="40530" title="caudate nucleus" label="caudate nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270424" start="40535" end="40554" title="subthalamic nucleus" label="subthalamic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="40656" end="40662" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="40736" end="40745" title="soma (biology)" label="cell body"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="40747" end="40751" title="axon" label="axon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="40757" end="40765" title="dendrite" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="40954" end="40970" title="action potential" label="action potential"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41178" end="41193" title="Axon#Initial segment" label="initial segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="41336" end="41352" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="41358" end="41365" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="41462" end="41470" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="41472" end="41481" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="41483" end="41487" title="gamma-Aminobutyric acid" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q120785193" start="41489" end="41498" title="glutamate (neurotransmitter)" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="41504" end="41517" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472302" start="41668" end="41682" title="neural pathway" label="neural pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43283" start="41685" end="41699" title="neural circuit" label="neural circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304076" start="41722" end="41737" title="large-scale brain networks" label="network systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997354" start="41750" end="41766" title="salience network" label="salience network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182555" start="41775" end="41795" title="default mode network" label="default mode network"/>
<link wikidata="Q969316" start="41855" end="41872" title="neurotransmission" label="neurotransmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q275157" start="41997" end="42010" title="blood glucose" label="blood glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="42026" end="42042" title="food energy" label="source of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="42239" end="42249" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="42277" end="42284" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="42347" end="42354" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q362854" start="42356" end="42374" title="endurance exercise" label="endurance exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="42387" end="42399" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q746183" start="42424" end="42437" title="ketone bodies" label="ketone bodies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42507" end="42530" title="Lactic acid#Exercise and lactate" label="lactate during exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174936" start="42572" end="42580" title="glycogen" label="glycogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="42645" end="42650" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048687" start="42654" end="42669" title="skeletal muscle" label="skeletal muscle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42671" end="42692" title="Fatty acid#Length of free fatty acid chains" label="Long-chain fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="42711" end="42730" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698455" start="42802" end="42824" title="short-chain fatty acid" label="short-chain fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="42833" end="42845" title="butyric acid" label="butyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422956" start="42847" end="42861" title="propionic acid" label="propionic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="42867" end="42878" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42888" end="42912" title="Fatty acid#Length of free fatty acid chains" label="medium-chain fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q409564" start="42914" end="42927" title="octanoic acid" label="octanoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q297592" start="42932" end="42946" title="heptanoic acid" label="heptanoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243699" start="43004" end="43014" title="brain cell" label="brain cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="43181" end="43188" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="43289" end="43301" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="43524" end="43547" title="functional neuroimaging" label="functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="43559" end="43562" title="Positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="43567" end="43571" title="fMRI" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="43765" end="43770" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338704" start="43916" end="43926" title="neurotoxic" label="neurotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15474254" start="44090" end="44107" title="glymphatic system" label="glymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6337803" start="44273" end="44287" title="Neuroscientist" label="Neuroscientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="44413" end="44425" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="44427" end="44436" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="44467" end="44477" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="44519" end="44533" title="basic research" label="basic research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183548" start="44611" end="44630" title="Decade of the Brain" label="Decade of the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955726" start="44794" end="44810" title="BRAIN Initiative" label="BRAIN Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q387749" start="44816" end="44840" title="Human Connectome Project" label="Human Connectome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="45029" end="45039" title="simulation" label="simulating"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="45338" end="45350" title="brain damage" label="brain damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="45352" end="45364" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154774" start="45423" end="45440" title="Electrophysiology" label="Electrophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q533483" start="45542" end="45563" title="local field potential" label="local field potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="45626" end="45646" title="electroencephalography" label="electroencephalogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q176140" start="45702" end="45711" title="electrode" label="electrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q9622" start="45742" end="45747" title="scalp" label="scalp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587624" start="45776" end="45796" title="electrocorticography" label="electrocorticography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173271" start="45896" end="45924" title="cortical stimulation mapping" label="cortical stimulation mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979465" start="46038" end="46052" title="microelectrode" label="microelectrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392016" start="46055" end="46076" title="single-unit recording" label="single-unit recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="46128" end="46146" title="Angular resolution" label="spatial resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977280" start="46156" end="46175" title="temporal resolution" label="temporal resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083207" start="46293" end="46310" title="cerebral organoid" label="cerebral organoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004354" start="46503" end="46526" title="Functional neuroimaging" label="Functional neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="46639" end="46676" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="46733" end="46738" title="SPECT" label="SPECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="46743" end="46746" title="positron emission tomography" label="PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="46773" end="46794" title="Nuclear medicine" label="radioactive materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q750537" start="46853" end="46890" title="functional near-infrared spectroscopy" label="functional near-infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981408" start="46918" end="46939" title="haemodynamic response" label="haemodynamic response"/>
<link wikidata="Q886843" start="47003" end="47013" title="cerebral circulation" label="blood flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q639842" start="47025" end="47057" title="brain mapping" label="mapping functions to brain areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316120" start="47059" end="47077" title="Resting state fMRI" label="Resting state fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182555" start="47202" end="47222" title="default mode network" label="default mode network"/>
<link wikidata="Q60442" start="47276" end="47294" title="neural oscillation" label="neural oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q384188" start="47343" end="47365" title="magnetoencephalography" label="magnetoencephalography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076659" start="47441" end="47453" title="Tractography" label="Tractography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="47459" end="47462" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q860755" start="47467" end="47481" title="image analysis" label="image analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q568742" start="47492" end="47501" title="3D modeling" label="3D images"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457374" start="47509" end="47520" title="nerve tract" label="nerve tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008929" start="47536" end="47548" title="Connectogram" label="Connectogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292103" start="47589" end="47607" title="connectome" label="neural connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955830" start="47638" end="47669" title="brain morphometry" label="brain structure can be measured"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="47697" end="47710" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="47715" end="47723" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915062" start="47829" end="47839" title="biology of depression" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915064" start="47844" end="47873" title="biology of obsessive-compulsive disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="47986" end="47998" title="neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="48166" end="48180" title="Bioinformatics" label="Bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48381" end="48408" title="Bioinformatics#Gene and protein expression" label="gene and protein expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="48440" end="48448" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068690" start="48454" end="48473" title="functional genomics" label="functional genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205742" start="48498" end="48512" title="DNA annotation" label="DNA annotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28946449" start="48516" end="48540" title="Transcriptomics technologies" label="transcriptome technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="48554" end="48558" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531051" start="48592" end="48601" title="GeneCards" label="GeneCards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48644" end="48664" title="Human genome#Coding sequences (protein-coding genes)" label="protein-coding genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="48787" end="48802" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="49013" end="49033" title="alcoholism" label="alcohol use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="49072" end="49080" title="Synapse" label="synaptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q252857" start="49081" end="49094" title="transcriptome" label="transcriptome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="49205" end="49220" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692577" start="49318" end="49330" title="ageing brain" label="ageing brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q720026" start="49749" end="49768" title="Brain damage" label="Injury to the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995526" start="49796" end="49818" title="Traumatic brain injury" label="Traumatic brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284014" start="49844" end="49857" title="contact sport" label="contact sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q333495" start="49867" end="49871" title="Falling (accident)" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9687" start="49878" end="49885" title="traffic collision" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q629257" start="49889" end="49902" title="work accident" label="work accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368943" start="49999" end="50024" title="intracerebral haemorrhage" label="bleeding within the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q591639" start="50089" end="50097" title="Cerebral contusion" label="Bruising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658686" start="50211" end="50232" title="diffuse axonal injury" label="diffuse axonal injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971607" start="50236" end="50251" title="skull fracture" label="fractured skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="50282" end="50290" title="deafness" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="50296" end="50306" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q927547" start="50441" end="50458" title="Coup contrecoup injury" label="contrecoup injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="50504" end="50533" title="posttraumatic stress disorder" label="posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="50539" end="50552" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="50554" end="50586" title="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="50618" end="50631" title="head injury" label="head injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="50648" end="50673" title="Neurodegenerative disease" label="Neurodegenerative disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692577" start="50776" end="50791" title="Aging brain" label="worsen with age"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="50810" end="50818" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="50830" end="50854" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713264" start="50856" end="50874" title="alcoholic dementia" label="alcoholic dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q583908" start="50876" end="50893" title="vascular dementia" label="vascular dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52844159" start="50899" end="50932" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="50994" end="51019" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="51021" end="51041" title="motor neuron disease" label="motor neuron disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435504" start="51044" end="51056" title="HIV dementia" label="HIV dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888578" start="51058" end="51083" title="Neurosyphilis" label="syphilis-related dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117121" start="51088" end="51109" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="51204" end="51210" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q703961" start="51232" end="51245" title="prion disease" label="prion disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q49989" start="51257" end="51282" title="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323502" start="51291" end="51298" title="Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q274615" start="51304" end="51308" title="Kuru (disease)" label="kuru"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083190" start="51348" end="51372" title="Cerebral atherosclerosis" label="Cerebral atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="51376" end="51391" title="atherosclerosis" label="atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058276" start="51448" end="51455" title="atheroma" label="plaques"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="51466" end="51477" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="51842" end="51847" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="51851" end="51859" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="51864" end="51869" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q268930" start="51895" end="51903" title="meninges" label="meninges"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="51905" end="51915" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="51936" end="51948" title="encephalitis" label="encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q141440" start="51989" end="52005" title="cerebral abscess" label="cerebral abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="52023" end="52036" title="Brain tumor" label="Brain tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="52051" end="52057" title="benign" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483951" start="52061" end="52070" title="malignant" label="cancerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="52095" end="52130" title="metastasis" label="arise from another part of the body"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="52155" end="52159" title="lung cancer" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="52161" end="52167" title="breast cancer" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="52172" end="52176" title="melanoma" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q369157" start="52273" end="52283" title="Meningioma" label="Meningioma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752284" start="52847" end="52852" title="cancer staging" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="52872" end="52886" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422252" start="52887" end="52900" title="dexamethasone" label="dexamethasone"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="52932" end="52940" title="oedema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="53084" end="53096" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="53100" end="53112" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="53170" end="53185" title="Mental disorder" label="Mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="53196" end="53206" title="major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="53208" end="53221" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="53223" end="53239" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="53241" end="53270" title="posttraumatic stress disorder" label="posttraumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="53272" end="53312" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="53314" end="53343" title="obsessive-compulsive disorder" label="obsessive-compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="53345" end="53362" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="53368" end="53377" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="53475" end="53488" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="53490" end="53500" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430290" start="53502" end="53521" title="social interventionism" label="social intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135807" start="53535" end="53543" title="Recovery model" label="recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="53552" end="53581" title="cognitive behavioural therapy" label="cognitive behavioural therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="53686" end="53703" title="Epileptic seizure" label="Epileptic seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346980" start="53793" end="53817" title="absence seizure" label="absence of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140388" start="53819" end="53824" title="focal seizure" label="focal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532415" start="53887" end="53898" title="generalised seizure" label="generalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q980709" start="53910" end="53928" title="Status epilepticus" label="Status epilepticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="54142" end="54150" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="54281" end="54291" title="blood test" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="54294" end="54297" title="EEG" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="54310" end="54325" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="54350" end="54365" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="54370" end="54389" title="medical examination" label="medical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="54483" end="54497" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q560337" start="54606" end="54623" title="Tay–Sachs disease" label="Tay–Sachs disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="54629" end="54639" title="congenital disorder" label="congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="54654" end="54661" title="Mutation" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744962" start="54666" end="54677" title="chromosome abnormality" label="chromosomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q584265" start="54716" end="54733" title="cephalic disorder" label="cephalic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544416" start="54744" end="54757" title="lissencephaly" label="lissencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="54834" end="54845" title="prenatal development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="54882" end="54891" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="54895" end="54919" title="nutritional deficiencies" label="nutritional deficiencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="54921" end="54930" title="teratology" label="teratogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="54933" end="54952" title="infectious diseases" label="infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="54972" end="54990" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002116" start="55031" end="55063" title="fetal alcohol spectrum disorders" label="fetal alcohol spectrum disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q191570" start="55071" end="55106" title="cerebral arteriovenous malformation" label="cerebral arteriovenous malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q426199" start="55233" end="55258" title="intracranial hemorrhage" label="intracranial hemorrhaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="55277" end="55283" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q188151" start="55289" end="55313" title="ischemia" label="decrease in blood supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383867" start="55346" end="55356" title="cell death" label="cell death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55361" end="55373" title="Brain damage#Causes" label="brain injury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55408" end="55416" title="Stroke#Signs and symptoms" label="symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424487" start="55438" end="55442" title="FAST (stroke)" label="FAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="55524" end="55537" title="dysarthria" label="with speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="55542" end="55576" title="dysphasia" label="finding words or forming sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="55788" end="55797" title="ataxia" label="imbalance"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="55799" end="55812" title="diplopia" label="double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686316" start="55814" end="55821" title="vertigo" label="vertigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36324933" start="55995" end="56002" title="embolus" label="embolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058276" start="56017" end="56029" title="atheroma" label="fatty plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="56038" end="56046" title="thrombus" label="thrombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="56051" end="56078" title="arteriosclerotic" label="narrowing of small arteries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56109" end="56134" title="Stroke#Hemorrhagic" label="bleeding within the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q593958" start="56136" end="56162" title="Transient ischemic attack" label="Transient ischaemic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="56271" end="56290" title="medical examination" label="medical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916167" start="56304" end="56328" title="neurological examination" label="neurological examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="56350" end="56365" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="56436" end="56455" title="Hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="56457" end="56476" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="56482" end="56489" title="tobacco smoking" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="56548" end="56551" title="ECG" label="ECG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915350" start="56556" end="56568" title="biotelemetry" label="biotelemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="56598" end="56617" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="56622" end="56632" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576205" start="56649" end="56658" title="carotid stenosis" label="narrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q214275" start="56666" end="56682" title="Common carotid artery" label="carotid arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q216933" start="56687" end="56701" title="echocardiogram" label="echocardiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130519" start="56750" end="56778" title="Valvular heart disease" label="diseases of the heart valves"/>
<link wikidata="Q757749" start="56800" end="56820" title="patent foramen ovale" label="patent foramen ovale"/>
<link wikidata="Q886837" start="56822" end="56832" title="Blood test" label="Blood test"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56868" end="56874" title="Medical diagnosis#Other diagnostic procedure methods" label="workup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56885" end="56899" title="Diabetes mellitus#Diagnosis" label="diabetes tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723972" start="56906" end="56919" title="lipid profile" label="lipid profile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931577" start="56982" end="56998" title="thrombolysis" label="clot dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q475069" start="57002" end="57028" title="embolectomy" label="surgical removal of a clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862390" start="57033" end="57050" title="Brain ischemia" label="ischaemic strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596746" start="57056" end="57069" title="decompression (surgery)" label="decompression"/>
<link wikidata="Q426199" start="57074" end="57094" title="Intracranial hemorrhage" label="haemorrhagic strokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="57217" end="57224" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024492" start="57272" end="57274" title="CT angiogram" label="CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q907325" start="57278" end="57290" title="MR angiogram" label="MR angiogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="57335" end="57343" title="MRI scan" label="MRI scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="57542" end="57553" title="stroke unit" label="stroke unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="57589" end="57599" title="secondary prevention" label="preventing"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="57634" end="57649" title="anticoagulation" label="anticoagulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="57659" end="57666" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410237" start="57670" end="57681" title="clopidogrel" label="clopidogrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="57684" end="57701" title="Antihypertensive drug" label="antihypertensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q955332" start="57707" end="57727" title="lipid-lowering agent" label="lipid-lowering drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="57731" end="57753" title="multidisciplinary team" label="multidisciplinary team"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="57764" end="57782" title="speech pathologist" label="speech pathologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="57785" end="57801" title="physiotherapists" label="physiotherapists"/>
<link wikidata="Q631193" start="57803" end="57825" title="occupational therapist" label="occupational therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="57832" end="57844" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678675" start="57919" end="57933" title="physical medicine and rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="58178" end="58182" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="58192" end="58198" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q754424" start="58206" end="58212" title="apnoea" label="apnoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16971792" start="58358" end="58373" title="brainstem death" label="brainstem death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754973" start="58476" end="58492" title="Futile medical care" label="medical futility"/>
<link wikidata="Q849032" start="58611" end="58625" title="organ donation" label="organ donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="58763" end="58785" title="differential diagnosis" label="differential diagnoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306528" start="59068" end="59082" title="neural imaging" label="neural imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049637" start="59180" end="59197" title="Neuroanthropology" label="Neuroanthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="59489" end="59511" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="59564" end="59577" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="59586" end="59603" title="mind–body problem" label="mind–body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="59648" end="59652" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q187181" start="59885" end="59892" title="synapse" label="synapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="59972" end="59989" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="60122" end="60136" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="60185" end="60192" title="Dualism (philosophy of mind)" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q316742" start="60565" end="60577" title="Phineas Gage" label="Phineas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="60956" end="60968" title="Materialism" label="materialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="61130" end="61142" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="61212" end="61223" title="correlation" label="correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="61280" end="61282" title="Intelligence quotient" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773734" start="61683" end="61707" title="brain-to-body mass ratio" label="brain-to-body mass ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="61785" end="61803" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="61843" end="61853" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q231550" start="61966" end="61975" title="treeshrew" label="treeshrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274235" start="62103" end="62127" title="History of the location of the soul" label="organs of the human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="62245" end="62250" title="Mind-brain dichotomy" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62288" end="62318" title="List of common misconceptions#Brain" label="misconceptions about the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q784749" start="62478" end="62503" title="Ten percent of the brain myth" label="ten per cent of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080497" start="62549" end="62576" title="Lateralization of brain function" label="lateralisation of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701109" start="62669" end="62678" title="Akio Mori" label="Akio Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519922" start="62701" end="62711" title="game brain" label="game brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="62789" end="62799" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q188584" start="63001" end="63011" title="phrenology" label="phrenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="63015" end="63028" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462026" start="63214" end="63229" title="Brain in science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462026" start="63251" end="63267" title="brain transplant" label="brain transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="63273" end="63280" title="Cyborgs in fiction" label="cyborgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q977260" start="63315" end="63331" title="artificial brain" label="artificial brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296821" start="63408" end="63428" title="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain" label="Donovan&amp;#x27;s Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823404" start="63456" end="63470" title="isolated brain" label="isolated brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q842363" start="63613" end="63632" title="Edwin Smith Papyrus" label="Edwin Smith Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="63637" end="63650" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977147" start="63654" end="63670" title="medical literature" label="medical treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="63762" end="63772" title="hieroglyph" label="hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="64013" end="64020" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188332" start="64088" end="64106" title="Alcmaeon of Croton" label="Alcmaeon of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="64110" end="64122" title="Magna Grecia" label="Magna Grecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451096" start="64161" end="64177" title="Sensorium" label="seat of the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000977" start="64191" end="64217" title="Fifth-century Athens" label="fifth century BC in Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091533" start="64247" end="64268" title="On the Sacred Disease" label="On the Sacred Disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="64316" end="64334" title="Hippocratic Corpus" label="Hippocratic Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="64367" end="64378" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="64431" end="64440" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27997172" start="64449" end="64456" title="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="64504" end="64516" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q312500" start="64810" end="64820" title="Herophilus" label="Herophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="64824" end="64833" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="64966" end="64976" title="Ventricular system" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q377781" start="64987" end="64999" title="Erasistratus" label="Erasistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214109" start="65003" end="65007" title="Kea (island)" label="Ceos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="65245" end="65250" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="65300" end="65312" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="65454" end="65460" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247917" start="65671" end="65687" title="Mondino de Luzzi" label="Mondino de Luzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q343358" start="65758" end="65771" title="Niccolò Massa" label="Niccolò Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30717150" start="65835" end="65857" title="Archangelo Piccolomini" label="Archangelo Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="65861" end="65865" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="65945" end="65961" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233009" start="65995" end="66021" title="De humani corporis fabrica" label="De humani corporis fabrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="66129" end="66144" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="66174" end="66177" title="human eye" label="eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="66459" end="66473" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252737" start="66497" end="66504" title="Mind-body dualism" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="66589" end="66601" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="66715" end="66729" title="animism" label="animal spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q452335" start="66927" end="66940" title="Thomas Willis" label="Thomas Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="67763" end="67783" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="Emil du Bois-Reymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="67788" end="67809" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q179472" start="67829" end="67841" title="galvanometer" label="galvanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57992" start="67952" end="67973" title="Johannes Peter Müller" label="Johannes Peter Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q322405" start="68046" end="68059" title="Richard Caton" label="Richard Caton"/>
<link wikidata="Q964160" start="68167" end="68187" title="Jean Pierre Flourens" label="Jean Pierre Flourens"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="68404" end="68414" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q907841" start="68440" end="68452" title="silver stain" label="silver stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196894" start="68456" end="68462" title="Golgi method" label="method"/>
<link wikidata="Q150630" start="68466" end="68479" title="Camillo Golgi" label="Camillo Golgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150526" start="68581" end="68603" title="Santiago Ramón y Cajal" label="Santiago Ramón y Cajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108577" start="68636" end="68651" title="neuron doctrine" label="neuron doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124570678" start="68889" end="68919" title="History of neuroscience" label="twentieth century neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="68938" end="68949" title="Nobel prize" label="Nobel prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q213504" start="69008" end="69027" title="Charles Scott Sherrington" label="Charles Sherrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375391" start="69342" end="69356" title="enchanted loom" label="enchanted loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700039" start="69392" end="69412" title="John Farquhar Fulton" label="John Farquhar Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69565" end="69606" title="History of neuroscience#Twentieth century" label="Neuroscience during the twentieth century"/>
<link wikidata="Q18713979" start="69678" end="69689" title="David Rioch" label="David Rioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q344882" start="69691" end="69709" title="Francis O. Schmitt" label="Francis O. Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q445338" start="69715" end="69730" title="Stephen Kuffler" label="Stephen Kuffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965939" start="69893" end="69931" title="Walter Reed Army Institute of Research" label="Walter Reed Army Institute of Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326566" start="70004" end="70033" title="Neuroscience Research Program" label="Neuroscience Research Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q311276" start="70220" end="70230" title="Paul Broca" label="Paul Broca"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="70314" end="70331" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q611821" start="70375" end="70397" title="John Hughlings Jackson" label="John Hughlings Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="70428" end="70440" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="70472" end="70489" title="epileptic seizure" label="epileptic seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q48965" start="70509" end="70522" title="Carl Wernicke" label="Carl Wernicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q824214" start="70533" end="70541" title="Wernicke&amp;#x27;s area" label="a region"/>
<link wikidata="Q61378" start="70597" end="70615" title="Korbinian Brodmann" label="Korbinian Brodmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350511" start="70701" end="70706" title="James Papez" label="Papez"/>
<link wikidata="Q705865" start="70712" end="70719" title="Paul D. MacLean" label="MacLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="70913" end="70928" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759585" start="70943" end="70959" title="Margaret Kennard" label="Margaret Kennard"/>
<link wikidata="Q380038" start="71011" end="71025" title="Harvey Cushing" label="Harvey Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="71076" end="71089" title="neurosurgery" label="brain surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379802" start="71113" end="71125" title="Walter Dandy" label="Walter Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="71157" end="71169" title="neurosurgery" label="neurosurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="71218" end="71239" title="intracranial aneurysm" label="intracranial aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="71326" end="71336" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="71384" end="71390" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="71511" end="71519" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="71712" end="71719" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="71869" end="71876" title="hominidae" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="71995" end="72010" title="human evolution" label="human evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="72022" end="72038" title="Australopithecus" label="Australopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="72073" end="72097" title="human" label="&amp;quot;Homo sapiens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022113" start="72247" end="72250" title="Cubic centimetre" label="cm3"/>
<link wikidata="Q101373" start="72260" end="72272" title="Homo habilis" label="Homo habilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="72320" end="72341" title="Homo neanderthalensis" label="Homo neanderthalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="72364" end="72367" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="72369" end="72384" title="gene expression" label="gene expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533121" start="72390" end="72418" title="gene–environment interaction" label="gene–environment interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842197" start="72527" end="72553" title="Outline of the human brain" label="Outline of the human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112690" start="72555" end="72578" title="Outline of neuroscience" label="Outline of neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q124842282" start="72580" end="72606" title="Brain health and pollution" label="Brain health and pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620193" start="72608" end="72624" title="Cerebral atrophy" label="Cerebral atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461576" start="72626" end="72655" title="Cortical spreading depression" label="Cortical spreading depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117055" start="72657" end="72688" title="Evolution of human intelligence" label="Evolution of human intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304076" start="72690" end="72716" title="Large-scale brain networks" label="Large-scale brain networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643337" start="72718" end="72748" title="Superficial veins of the brain" label="Superficial veins of the brain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490623" wikidata="Q196602" url="?curid=490623" title="Kiki's Delivery Service">
<text>is a 1989 Japanese animated fantasy film written, produced, and directed by Hayao Miyazaki, based on Eiko Kadono&#x27;s 1985 novel &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot;. Animated by Studio Ghibli, the film stars Minami Takayama, Rei Sakuma, Kappei Yamaguchi, and Keiko Toda. The story follows Kiki (Takayama), a young witch who moves to the port city of Koriko with her cat Jiji (Sakuma) and starts a flying courier service.

In 1987, Group Fudosha asked Kadono&#x27;s publishers for the rights to the novel to be made into a film by either Hayao Miyazaki or Isao Takahata. Production began near the release of &quot;My Neighbor Totoro&quot; (1988). Miyazaki initially worked as producer, but took over directing from Sunao Katabuchi as he became more involved in the project. As the novel is based on a fictional northern European country, Miyazaki and his team traveled to locations such as Visby, Sweden, to research its landscape. Miyazaki altered the story, adding new scenes to emphasize the theme of independence and growing up. According to Miyazaki, the film portrays the gulf between independence and reliance among teenage Japanese girls.

&quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; was released in Japan on July 29, 1989, by Toei. It was the first Studio Ghibli film to be successful on initial release, grossing a total of ¥4.3 billion ($31 million). It received critical acclaim and multiple awards.

An English dub was produced by Streamline Pictures for Japan Airlines international flights in 1989. Walt Disney Pictures produced an English dub in 1997, which became the first film under a deal between Tokuma and Disney to be released in English. It was released to home media in 1998.

==Plot==

Kiki, a young witch, decides to go out on her own, which all young witches must do, taking her talking black cat, Jiji, with her. Her mother insists that she take her mother&#x27;s old, reliable broomstick. Kiki flies off into the night, searching for a new town for settlement. She encounters another witch and her cat who she finds pretentious but they cause Kiki to wonder what her special &quot;skill&quot; is. Kiki finds the town of Koriko and accidentally flies through traffic, causing disruptions. She is approached by a policeman, but a boy named Tombo helps her escape.

Kiki looks for a place to live and work in her new town. She finds the Gutiokipanja bakery, owned by Osono and her husband, Fukuo, who are expecting a child. Osono invites her to live in a room above the bakery. Kiki opens a business delivering goods by broomstick, known as the &quot;Witch Delivery Service&quot;. Her first delivery is of a small stuffed toy of a black cat that looks like Jiji. Along the way, she is caught in the wind and ends up in a forest filled with crows, which attack her, causing her to lose the toy. They come up with a plan in which Jiji pretends to be the toy until Kiki can retrieve the real one. She finds it in the home of a young painter, Ursula, who repairs and returns it. With the help of a dog, Kiki successfully retrieves Jiji and replaces him with the stuffed cat.

The next day, Tombo gives her an invitation to visit his aviation club. However, she gets busy with her deliveries, and gets caught in a thunderstorm on her way back. Drenched from the rain, she decides not to go. She then falls ill, but Osono cares for her until she recovers. Osono secretly arranges for Kiki to see Tombo again by assigning her a delivery addressed to him. Kiki apologizes for missing the party, and Tombo takes her for a test ride on the flying machine he is working on, fashioned from a bicycle. Kiki warms up to him, but is once again disgusted by Tombo&#x27;s friends.

Kiki becomes depressed and discovers she can no longer understand Jiji. She has also lost her flying ability and is forced to suspend her delivery business. Ursula then visits Kiki and asks if she can go to her house. She agrees, and the two spend time together there. Ursula determines that Kiki&#x27;s crisis is a form of artist&#x27;s block, and then suggests to her to find a new purpose, so that she can regain her powers.

While visiting a former customer&#x27;s house she witnesses an airship accident on television. Tombo is seen trying to help tie the dirigible to the ground, but a gust of wind pushes the aircraft away with him clinging to the rope. Kiki rushes to the scene and asks to borrow a broom from a local shop-owner. She regains her flying power and manages to rescue Tombo. With her confidence restored, she resumes her delivery service, and writes a letter home saying that she and Jiji are happy.

== Voice cast ==
==Themes and analysis==
A major theme of the film is maturity. After leaving her parents who are supportive of her independence, Kiki has to face problems common to adolescence such as finding a job, seeking acceptance, and taking care of herself. The concept of vulnerability is also examined closely in the film. Critic Mark Schilling notes a scene during Kiki&#x27;s first night away from home where Kiki rushes back to her room and slams the door behind her to avoid being spotted by Fukuo. Fukuo, however, steps outside simply to stretch his arms, and Kiki&#x27;s bizarrely shy behavior &quot;expresses [her] youth, vulnerability, and isolation.&quot;

Another theme is the transition from traditional to contemporary. Kiki is shown to balance both of these qualities. For instance, Kiki observes the tradition of witches wearing dark-colored clothes, but adorns her hair with a bright red bow. Kiki also engages in other traditional methods, such as baking with a wood-burning stove and flying her mother&#x27;s old broom.

Kiki&#x27;s loss of her witch powers is considered the worst crisis she has to face during the film. Her loss of flight reflects the harm dealt to Kiki by her own self-doubts. This hardship causes Kiki to realize that being vulnerable does not always lead to failure and can help her learn valuable lessons to better understand herself. Petrana Radulovic also suggests that Jiji&#x27;s bond with Kiki represents the experiences she had as a child, and that once Kiki loses her powers to talk to Jiji, she becomes more lonely. Jiji had served as the wiser voice (imaginary companion) to Kiki, and she stopped being able to understand him the moment she struggles with self-doubt. According to Miyazaki himself, Jiji is meant to represent the immature side of Kiki, and her inability to talk to Jiji represents her newfound maturity at the end of the movie.

In relation to Kiki&#x27;s portrayal as a witch, some have drawn comparisons to historical or contemporary views on witches and witchcraft. The film incorporates some conventions from fairy-tales such as a black cat companion for Kiki, Kiki&#x27;s use of a broom for flight, and her black dress. While girls with magical powers are common in Japanese television, Miyazaki wanted to stray away from the various stereotypes generated from these shows, remarking that witchcraft &quot;has always merely been the means to fulfill the dreams of young girls.&quot; This stereotypical portrayal of witches is also shown in the older witch Kiki encounters while travelling to Koriko.

Kiki has also been compared to other characters in Miyazaki&#x27;s films. While there are overt differences in demeanor between Kiki and San from &quot;Princess Mononoke&quot;, a character who is motivated by anger, both characters take control over their own lives. This theme of remarkable independence is also seen in Miyazaki&#x27;s earlier works, such as in Nausicaä in &quot;Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind&quot;. Kiki is also compared to Chihiro of &quot;Spirited Away&quot; as they are both young girls attempting to seek independence without being rebellious. Both Chihiro and Kiki develop their independence with the help of their friends.

==Production==


In 1987, Group Fudosha asked Kadono&#x27;s publishers for the rights to adapt Kadono&#x27;s novel into a feature film directed by either Hayao Miyazaki or Isao Takahata of Studio Ghibli. However, both of the chosen directors were busy, working on &quot;My Neighbor Totoro&quot; and &quot;Grave of the Fireflies&quot; respectively. Miyazaki accepted the role of producer while the studio continued to search for a director. Near the end of &quot;Totoro&quot;″s production, members of Studio Ghibli were being recruited as senior staff for &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot;. The character design position was given to Katsuya Kondo, who was working with Miyazaki on &quot;Totoro&quot;. Hiroshi Ohno, who would later work on projects such as &quot;Jin-Roh&quot;, was hired as art director at the request of Kazuo Oga.

Miyazaki chose Sunao Katabuchi as director. Katabuchi had worked with Miyazaki on &quot;Sherlock Hound&quot;; &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; was to have been his directorial debut. Studio Ghibli hired Nobuyuki Isshiki as script writer, but Miyazaki was dissatisfied by the first draft, finding it dry and too divergent from his own vision of the film. Although the novel is set in a fictional northern European country, Miyazaki did not originally travel to Sweden for research. Instead, he had previously visited locations such as Visby and Stockholm while attempting to secure the rights for an animated adaptation of &quot;Pippi Longstocking&quot;. After being denied a meeting with Astrid Lindgren, he later used reference photos from that trip as inspiration for the film&#x27;s setting. The architecture of Koriko is also based on the design of buildings from other cities such as Amsterdam, Paris, and San Francisco.

Upon their return to Japan, Miyazaki and the creative team worked on conceptual art and character designs. Miyazaki began significantly modifying the story, creating new ideas and changing existing ones. &quot;Majo no Takkyūbin&quot;, the original children&#x27;s book by Kadono that the movie was based on, is very different from Miyazaki&#x27;s finished film. Kadono&#x27;s novel is more episodic, consisting of small stories about various people and incidents Kiki encounters while making deliveries. Kiki overcomes many challenges in the novel based on &quot;her good heart&quot; and consequently expands her circle of friends. She faces no particular traumas or crises. Many of the more dramatic elements, such as Kiki getting attacked by many crows, losing her powers or the airship incident at the film&#x27;s climax, are not present in the original story. In order to more clearly illustrate the themes of struggling with independence and growing up in the film, Miyazaki intended to have Kiki face tougher challenges and create a more potent sense of loneliness. One such challenge is Kiki&#x27;s sudden loss of ability to fly. This event is only loosely paralleled in the novel, in which Kiki&#x27;s broom breaks and merely requires her to fix it. Miyazaki remarked, &quot;As movies always create a more realistic feeling, Kiki will suffer stronger setbacks and loneliness than in the original&quot;. Kadono was unhappy with the changes made between the book and film, to the point that the project was in danger of being shelved at the screenplay stage. Miyazaki and Toshio Suzuki, the producer of Ghibli, went to the author&#x27;s home and invited her to the film&#x27;s studio. After her visit to the studio, Kadono decided to let the project continue.

Miyazaki finished the rough draft of the screenplay in June 1988 and presented it in July 1988. It was at this time that Miyazaki revealed that he had decided to direct the film, because he had influenced the project so much. &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; was originally intended to be a 60-minute special, but expanded into a feature film running 102 minutes after Miyazaki completed storyboarding and scripting it.

The word in the Japanese title is a trademark of Yamato Transport (which stylized it in non-Japanese languages as &quot;TA-Q-BIN&quot;), though it is used today as a synonym for . While Yamato Transport sponsored the film, it initially did not approve of the usage of its trademark, since it was used by Kadono without permission. However, the success of the film restored relations between both her and Yamato Transport.

The film had a production budget of (), making it one of the most expensive anime films up until then, along with &quot;Akira&quot; (1988) and &quot;Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise&quot; (1987).

== Music ==

As with Hayao Miyazaki&#x27;s other films, Joe Hisaishi composed the soundtrack for this film. Three months before the theatrical release of the movie, the image album for the film was published by Tokuma Shoten on Compact disc. A vocal album was released in November 1992.

For the 1997 Disney English dub, much of the soundtrack was retained except for &quot;Message of Rouge&quot; and &quot;Wrapped in Kindness&quot;, which were the opening and ending themes of the original Japanese version. Instead, they were replaced with two songs by Sydney Forest; &quot;Soaring&quot; and &quot;I&#x27;m Gonna Fly&quot;. Both these songs were removed from the 2010 DVD re-release of the English dub of &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot;. Paul Chihara composed the music for the dub, adding music to scenes that were silent in the original Japanese version.

==Release==

=== Box Office ===
&quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; premiered on July 29, 1989, in Japanese theaters. It sold around 2,640,000 tickets in Japan, with a total box office of () in gross receipts. It became the first Studio Ghibli film to be successful during its initial release and was one of 1989&#x27;s highest-grossing films in Japan. It also grossed () in Hong Kong upon release there in 1990. Later re-releases and international releases between 2004 and 2023 grossed US$10,366,082 worldwide, adding up to grossed worldwide . In the United Kingdom, it was 2018&#x27;s seventh best-selling foreign-language film on home video, and 2019&#x27;s fifth best-selling foreign-language film (below four other Japanese films, including three Miyazaki anime films).

=== English releases ===
Streamline Pictures produced the first official English dub of &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; in November 1989 for Japan Airlines international flights. It was the second Studio Ghibli dub produced by Streamline following &quot;My Neighbor Totoro&quot; earlier that year. Tokuma Shoten commissioned Streamline for the &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; dub after being satisfied with the English production of &quot;My Neighbor Totoro&quot;, but did not give Streamline the rights to distribute the film in North America. The Streamline dub was released only on the Ghibli LaserDisc Box Set in 1996, which is out of print.

Disney produced an English dub in 1997 and &quot;Kiki&quot; was the first film released through a deal Disney made with Tokuma. It premiered at the Seattle International Film Festival on May 23, 1998, and was released on both VHS and LaserDisc by Buena Vista Home Video in September 1998. It became the eighth-most sold film at Blockbuster during its first week of availability, and sold over 900,000 copies by September 28, 1998. It was released on home media in North America in 2003, alongside the releases of &quot;Spirited Away&quot; and &quot;Castle in the Sky&quot;. Disney re-released the film to DVD in 2010 with an updated English dub that removed the earlier dub&#x27;s deviations from the Japanese version.

In the United Kingdom, the film was released on Blu-ray by StudioCanal alongside a release of &quot;Grave of the Fireflies&quot; on July 1, 2013, while in North America, Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on Blu-ray Disc alongside &quot;Princess Mononoke&quot; and &quot;The Wind Rises&quot;, on November 18, 2014. GKIDS re-issued the film on Blu-ray and DVD on October 17, 2017. In 2020, it was announced the Japanese version and the Disney dub would be streaming on Netflix.

==Reception==
At the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 98% of 45 reviews are positive for &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot;, and the average rating is 8.1/10. The critics consensus reads, &quot;&quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; is a heartwarming, gorgeously-rendered tale of a young witch discovering her place in the world.&quot; Metacritic, another aggregator, collected 15 reviews and calculated an average rating of 85 out of 100, signifying &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

Initial reviews and reception for &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; were positive. Mark Schilling of &quot;The Japan Times&quot; gave a positive review, praising the realism of Kiki&#x27;s character, as well as citing various scenes that emphasized it, and Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa also showed admiration for the film. The film also received similar acclaim in America once it was released there. On September 12, 1998, it was the first video release to be reviewed as a normal film on &quot;Siskel and Ebert&quot; rather than on the &quot;Video Pick of the Week&quot; section. Gene Siskel of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; and Roger Ebert of the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; gave it &quot;two thumbs up&quot;

Retrospective reviews were also positive. &quot;IGN&quot;&#x27;s Andy Patrizio praised the film for its simple but meaningful story, as well as the voice acting of the English dub, while &quot;Vox&quot;&#x27;s Allegra Frank felt that the film presented its message well.

The film was also ranked high in various publications. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; rated it as Video of the Year in 1998, and in the same year Roger Ebert went on to rank it as one of the best animated films released in the U.S. The film also ranked No. 12 on &quot;Wizard&#x27;s Anime&quot; Magazine&#x27;s list of the &quot;Top 50 Anime released in North America&quot;.

===Accolades===
== Other media ==

===Books===
A four-volume ani-manga book series using stills from the film was published in Japan by Tokuma Shoten between August and September 1989. An English translation would later be published by Viz Media between April and July 2006. Tokuma also published a 208-page art book on February 11, 1989, and Viz Media published the English translation of it on May 9, 2006.

===Musicals===
A musical based on the film ran at the Southwark Playhouse in the UK from December 8, 2016, to January 7, 2017, and officially opened on December 13, 2016. It was adapted by Jessica Sian and directed by Katie Hewitt. The musical would later run again from August 10, 2017, to September 3, 2017.

There were also other musicals that ran in Japan. The first ran in Tokyo and Osaka from June 2017 to September 2017, and starred Moka Kamishirasi as Kiki and Aran Abe as Tombo. A second one ran in 2018 which starred Riko Fukumoto as Kiki. The most recent one ran from March 2021 to April 2021 in Tokyo, Nagoya and Osaka. It stars Neo Inoue as Kiki, and Yūto Nasu as Tombo.

== Notes ==

== References ==

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Kiki&#x27;s Delivery Service&quot; page at Nausicaa.net
* 
* Violation of Agreement with added Dialog and Sound Effects.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="19" end="27" title="Anime" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="28" end="40" title="fantasy film" label="fantasy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="76" end="90" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q449522" start="101" end="112" title="Eiko Kadono" label="Eiko Kadono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768944" start="137" end="165" title="Kiki&amp;#x27;s Delivery Service (novel)" label="Kiki&amp;#x27;s Delivery Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="185" end="198" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323029" start="215" end="230" title="Minami Takayama" label="Minami Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49564" start="232" end="242" title="Rei Sakuma" label="Rei Sakuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q355173" start="244" end="260" title="Kappei Yamaguchi" label="Kappei Yamaguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370797" start="266" end="276" title="Keiko Toda" label="Keiko Toda"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="321" end="326" title="Witchcraft" label="witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="411" end="418" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="562" end="575" title="Isao Takahata" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q39571" start="620" end="638" title="My Neighbor Totoro" label="My Neighbor Totoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503793" start="721" end="736" title="Sunao Katabuchi" label="Sunao Katabuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54757" start="896" end="901" title="Visby" label="Visby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066018" start="1238" end="1242" title="Toei Company" label="Toei"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="1427" end="1430" title="Dubbing" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="1447" end="1466" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="1471" end="1485" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q191224" start="1517" end="1537" title="Walt Disney Pictures" label="Walt Disney Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q386905" start="1810" end="1827" title="Familiar spirit" label="talking black cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="4019" end="4038" title="Writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="artist&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178984" start="4897" end="4910" title="vulnerability" label="vulnerability"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137476" start="4956" end="4970" title="Mark Schilling" label="Mark Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q259065" start="6226" end="6245" title="imaginary friend" label="imaginary companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327677" start="6727" end="6736" title="black cat" label="black cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q752321" start="6823" end="6848" title="magical girl" label="girls with magical powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407200" start="6863" end="6882" title="Japanese television" label="Japanese television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7249" end="7270" title="List of works by Hayao Miyazaki#Filmography" label="Miyazaki&amp;#x27;s films"/>
<link wikidata="Q186572" start="7350" end="7367" title="Princess Mononoke" label="Princess Mononoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337177" start="7561" end="7569" title="Nausicaä (Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind)" label="Nausicaä"/>
<link wikidata="Q8885676" start="7579" end="7613" title="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (film)" label="Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q117779" start="7646" end="7653" title="Chihiro" label="Chihiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="7663" end="7676" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709045" start="7931" end="7937" title="Film rights" label="rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="8024" end="8037" title="Isao Takahata" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q39571" start="8122" end="8140" title="My Neighbor Totoro" label="My Neighbor Totoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q274520" start="8157" end="8179" title="Grave of the Fireflies" label="Grave of the Fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378225" start="8492" end="8505" title="Katsuya Kondo" label="Katsuya Kondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632277" start="8680" end="8689" title="Kazuo Oga" label="Kazuo Oga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503793" start="8707" end="8722" title="Sunao Katabuchi" label="Sunao Katabuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150791" start="8780" end="8794" title="Sherlock Hound" label="Sherlock Hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q54757" start="9234" end="9239" title="Visby" label="Visby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668" start="9328" end="9346" title="Pippi Longstocking" label="Pippi Longstocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q55767" start="9388" end="9403" title="Astrid Lindgren" label="Astrid Lindgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="9589" end="9598" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="9600" end="9605" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="9611" end="9624" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768944" start="9837" end="9854" title="Kiki&amp;#x27;s Delivery Service (novel)" label="Majo no Takkyūbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="10408" end="10415" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q713511" start="11205" end="11218" title="Toshio Suzuki (producer)" label="Toshio Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584353" start="11872" end="11888" title="Yamato Transport" label="Yamato Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="12366" end="12371" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12395" end="12437" title="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise" label="Royal Space Force: The Wings of Honnêamise"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="12474" end="12488" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q275900" start="12509" end="12521" title="Joe Hisaishi" label="Joe Hisaishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625206" start="12622" end="12633" title="image album" label="image album"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="12681" end="12693" title="Compact disc" label="Compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q10913010" start="12827" end="12843" title="Rūju no Dengon" label="Message of Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659933" start="13008" end="13021" title="Sydney Forest" label="Sydney Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059146" start="13202" end="13214" title="Paul Chihara" label="Paul Chihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546839" start="13647" end="13678" title="List of highest-grossing Japanese films" label="highest-grossing films in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622702" start="14129" end="14148" title="Streamline Pictures" label="Streamline Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="14254" end="14268" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q39571" start="14367" end="14385" title="My Neighbor Totoro" label="My Neighbor Totoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372258" start="14411" end="14424" title="Tokuma Shoten" label="Tokuma Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="14718" end="14727" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="15016" end="15038" title="Buena Vista Home Video" label="Buena Vista Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q884711" start="15097" end="15108" title="Blockbuster (retailer)" label="Blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="15288" end="15301" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q498577" start="15318" end="15335" title="Castle in the Sky" label="Castle in the Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450848" start="15548" end="15559" title="StudioCanal" label="StudioCanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q274520" start="15589" end="15611" title="Grave of the Fireflies" label="Grave of the Fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053254" start="15659" end="15697" title="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment" label="Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="15719" end="15731" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513576" start="15826" end="15831" title="GKIDS" label="GKIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="15979" end="15986" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="16036" end="16051" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="16343" end="16353" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190886" start="16604" end="16619" title="The Japan Times" label="The Japan Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006" start="16773" end="16787" title="Akira Kurosawa" label="Akira Kurosawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812547" start="16998" end="17014" title="At the Movies with Ebert &amp;amp; Roeper" label="Siskel and Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q969105" start="17084" end="17095" title="Gene Siskel" label="Gene Siskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="17109" end="17124" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="17135" end="17146" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="17160" end="17177" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="17267" end="17270" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877087" start="17406" end="17421" title="Vox (website)" label="&amp;quot;Vox&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="17552" end="17572" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359975" start="17930" end="17939" title="Film comic" label="ani-manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372258" start="18005" end="18018" title="Tokuma Shoten" label="Tokuma Shoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="18105" end="18114" title="Viz Media" label="Viz Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571159" start="18333" end="18352" title="Southwark Playhouse" label="Southwark Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981419" start="19100" end="19112" title="Nausicaa.net" label="Nausicaa.net"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490626" wikidata="Q267287" url="?curid=490626" title="Dunedin sound">
<text>The Dunedin sound was a musical and cultural movement in Dunedin, Otago, New Zealand, in the early 1980s. It helped found indie rock as a genre. The scene is associated with Flying Nun Records, an independent label.

Bands associated with the Dunedin sound include the Chills, the Clean, the Verlaines, the Bats, Toy Love, Tall Dwarfs, Straitjacket Fits, Look Blue Go Purple, the 3Ds, the Dead C, Snapper, and Sneaky Feelings, among many others.

The Dunedin sound influenced many overseas bands, including American indie rock groups R.E.M., Yo La Tengo, and Pavement.

==Characteristics==
According to Matthew Bannister, Dunedin sound &quot;was typically marked by the use of droning or jangling guitars, indistinct vocals and often copious quantities of reverberation.&quot; Many Dunedin sound bands drew inspiration from punk rock, as well as pop, rock, and psychedelic music of the 1960s.

==Influences==
The Dunedin sound can be traced back to the emergence of punk rock as a musical influence in New Zealand in the late 1970s. Isolated from the country&#x27;s main punk scene in Auckland (which had been influenced by bands such as England&#x27;s Buzzcocks), Dunedin&#x27;s punk groups, such as The Enemy (which became Toy Love) and The Same (which later developed into The Chills), developed a sound more heavily influenced by artists like The Velvet Underground and The Stooges. This was complemented by jangly, psychedelic-influenced guitar work reminiscent of 1960s bands such as The Beatles and The Byrds, and the combination of the two developed into the style which became known as the Dunedin sound.

==Reception and legacy==
New Zealand-based Flying Nun Records championed the Dunedin sound, starting with its earliest releases (including The Clean&#x27;s single &quot;Tally Ho!&quot; and the four-band compilation &quot;Dunedin Double&quot; EP, from which the term &quot;Dunedin sound&quot; was first coined). Many artists gained a dedicated &quot;college music&quot; following, both at home and overseas. In July 2009, &quot;Uncut&quot; magazine suggested that &quot;before the mp3 replaced the flexidisc, the three axes of the international indie-pop underground were Olympia [in Washington State] ... Glasgow, and Dunedin...&quot; The growth of the Dunedin sound coincided with the founding of the student radio station Radio One at the University of Otago, helping to increase the popularity and availability of the music around the city. Christchurch student radio station RDU, popular in student flats at the time, was already playing plenty of Dunedin music as early as 1981, while commercial radio stations in New Zealand barely featured any &quot;homegrown&quot; music until a voluntary code was introduced in 2002.
The development of parallel musical trends such as the Paisley Underground in California and the resurgence of jangle pop contributed to growth in the popularity of the Dunedin sound on college radio in the USA and Europe. The heyday of the movement was in the mid-to-late 1980s, although music in the style is still being recorded and released.

Pavement, R.E.M., and Mudhoney cite the Dunedin sound as an influence, and other overseas artists, such as Superchunk, Barbara Manning, and Cat Power, have covered Dunedin sound songs on several occasions. Post-2000 a new batch of Australian bands, often referred to as Dolewave were heavily influenced by the Dunedin Sound.

A 2009 tribute album to Chris Knox (who suffered a major stroke that year) included contributions from Will Oldham, The Mountain Goats, Yo La Tengo, Lou Barlow, A. C. Newman, Stephin Merritt, Jay Reatard, and Lambchop.

In 2000, a &quot;Dunedin sound&quot; showcase was presented as part of the Otago Festival of the Arts, held in Dunedin. This showcase featured performances by The Clean, The Chills, the Dead C, Alastair Galbraith, the Renderers, Snapper, and the Verlaines. KFJC 89.7 FM, an American college radio station based in Los Altos Hills, California, broadcast all six nights of the Dunedin sound showcase live to the San Francisco Bay Area via its FM signal and worldwide over the internet. The following year, a double CD documenting these broadcasts was produced for the station&#x27;s annual fund-raiser.

== References ==
==Sources and further reading==
*Bannister, M. (1999) &quot;Positively George Street.&quot; Auckland: Reed Books. 
*Bertram, G. &quot;Great still sounds great&quot;, &quot;Otago Daily Times&quot;, 7 December 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2014.
*Chapman, I. (2016) &quot;The Dunedin Sound: Some disenchanted evening.&quot; Auckland: David Bateman Ltd 
*Davey, T. &amp; Puschmann, H. (1996) &quot;Kiwi rock.&quot; Dunedin: Kiwi Rock Publications. 
*Dix, J. (1988) &quot;Stranded in paradise: New Zealand rock&#x27;n&#x27;roll 1955–1988.&quot; Wellington: Paradise Publications. 
*Eggleton, D. (2003) &quot;Ready to fly: The story of New Zealand rock music.&quot; Nelson, NZ: Craig Potton Publishing. 
*Higgins, M. (1982) &quot;The Clean and the Dunedin Sound&quot;. In &quot;Rip It Up&quot; magazine, April 1982.
*Flying Nun 25th anniversary edition of &quot;Real Groove&quot; magazine, 2006.
*&quot;Flying Nun: Anything can happen&quot; (Television New Zealand documentary, 1990)
*&quot;Heavenly pop hits: The Flying Nun story&quot; (Television New Zealand documentary, 2002)

==External links==
*Flying Nun history 1980–1995
*Martin Phillipps &amp; The Chills&#x27; official homepage
*In Love With Those Times – Article on &quot;Stylus&quot; magazine
*Dunedin music in the press</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q267287" start="4" end="17" title="Dunedin sound" label="Dunedin sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="57" end="64" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="66" end="71" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="122" end="132" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074625" start="174" end="192" title="Flying Nun Records" label="Flying Nun Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542343" start="197" end="214" title="Independent record label" label="independent label"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634063" start="265" end="275" title="the Chills" label="the Chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410301" start="277" end="286" title="the Clean" label="the Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414853" start="288" end="301" title="the Verlaines" label="the Verlaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519888" start="303" end="311" title="The Bats (New Zealand band)" label="the Bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830515" start="313" end="321" title="Toy Love" label="Toy Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514534" start="323" end="334" title="Tall Dwarfs" label="Tall Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621157" start="336" end="353" title="Straitjacket Fits" label="Straitjacket Fits"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866644" start="355" end="374" title="Look Blue Go Purple" label="Look Blue Go Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711883" start="376" end="383" title="the 3Ds" label="the 3Ds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729281" start="385" end="395" title="the Dead C" label="the Dead C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547319" start="397" end="404" title="Snapper (band)" label="Snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547506" start="410" end="425" title="Sneaky Feelings" label="Sneaky Feelings"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="534" end="540" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q221021" start="542" end="553" title="Yo La Tengo" label="Yo La Tengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="559" end="567" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790119" start="603" end="620" title="Matthew Bannister (musician)" label="Matthew Bannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="966" end="975" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="1085" end="1093" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="1153" end="1162" title="The Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732177" start="1201" end="1210" title="The Enemy (New Zealand band)" label="The Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830515" start="1225" end="1233" title="Toy Love" label="Toy Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634063" start="1276" end="1286" title="The Chills" label="The Chills"/>
<link wikidata="Q103550" start="1347" end="1369" title="The Velvet Underground" label="The Velvet Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="1374" end="1385" title="The Stooges" label="The Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q206159" start="1420" end="1431" title="Psychedelic rock" label="psychedelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="1490" end="1501" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="1506" end="1515" title="The Byrds" label="The Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074625" start="1658" end="1676" title="Flying Nun Records" label="Flying Nun Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410301" start="1754" end="1763" title="The Clean" label="The Clean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410301" start="1784" end="1792" title="Tally Ho! (song)" label="Tally Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314969" start="1836" end="1850" title="Dunedin Double (EP)" label="Dunedin Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q783097" start="1964" end="1977" title="College rock" label="college music"/>
<link wikidata="Q795422" start="2042" end="2047" title="Uncut (magazine)" label="Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="2112" end="2121" title="Flexi disc" label="flexidisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q42735" start="2186" end="2193" title="Olympia, Washington" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2220" end="2227" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="2317" end="2330" title="Campus radio" label="student radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561659" start="2339" end="2348" title="Radio One (New Zealand)" label="Radio One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201513" start="2356" end="2375" title="University of Otago" label="University of Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432934" start="2796" end="2815" title="Paisley Underground" label="Paisley Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190565" start="2852" end="2862" title="jangle pop" label="jangle pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="3088" end="3096" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="3098" end="3104" title="R.E.M. (band)" label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="3110" end="3118" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576798" start="3195" end="3205" title="Superchunk" label="Superchunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883989" start="3207" end="3222" title="Barbara Manning" label="Barbara Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q232348" start="3228" end="3237" title="Cat Power" label="Cat Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q60463676" start="3358" end="3366" title="Dolewave" label="Dolewave"/>
<link wikidata="Q709464" start="3517" end="3528" title="Will Oldham" label="Will Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q145515" start="3530" end="3548" title="The Mountain Goats" label="The Mountain Goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q221021" start="3550" end="3561" title="Yo La Tengo" label="Yo La Tengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q939369" start="3563" end="3573" title="Lou Barlow" label="Lou Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q94485" start="3575" end="3587" title="A. C. Newman" label="A. C. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="3589" end="3604" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q677883" start="3606" end="3617" title="Jay Reatard" label="Jay Reatard"/>
<link wikidata="Q374679" start="3623" end="3631" title="Lambchop (band)" label="Lambchop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729281" start="3816" end="3826" title="the Dead C" label="the Dead C"/>
<link wikidata="Q15503101" start="3828" end="3846" title="Alastair Galbraith (musician)" label="Alastair Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760188" start="3848" end="3861" title="The Renderers (band)" label="the Renderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547319" start="3863" end="3870" title="Snapper (band)" label="Snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414853" start="3876" end="3889" title="the Verlaines" label="the Verlaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329016" start="3891" end="3895" title="KFJC" label="KFJC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790119" start="4286" end="4299" title="Matthew Bannister (musician)" label="Bannister, M."/>
<link wikidata="Q22959054" start="4826" end="4838" title="David Eggleton" label="Eggleton, D."/>
<link wikidata="Q7335513" start="5021" end="5030" title="Rip It Up (magazine)" label="Rip It Up"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490627" wikidata="Q1134480" url="?curid=490627" title="Hakone Tozan Line">
<text>The is a mountain railway in Japan operated by Odakyu Hakone, an Odakyu Group company that also owns the Hakone Tozan Cable Car.

The section of the line from Odawara Station to Hakone-Yumoto Station began operating in 1919, with the current terminus of Gōra being reached in 1930. Since 2006, only Odakyū Odawara Line trains run on the section from Odawara Station to Hakone-Yumoto Station, as that section was converted from dual-gauge (standard and narrow) to just narrow-gauge. From Gora, travelers can continue up the mountain on the Hakone Tozan Cable Car.

The railway is capable of climbing one meter vertically for every of horizontal distance, with a maximum gradient of 8%. The line traverses Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park, so the line was carefully designed to limit the impact on the scenery. Due to the difficult topography, the line has three switchbacks used to ascend particularly steep sections.

The section of the line between Hakone-Yumoto and Gora was suspended in October 2019 due to heavy damage caused by Typhoon Hagibis. On 9 July 2020, after repairs had been completed, test trains began running over the line and full service was restored two weeks later on 23 July.

== Description ==

* Length: 
* Gauge: 
** Odawara - Iriuda: 
** Iriuda - Hakone-Yumoto: / (dual gauge)
** Hakone-Yumoto - Gōra: 
* Stations: 11 (including termini)
* Track: single
* Power: 
** Odawara - Hakone-Yumoto: 1,500 V DC overhead supply
** Hakone-Yumoto - Gōra: 750 V DC overhead supply
* Block system: Automatic (cab signal/digital) (CTC)

== Stations ==
All stations are in Kanagawa.
* Trains: &quot;S&quot; = All stop, &quot;|&quot; = All pass.
* Transfers:
** At Odawara Station:
*** Odakyū Odawara Line
*** Tōkaidō Line, Shōnan-Shinjuku Line
*** Tōkaidō Shinkansen
*** Izu-Hakone Railway Daiyūzan Line
** At Gōra Station:
*** Hakone Tozan Railway - Hakone Tozan Cable Car
* Hakone-Yumoto Station is the terminus for all Hakone Tozan Line trains. 
* On the Odawara - Hakone-Yumoto section, Limited Express &quot;Romancecar&quot; and Local trains run through to and from the Odakyu Odawara Line. 
** Odakyu LE, &quot;Super Hakone&quot;, &quot;Hakone&quot; and &quot;Homeway&quot; services run from/to Shinjuku Station.
** Odakyu LE &quot;Metro Hakone&quot; runs between Hakone-Yumoto and Kita-Senju Station, on Tokyo Metro Chiyoda Line at weekends only. 
** Local trains runs between Odawara and Hakone-Yumoto, partly from/to Shin-Matsuda Station using 4-car Odakyu EMUs.
* Section between Hakone-Yumoto and Gōra is operated by local trains only, using Hakone Tozan 2/3-car EMUs.
** Trains stop at three signal stops which have no passenger platforms.
** There are three switchbacks: Deyama, Ōhiradai, and Kami-Ōhiradai.
* Journey time between Odawara - Hakone-Yumoto is approximately 15 minutes, Hakone-Yumoto - Gōra is approximately 40 minutes, Shinjuku - Hakone-Yumoto is approximately an hour and 25–35 minutes by limited express.

===Signal stops===
There are three signal stops on the Hakone Tozan Line in addition to the regular passenger stations. All of them have a siding track and two of them have switchbacks.

====Deyama Switchback====
Signal stop with a switchback. 234 m AMSL.
====Kami-Ōhiradai Switchback====
Signal stop with a switchback near Ōhiradai station which also has a switchback. 359 m AMSL.
====Sennindai Signal Stop====
Signal stop without a switchback. 410 m AMSL.


==Rolling stock==

===Hakone Tozan Railway (Hakone-Yumoto - Gōra)===

* MoHa 1 (formerly ChiKi 1, since 1919)
* MoHa 2 (formerly ChiKi 2, since 1927)
* 1000 series (&quot;Bernina&quot;, named after the Rhätische Bahn railway of the same name in Switzerland)
* 2000 series (&quot;St. Moritz&quot;, after the Swiss resort town and Bernina Railway terminus)
* 3000 series (since November 2014)
* 3100 series two-car EMU (since May 2017)
* MoNi 1 (non-revenue car, since 1975)

All trains are based at Iriuda Depot.

====Former====

* MoHa 3 (withdrawn in 1997)
* Mu 1 (goods wagon, withdrawn in 1952/1992)
* Yu 1 (goods wagon, withdrawn in 1976)

===Odakyu Electric Railway (Shinjuku - Odawara - Hakone-Yumoto)===

====Romancecar EMUs====
* Odakyu 7000 series LSE
* Odakyu 10000 series HiSE
* Odakyu 20000 series RSE
* Odakyu 30000 series EXE
* Odakyu 50000 series VSE
* Odakyu 60000 series MSE (also from Kita-Senju)

====Commuter EMUs====
* Odakyu 1000 series
* Odakyu 5000 series
* Odakyu 8000 series

== History ==
* October 1, 1888: Odawara Horse-drawn Railway opens from Kōzu Station via Odawara Station, to Hakone-Yumoto Station.
* October 31, 1896: Operating company name is changed to Odawara Electric Railway.
* March 21, 1900: Line is electrified (as a tram, 600 V DC).
* June 1, 1919: Line opens between Hakone-Yumoto and Gōra as an electrified (600 V DC) funicular railway.
* December 16, 1920: Tram line closes between Kōzu - Odawara, and connected with the JGR (now JR) Tōkaidō Main Line at Odawara.
* August 16, 1928: Hakone Tozan Railway is founded.
* October 1, 1935: Mainline railway is extended from Hakone-Yumoto to Odawara. Tram line remains between Odawara - Hakone-Itabashi, and is renamed the &quot;Odawara Town Line&quot;.
* December 20, 1940: Tram section is renamed &quot;Odawara City Line&quot;.
* June 1, 1948: Hakone Tozan Railway becomes part of the Odakyu Group.
* August 1, 1950: Odakyu Electric Railway begins operating Limited Express and Express trains from Shinjuku to Hakone-Yumoto. The line voltage is changed to 1,500 V DC for the dual gauge section between Odawara and Hakone-Yumoto.
* June 1, 1956: Odawara City Line (tram) is abandoned.
* July 14, 1993: Hakone-Yumoto - Gōra section is uprated from 600 to 750 V DC. Operations start using 3-car EMUs.
* March 18, 2006: Hakone Tozan Railway discontinues operation using its own units between Odawara and Hakone-Yumoto. Dual-gauge section reduced to Iriuda - Hakone-Yumoto. 
* March 15, 2008: New Odakyu &quot;Romancecar&quot; through service starts from Kita-Senju Station.
* October 12, 2019: The section between Hakone-Yumoto and Gora closed due to severe damage caused by Typhoon Hagibis. The heavy rains caused landslides over the tracks and washed away ballast. In November 2019, the railway announced that repairs would keep the line closed until the fall of 2020.
*On July 9, 2020, test trains began running on the fixed line with services scheduled to begin on July 23.
*On April 1, 2024, the name of the operator company was changed from Hakone Tozan Railway Co., Ltd. to Odakyu Hakone Co., Ltd.

==Microsoft Train Simulator==
This route appears in &quot;Microsoft Train Simulator&quot; complete with scenarios simulating prototypical operation (Only from Odawara to Hakone-Yumoto).

==References==
==External links==

* Hakone Tozan Railway Official Site
* Hakone Navi (Odakyu official sightseeing guide, in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1497019" start="9" end="25" title="mountain railway" label="mountain railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q604174" start="47" end="60" title="Odakyu Hakone" label="Odakyu Hakone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077250" start="65" end="77" title="Odakyu Group" label="Odakyu Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048679" start="105" end="127" title="Hakone Tozan Cable Car" label="Hakone Tozan Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q801290" start="159" end="174" title="Odawara Station" label="Odawara Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593075" start="178" end="199" title="Hakone-Yumoto Station" label="Hakone-Yumoto Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q997926" start="254" end="258" title="Gōra Station" label="Gōra"/>
<link wikidata="Q135176" start="299" end="318" title="Odakyū Odawara Line" label="Odakyū Odawara Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q801290" start="350" end="365" title="Odawara Station" label="Odawara Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593075" start="369" end="390" title="Hakone-Yumoto Station" label="Hakone-Yumoto Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048679" start="539" end="561" title="Hakone Tozan Cable Car" label="Hakone Tozan Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137542" start="704" end="733" title="Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park" label="Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132840" start="858" end="869" title="Zig Zag (railway)" label="switchbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q69841946" start="1030" end="1045" title="Typhoon Hagibis (2019)" label="Typhoon Hagibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138981" start="1288" end="1298" title="dual gauge" label="dual gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110407" start="1415" end="1425" title="List of current systems for electric rail traction" label="1,500 V DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q110701" start="1426" end="1441" title="overhead lines" label="overhead supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q135176" start="1693" end="1712" title="Odakyū Odawara Line" label="Odakyū Odawara Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190152" start="1717" end="1729" title="Tōkaidō Line" label="Tōkaidō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323851" start="1731" end="1751" title="Shōnan-Shinjuku Line" label="Shōnan-Shinjuku Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q660895" start="1756" end="1774" title="Tōkaidō Shinkansen" label="Tōkaidō Shinkansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209848" start="1779" end="1811" title="Izu-Hakone Railway Daiyūzan Line" label="Izu-Hakone Railway Daiyūzan Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134480" start="1836" end="1856" title="Hakone Tozan Railway" label="Hakone Tozan Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048679" start="1859" end="1881" title="Hakone Tozan Cable Car" label="Hakone Tozan Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115395" start="2021" end="2031" title="Romancecar" label="Romancecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q801447" start="2209" end="2225" title="Shinjuku Station" label="Shinjuku Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801026" start="2296" end="2314" title="Kita-Senju Station" label="Kita-Senju Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075089" start="2319" end="2343" title="Tokyo Metro Chiyoda Line" label="Tokyo Metro Chiyoda Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419978" start="2434" end="2454" title="Shin-Matsuda Station" label="Shin-Matsuda Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132840" start="2679" end="2690" title="zig zag (railway)" label="switchbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132840" start="3117" end="3128" title="Zig zag (railway)" label="switchbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="3194" end="3198" title="above mean sea level" label="AMSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q177598" start="3606" end="3620" title="RhB" label="Rhätische Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q277177" start="3621" end="3645" title="Bernina Railway" label="railway of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q68986" start="3711" end="3728" title="St. Moritz" label="Swiss resort town"/>
<link wikidata="Q644577" start="3733" end="3757" title="St. Moritz railway station" label="Bernina Railway terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939055" start="3761" end="3772" title="Hakone Tozan 3000 series" label="3000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q29980387" start="3797" end="3808" title="Hakone Tozan 3100 series" label="3100 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166501" start="3970" end="3981" title="goods wagon" label="goods wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463066" start="4142" end="4164" title="Odakyu 7000 series LSE" label="Odakyu 7000 series LSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077239" start="4167" end="4191" title="Odakyu 10000 series HiSE" label="Odakyu 10000 series HiSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077241" start="4194" end="4217" title="Odakyu 20000 series RSE" label="Odakyu 20000 series RSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077244" start="4220" end="4243" title="Odakyu 30000 series EXE" label="Odakyu 30000 series EXE"/>
<link wikidata="Q863629" start="4246" end="4269" title="Odakyu 50000 series VSE" label="Odakyu 50000 series VSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077251" start="4272" end="4295" title="Odakyu 60000 series MSE" label="Odakyu 60000 series MSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077240" start="4344" end="4362" title="Odakyu 1000 series" label="Odakyu 1000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q97311567" start="4365" end="4383" title="Odakyu 5000 series (disambiguation)" label="Odakyu 5000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463068" start="4386" end="4404" title="Odakyu 8000 series" label="Odakyu 8000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q865280" start="4478" end="4490" title="Kōzu Station (Kanagawa)" label="Kōzu Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="4769" end="4778" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q249654" start="4873" end="4876" title="Japanese Government Railways" label="JGR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190152" start="4886" end="4903" title="Tōkaidō Main Line" label="Tōkaidō Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138981" start="5473" end="5483" title="dual gauge" label="dual gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115395" start="5903" end="5913" title="Romancecar" label="Romancecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q801026" start="5948" end="5966" title="Kita-Senju Station" label="Kita-Senju Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q69841946" start="6069" end="6084" title="Typhoon Hagibis (2019)" label="Typhoon Hagibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q599697" start="6152" end="6159" title="Track ballast" label="ballast"/>
<link wikidata="Q384055" start="6558" end="6583" title="Microsoft Train Simulator" label="Microsoft Train Simulator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490631" wikidata="Q210150" url="?curid=490631" title="Hanami">
<text>is the Japanese traditional custom of enjoying the transient beauty of flowers; in this case almost always refer to those of the or, less frequently, trees. From the end of March to early May, cherry trees bloom all over Japan, and around the second week of January on the island of Okinawa. The is announced each year by the Japan Meteorological Agency and watched carefully by those planning &quot;hanami,&quot; as the blossoms only last a week or two.

In modern-day Japan, &quot;hanami&quot; mostly consists of having an outdoor party beneath the sakura during daytime or at night. In some contexts the Sino-Japanese term is used instead, particularly for festivals. &quot;Hanami&quot; at night is called . In many places such as Ueno Park temporary paper lanterns are hung for the purpose of &quot;yozakura&quot;. On the island of Okinawa, decorative electric lanterns are hung in the trees for evening enjoyment, such as on the trees ascending Mt. Yae, near Motobu Town, or at the Nakijin Castle.

A more ancient form of &quot;hanami&quot; also exists in Japan, which is enjoying the plum blossoms instead, which is narrowly referred to as . This kind of &quot;hanami&quot; is popular among older people, because they are calmer than the sakura parties, which usually involve younger people and can sometimes be very crowded and noisy.

==History==

The practice of &quot;hanami&quot; is many centuries old. The custom is said to have started during the Nara period (710–794) when it was plum or &quot;ume&quot; blossoms that people admired in the beginning. The Japanese practice of &quot;hanami&quot; originated from the Chinese custom of enjoying poetry and wine underneath plum blossom trees while viewing their flowers, that was replicated by Japanese elites. This is supported by the fact that &quot;hanami&quot; started in urban areas rather than rural areas, that Japanese people initially admired plum blossoms like the Chinese rather than cherry blossoms, and that classic Japanese poetry does not associate cherry blossoms with merriness.

By the Heian period (794–1185), cherry blossoms or &quot;sakura&quot; came to attract more attention than the plum blossom and &quot;hanami&quot; was synonymous with &quot;sakura&quot;. From then on, in both waka and haiku, &quot;flowers&quot; meant &quot;sakura&quot;. The historical text Nihon Kōki, documented the first observation of the &quot;sakura&quot; bloom in the year 812, which has been observed and recorded over the next twelve centuries.

&quot;Hanami&quot; was first used as a term analogous to cherry blossom viewing in the Heian era novel &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot;. Although a wisteria viewing party was also described, the terms &quot;hanami&quot; and &quot;flower party&quot; were subsequently used only in reference to cherry blossom viewing.

Sakura was originally used to divine that year&#x27;s harvest as well as announce the rice-planting season. People believed in &quot;kami&quot; inside the trees and made offerings. Afterwards, they partook of the offering with sake.

Emperor Saga of the Heian period adopted this practice, and held flower-viewing parties with sake and feasts underneath the blossoming boughs of sakura trees in the Imperial Court in Kyoto. Poems would be written praising the delicate flowers, which were seen as a metaphor for life itself, luminous and beautiful yet fleeting and ephemeral. This was said to be the origin of &quot;Hanami&quot; in Japan.
The custom was originally limited to the elite of the Imperial Court, but soon spread to Samurai society and, by the Edo period, to the common people as well. Tokugawa Yoshimune planted areas of cherry blossom trees to encourage this. Under the sakura trees, people had lunch and drank sake in cheerful feasts.
Since a book written in the Heian period mentions , one of the cultivars with pendulous branches, it is considered that &quot;Prunus itosakura&quot; &#x27;Pendula&#x27; (Sidare-zakura) is the oldest cultivar in Japan. In the Kamakura period, when the population increased in the southern Kanto region, Oshima cherry, which originated in Izu Oshima Island, was brought to Honshu and cultivated there, and then brought to capital, Kyoto. In the Muromachi period, the Sato-zakura Group which was born from complex interspecific hybrids based on Oshima cherry, began to appear.
&quot;Prunus itosakura&quot; (syn. &quot;Prunus subhirtella&quot;, Edo higan), a wild species, grows slowly, but has the longest life span among cherry trees and is easy to grow into large trees. For this reason, there are many large and long-lived trees of this species in Japan, and their cherry trees are often regarded as sacred and have become a landmark that symbolizes Shinto shrines, Buddhist temples and local areas. Famous examples include the &quot;Jindai-zakura&quot; (~2,000 years old), &quot;Usuzumi-zakura&quot; (~1,500 years old), and &quot;Daigo-zakura&quot; (~1,000 years old).
In the Edo period, various double-flowered cultivars were produced and planted on the banks of rivers, on Buddhist temples, in Shinto shrines and in daimyo gardens in urban areas such as Edo, and the common people living in urban areas could enjoy them. Books from that period recorded more than 200 varieties of cherry blossoms and mentioned many varieties of cherry blossoms which are currently known, such as &#x27;Kanzan&#x27;. However, the situation was limited to urban areas, and the main objects of hanami across the country were wild species such as &quot;Prunus jamasakura&quot; (Yamazakura) and Oshima cherry, which were widely distributed in the country.
Since the Meiji period when Japan was modernized, Yoshino cherry has spread throughout Japan, and the object of hanami for Japanese people has changed to Yoshino cherry. On the other hand, various cultivars other than Yoshino cherry were cut down one after another due to the rapid modernization of cities, such as reclamation of waterways and demolition of daimyo gardens. The gardener Takagi Magoemon and the village mayor of Kohoku Village Shimizu Kengo worried about this situation and saved them from the danger of extinction by making a row of cherry trees composed of various cultivars on the Arakawa River bank. In Kyoto, Sano Toemon XIV, a gardener, collected various cultivars and propagated them. After World War II, these cultivars were inherited by the National Institute of Genetics, Tama Forest Science Garden and the Flower Association of Japan, and from the 1960s onwards various cultivars were again used for hanami.
The teasing proverb hints at the real priorities for most cherry blossom viewers, meaning that people are more interested in the food and drinks accompanying a hanami party than actually viewing the flowers themselves.

&quot;Dead bodies are buried under the cherry trees!&quot; is a popular saying about &quot;hanami&quot;, after the opening sentence of the 1925 short story &quot;Under the Cherry Trees&quot; by Motojirō Kajii.

==Hanami today==
The Japanese people continue the tradition of &quot;hanami&quot;, gathering in great numbers wherever the flowering trees are found. Thousands of people fill the parks to hold feasts under the flowering trees, and sometimes these parties go on until late at night. In more than half of Japan, the cherry blossoming days come at the same time as the beginning of school and work after vacation, and so welcoming parties are often opened with &quot;hanami&quot;. Usually, people go to the parks to keep the best places to celebrate &quot;hanami&quot; with friends, family, and company coworkers many hours or even days before. In cities like Tokyo, it is also common to have celebrations under the sakura at night. &quot;Hanami&quot; at night is called &quot;yozakura&quot; (夜桜, &quot;night sakura&quot;). In many places such as Ueno Park, temporary paper lanterns are hung to have yozakura.

The cherry blossom front is forecast each year, previously by the Japan Meteorological Agency and now by private agencies, and is watched with attention by those who plan to celebrate hanami because the blossoms last for very little time, usually no more than two weeks. The first cherry blossoms happen in the subtropical southern islands of Okinawa, while on the northern island of Hokkaido they bloom much later. In most large cities like Tokyo, Kyoto and Osaka, the cherry blossom season normally takes place around the end of March and the beginning of April. The television and newspapers closely follow this cherry blossom front as it slowly moves from south to north. In 2018 blossoms were scheduled to open in Fukuoka on March 21, in Kyoto March 27, in Tokyo March 26 and Sapporo May 1.
The &quot;hanami&quot; celebrations usually involve eating and drinking, and playing and listening to music. Some special dishes are prepared and eaten at the occasion, like &quot;dango&quot; and &quot;bento&quot;, and sake is commonly drunk as part of the festivity. In 2020, traditional cherry blossom season events were canceled and tourists did not come to Japan due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 2021 peak bloom day in Kyoto, March 26, was the earliest since record-tracking began in 812. Peak blooms have been trending earlier since 1800, an example of season creep caused by climate change.

==Outside Japan==
Similar celebrations take place in Taiwan, Korea, the Philippines, and China.

=== North America ===

==== United States ====
In the United States, &quot;hanami&quot; has also become very popular. In 1912, Japan gave 3,000 sakura trees as a gift to the United States to celebrate the nations&#x27; friendship. These trees were planted in Washington, D.C., and another 3,800 trees were donated in 1965. These sakura trees continue to be a popular tourist attraction, and every year, the National Cherry Blossom Festival takes place when they bloom in early spring.

In Macon, Georgia, another cherry blossom festival called the International Cherry Blossom Festival is celebrated every spring. Macon is known as the Cherry Blossom Capital of the World, because 300,000 sakura trees grow there.

In Brooklyn, New York, the Annual Sakura Matsuri Cherry Blossom Festival takes place in May, at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. This festivity has been celebrated since 1981, and is one of the Garden&#x27;s most famous attractions. Similar celebrations are also held in Philadelphia and other places through the United States.

Another popular collection of sakura in the United States is in Newark, New Jersey&#x27;s Branch Brook Park, whose over 5,000 cherry trees of 18 varieties attract 10,000 visitors a day during its annual Cherry Blossom Festival.

==== Canada ====
In Toronto, Canada the Hanami is celebrated in the many parks in the city in late April, due to the city&#x27;s cold climate. Around 50 Yoshino Sakura trees have been donated to the city as symbols of international friendship and good will by the descendants of Japanese immigrants. High Park, the home of the most extensive cherry tree collection in the city, closes its streets to auto traffic to better allow for sakura viewing during the week of peak bloom.

Vancouver has over 40,000 cherry blossom trees of different varieties. Queen Elizabeth Park is a popular spot to view the cherry blossom trees.

=== Europe ===

Hanami is also celebrated in several European countries. For example, in Finland people gather to celebrate hanami in Helsinki at Roihuvuori. Local Japanese people and companies have donated 200 cherry trees which are all planted in Kirsikkapuisto. Those cherry trees usually bloom in mid-May.

In Rome, in Italy, the hanami is celebrated, where are a lot of cherry trees were donated by Japan in 1959.

In Stockholm there is an annual festivity in Kungsträdgården where a lot of people celebrate hanami.

Paris has several stunning displays of cherry blossom trees in the Trocadero Garden, Jardin des Plantes, Parc de Sceaux, and many other spots.

During the COVID-19 pandemic in England, the National Trust initiated the #BlossomWatch campaign, which was inspired by Japanese cherry blossom festivals. It encouraged people to share images of first flowers on their lockdown walks.

==See also==
* Sakuramochi
* Sakurayu
* Sakura cheese
* &quot;Hana wa sakuragi, hito wa bushi&quot;
* Momijigari, autumn leaf viewing
* Tsukimi, moon viewing
* Fuji Matsuri
* &quot;Prunus&quot;
* Cherry Tree Park
* Subaru Cherry Blossom Festival of Greater Philadelphia
* List of Award of Garden Merit flowering cherries

==References==
==External links==
* Hanami in Philadelphia! Information on the Subaru Cherry Blossom Festival of Greater Philadelphia 
* Hanami Documentary produced by Oregon Field Guide
* &quot;Kyotoview&quot; — &quot;Hanami In Kyoto
* &quot;Cherry Blossom Forecast&quot; Yearly map of blossoms in Japan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q600614" start="283" end="290" title="Okinawa Island" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q860935" start="326" end="353" title="Japan Meteorological Agency" label="Japan Meteorological Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222379" start="607" end="620" title="Sino-Japanese vocabulary" label="Sino-Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q746216" start="734" end="743" title="Ueno Park" label="Ueno Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545439" start="754" end="767" title="paper lantern" label="paper lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205928" start="964" end="975" title="Motobu, Okinawa" label="Motobu Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q508866" start="987" end="1001" title="Nakijin Castle" label="Nakijin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="1460" end="1471" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1629" end="1636" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q157763" start="1683" end="1695" title="Prunus mume" label="plum blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q871991" start="1955" end="1969" title="cherry blossom" label="cherry blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="2064" end="2076" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q737148" start="2265" end="2269" title="waka (poetry)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="2274" end="2279" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077029" start="2347" end="2357" title="Nihon Kōki" label="Nihon Kōki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="2608" end="2613" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269" start="2620" end="2637" title="The Tale of Genji" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q261903" start="2656" end="2664" title="wisteria" label="wisteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q524158" start="2959" end="2963" title="kami" label="kami"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="3053" end="3057" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q316654" start="3060" end="3072" title="Emperor Saga" label="Emperor Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680900" start="3225" end="3248" title="Imperial Court in Kyoto" label="Imperial Court in Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="3250" end="3255" title="Poetry" label="Poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="3554" end="3561" title="Samurai" label="Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="3582" end="3592" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q319664" start="3624" end="3642" title="Tokugawa Yoshimune" label="Tokugawa Yoshimune"/>
<link wikidata="Q51117378" start="3896" end="3960" title="Prunus itosakura" label="&amp;quot;Prunus itosakura&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Pendula&amp;#x27; (Sidare-zakura)"/>
<link wikidata="Q236205" start="4001" end="4016" title="Kamakura period" label="Kamakura period"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="4064" end="4076" title="Kanto region" label="Kanto region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070580" start="4113" end="4123" title="Izu Oshima" label="Izu Oshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="4147" end="4153" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="4205" end="4210" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="4219" end="4235" title="Muromachi period" label="Muromachi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q165321" start="4241" end="4258" title="Prunus serrulata" label="Sato-zakura Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705488" start="4318" end="4331" title="Oshima cherry" label="Oshima cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q51117378" start="4350" end="4427" title="Prunus itosakura" label="&amp;quot;Prunus itosakura&amp;quot; (syn. &amp;quot;Prunus subhirtella&amp;quot;, Edo higan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845945" start="4726" end="4740" title="Shinto shrines" label="Shinto shrines"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4810" end="4823" title=":ja:神代桜" label="Jindai-zakura"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4856" end="4870" title=":ja:淡墨桜" label="Usuzumi-zakura"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4907" end="4919" title=":ja:醍醐桜" label="Daigo-zakura"/>
<link wikidata="Q63825" start="4973" end="4988" title="double-flowered" label="double-flowered"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="5095" end="5101" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215646" start="5133" end="5136" title="Edo" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10879444" start="5358" end="5376" title="Prunus &amp;#x27;Kanzan&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;#x27;Kanzan&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5505" end="5547" title=":ja:ヤマザクラ" label="&amp;quot;Prunus jamasakura&amp;quot; (Yamazakura)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="5623" end="5635" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q163078" start="5663" end="5677" title="Yoshino cherry" label="Yoshino cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="5971" end="5977" title="daimyo" label="daimyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q625465" start="6213" end="6226" title="Arakawa River (Kantō)" label="Arakawa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q576466" start="6379" end="6409" title="National Institute of Genetics" label="National Institute of Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788556" start="6411" end="6437" title="Tama Forest Science Garden" label="Tama Forest Science Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q519158" start="6962" end="6976" title="Motojirō Kajii" label="Motojirō Kajii"/>
<link wikidata="Q746216" start="7823" end="7832" title="Ueno Park" label="Ueno Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713652" start="7891" end="7911" title="cherry blossom front" label="cherry blossom front"/>
<link wikidata="Q860935" start="7953" end="7980" title="Japan Meteorological Agency" label="Japan Meteorological Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="8198" end="8209" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="8230" end="8237" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="8271" end="8279" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q877913" start="8863" end="8868" title="dango" label="dango"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="8885" end="8890" title="bento" label="bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="8902" end="8906" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="9061" end="9078" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441881" start="9242" end="9254" title="season creep" label="season creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="9265" end="9279" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9638" end="9654" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q535568" start="9786" end="9818" title="National Cherry Blossom Festival" label="National Cherry Blossom Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q219656" start="9868" end="9882" title="Macon, Georgia" label="Macon, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049171" start="9927" end="9964" title="International Cherry Blossom Festival" label="International Cherry Blossom Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="10097" end="10115" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q15974353" start="10135" end="10142" title="Matsuri" label="Matsuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360424" start="10194" end="10217" title="Brooklyn Botanic Garden" label="Brooklyn Botanic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10361" end="10373" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="10483" end="10501" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956346" start="10509" end="10526" title="Branch Brook Park" label="Branch Brook Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="10668" end="10675" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10677" end="10683" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617812" start="10948" end="10957" title="High Park" label="High Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="11128" end="11137" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479020" start="11199" end="11219" title="Queen Elizabeth Park, British Columbia" label="Queen Elizabeth Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="11407" end="11415" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070186" start="11419" end="11429" title="Roihuvuori" label="Roihuvuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220828" start="11522" end="11536" title="Kirsikkapuisto" label="Kirsikkapuisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="11587" end="11591" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="11795" end="11800" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q730948" start="11880" end="11898" title="Jardin des plantes" label="Jardin des Plantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q87743855" start="11950" end="11978" title="COVID-19 pandemic in England" label="COVID-19 pandemic in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="11984" end="11998" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q113147391" start="12014" end="12026" title="BlossomWatch" label="BlossomWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087577" start="12189" end="12200" title="Sakuramochi" label="Sakuramochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865751" start="12203" end="12211" title="Sakurayu" label="Sakurayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296415" start="12214" end="12227" title="Sakura cheese" label="Sakura cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639179" start="12236" end="12267" title="Hana wa sakuragi, hito wa bushi" label="Hana wa sakuragi, hito wa bushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17096546" start="12276" end="12286" title="Leaf peeping" label="Momijigari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050292" start="12310" end="12317" title="Tsukimi" label="Tsukimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507349" start="12334" end="12346" title="Fuji Matsuri" label="Fuji Matsuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q190545" start="12355" end="12361" title="Prunus" label="Prunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220828" start="12370" end="12386" title="Cherry Tree Park" label="Cherry Tree Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630788" start="12389" end="12443" title="Subaru Cherry Blossom Festival of Greater Philadelphia" label="Subaru Cherry Blossom Festival of Greater Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563069" start="12446" end="12494" title="List of Award of Garden Merit flowering cherries" label="List of Award of Garden Merit flowering cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101205" start="12664" end="12682" title="Oregon Field Guide" label="Oregon Field Guide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490632" wikidata="Q717957" url="?curid=490632" title="Rentarō Taki">
<text>was a Japanese pianist and composer of the Meiji era.

Taki was born in Tokyo, but moved to many places during his childhood owing to his father&#x27;s job. He went to Tokyo Music School (now known as Tokyo University of the Arts) and was taught by Nobu Koda, graduating in 1901. One of his famous pieces is &quot;Kōjō no Tsuki&quot; (Moon Over the Ruined Castle), which was included in the songbook for junior high school students, along with the &quot;Hakone-Hachiri&quot; (箱根八里). &quot;Hana&quot; (花, &quot;Flower&quot;) is also a well-known song.

In the same year, Taki went to the Leipzig Conservatory in Germany for further studies, but fell seriously ill with pulmonary tuberculosis and therefore returned to Japan. He lived quietly in the country afterwards, but soon died at the age of 23. His posthumous work is a solo piano piece called &quot;Urami&quot; (憾, &quot;Regret&quot;), which he wrote four months before he died.

==Recordings==
*&quot;Kōjō no Tsuki&quot; performed by Jean-Pierre Rampal and Ensemble Lunaire, &quot;Japanese Folk Melodies&quot;. transcribed by Akio Yashiro, CBS Records, 1978.
*&quot;Kōjō no Tsuki&quot; performed by New Kyoto Ensemble, &quot;Distant Winds: The Music of Japan&quot;. Intersound, 1992. (no composers are credited on this album)

== References ==
==External links==
* – &quot;Kojo no Tsuki&quot;
* – &quot;Kojo no Tsuki&quot;
* – &quot;Urami (regret)&quot;
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="43" end="52" title="Meiji (era)" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="72" end="77" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153515" start="201" end="229" title="Tokyo University of the Arts" label="Tokyo University of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11484020" start="249" end="258" title="Nobu Kōda" label="Nobu Koda"/>
<link wikidata="Q371898" start="314" end="327" title="Kōjō no Tsuki" label="Kōjō no Tsuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q312578" start="587" end="607" title="University of Music and Theatre Leipzig" label="Leipzig Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="668" end="690" title="pulmonary tuberculosis" label="pulmonary tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186359" start="991" end="1009" title="Jean-Pierre Rampal" label="Jean-Pierre Rampal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1014" end="1030" title="Ensemble Lunaire" label="Ensemble Lunaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q418621" start="1083" end="1095" title="Akio Yashiro" label="Akio Yashiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="1097" end="1108" title="Sony Music" label="CBS Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1156" end="1174" title="New Kyoto Ensemble" label="New Kyoto Ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q28457295" start="1223" end="1233" title="Intersound" label="Intersound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490636" wikidata="Q87590" url="?curid=490636" title="Castella">
<text>is a type of Japanese sponge cake and is known for its sweet, moist brioche-style flavour and texture. It is based on cakes introduced to Japan by Portuguese merchants in the 16th century. It was then popularized in the city of Nagasaki, where it is considered a specialty. Despite its foreign origins, it is considered a kind of &quot;wagashi&quot;, or traditional Japanese confectionery. 

To suit the tastes of Japanese people, &quot;mizuame&quot; syrup was added to the sponge cake to make it more moist, and &quot;zarame&quot; (coarse sugar) was added to the bottom to give it a coarser texture. Castella is usually baked in square or rectangular molds, then cut and sold in long boxes, with the cake inside being approximately long. 

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;castella&quot; is derived from the Portuguese , meaning &quot;cake from Castile&quot;. Its closest relative is &quot;pão-de-ló&quot;, a Portuguese cake. &quot;Pão-de-ló&quot; can be in turned derived from the French &quot;Pain de lof&quot; or &quot;Gâteau de Savoie&quot;.

Similar European sponge cakes also reference Spain in their names, such as in , in , in , in , in , in , and in . Castile was a former kingdom of Spain, comprising its north-central provinces, thus these names are quasi-synonymous with &quot;bread from Castile&quot;.

==History==

In the 16th century, the Portuguese reached Japan and soon started trade and missionary work. Nagasaki was then the only Japanese port open for foreign commerce. This exchange, called the Nanban trade, brought many new things to Japan. The Portuguese introduced things such as guns, tobacco, pumpkins, and cakes baked with wheat flour, eggs, and milk. 

Castella cakes could be stored for a long time, and so were useful for the sailors who were out on the sea for months. In the Edo period, in part due to the cost of sugar, castella was an expensive dessert to make despite the ingredients sold by the Portuguese. When the Emperor of Japan&#x27;s envoy was invited, the Tokugawa shogunate presented them with castella cakes. Over the years, the taste changed to suit Japanese palates.

==Varieties==
There are now many varieties made with ingredients such as powdered green tea, brown sugar, and honey. They may be molded in various shapes; a popular Japanese festival food is &quot;baby castella&quot;, a bite-sized version.

&quot;Siberia&quot;, castella cake filled with &quot;yōkan&quot; (sweet bean jelly), was popular in the Meiji era; it had a resurgence since it appeared in the 2013 animated film &quot;The Wind Rises&quot;, by Hayao Miyazaki.

Castella mix is used for the pancakes that are sandwiched together with sweet adzuki bean paste in the confection known as &quot;dorayaki&quot;.

===Taiwanese castella===
Castella were first introduced to Taiwan during the age of Taiwan under Japanese rule. In 1968, Ye Yongqing, the owner of a Japanese bakery in Taipei named &quot;Nanbanto&quot;, partnered with the Japanese company &quot;Nagasaki Honpu&quot; to establish a castella business. 

Taiwanese style castella is generally more soufflé-like than the Japanese variety with a custard like center. A speciality of Tamsui is a simple pillow shaped castella cake. Taiwanese style castella has been introduced into Japan.

== Main manufacturers ==

*Founded in 1624: Castella Honke Fukusaya (Nagasaki City, Nagasaki Prefecture)
*Founded in 1681: Shooken (Nagasaki City, Nagasaki Prefecture)
*Founded in 1900 (Meiji 33): Bunmeidō (Nagasaki City, Nagasaki Prefecture) Known for the phrase &quot;castella first, telephone number second&quot; and in the Kanto region, commercials of bear puppets dancing can-can dances.

==See also==
*Gairaigo
*Japanese words of Portuguese origin
*Baumkuchen

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1049852" start="22" end="33" title="sponge cake" label="sponge cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q917574" start="68" end="75" title="brioche" label="brioche"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="147" end="157" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="228" end="236" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063096" start="336" end="343" title="wagashi" label="wagashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044475" start="437" end="444" title="mizuame" label="mizuame"/>
<link wikidata="Q173063" start="844" end="851" title="Castile (historical region)" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q123251283" start="889" end="898" title="pão-de-ló" label="pão-de-ló"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="981" end="987" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="1160" end="1167" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1192" end="1197" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14606226" start="1353" end="1377" title="History of Portugal (1415–1542)" label="Portuguese reached Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="1422" end="1430" title="Nagasaki, Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122859" start="1516" end="1528" title="Nanban trade" label="Nanban trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="1605" end="1609" title="guns" label="guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="1611" end="1618" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="1620" end="1627" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1808" end="1818" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="1953" end="1969" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="2000" end="2018" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q822331" start="2189" end="2207" title="matcha" label="powdered green tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190742" start="2209" end="2220" title="brown sugar" label="brown sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="2226" end="2231" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15974353" start="2281" end="2298" title="matsuri" label="Japanese festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q559408" start="2410" end="2415" title="yōkan" label="yōkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="2461" end="2470" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q888131" start="2542" end="2556" title="The Wind Rises" label="The Wind Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q55400" start="2567" end="2581" title="Hayao Miyazaki" label="Hayao Miyazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q380279" start="2662" end="2673" title="adzuki bean" label="adzuki bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051482" start="2713" end="2721" title="dorayaki" label="dorayaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="2814" end="2840" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="Taiwan under Japanese rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q846376" start="3075" end="3082" title="soufflé" label="soufflé"/>
<link wikidata="Q570509" start="3158" end="3164" title="Tamsui" label="Tamsui"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3308" end="3331" title=":ja:カステラ本家福砂屋" label="Castella Honke Fukusaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="3333" end="3346" title="Nagasaki City" label="Nagasaki City"/>
<link wikidata="Q169376" start="3348" end="3367" title="Nagasaki Prefecture" label="Nagasaki Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3387" end="3394" title=":ja:松翁軒" label="Shooken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="3450" end="3455" title="Meiji Era" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3461" end="3469" title=":ja:文明堂" label="Bunmeidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="3591" end="3603" title="Kanto region" label="Kanto region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491365" start="3672" end="3680" title="Gairaigo" label="Gairaigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567116" start="3682" end="3717" title="Japanese words of Portuguese origin" label="Japanese words of Portuguese origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665589" start="3719" end="3729" title="Baumkuchen" label="Baumkuchen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490638" wikidata="Q1138250" url="?curid=490638" title="SMAP">
<text>was a Japanese boy band, composed of Masahiro Nakai, Takuya Kimura, Goro Inagaki, Tsuyoshi Kusanagi, and Shingo Katori. The group was created in 1988 by music producer Johnny Kitagawa, founder of Johnny &amp; Associates, originally as a six-piece with Katsuyuki Mori, until his departure from the band in 1996. The name stands for &quot;Sports Music Assemble People&quot;. After making their debut in 1991, the group took the Japanese entertainment industry by storm, becoming one of the most successful boy bands in Asia. The group is often referred to as a &quot;national treasure&quot; and a &quot;fortune and property of the country&quot; in Japan.

SMAP was regarded as an iconic group in Japan, after achieving an unprecedented level of success in numerous genres in the entertainment industry, including music, television, film, radio, and theater, as a group and individually. SMAP was credited for changing the Japanese entertainment and music industry, in terms of prolonging longevity of boy bands and broadening careers by creating new opportunities for bands that followed. After starting out as a typical boy band, with a fan base predominantly female teens, they gradually transformed into a band with a wider audience, expanding their fan base to preteens, male adults, and even the elderly, after their success as actors and television personalities.

SMAP released 55 singles, all of which reached the top 10 in the charts, 22 consecutive number-one singles, and 33 number-one singles in total. The band has had 24 top-10 albums and 14 number-one albums. &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, released in 2003, is the best selling single in the 21st century and the third best selling single in Japanese history and has become the most recognized song in Japan, as it appears in text books used in school and children are taught to learn the song at a young age. Other best selling singles by the group include, &quot;Beyond the Night Sky&quot;, &quot;Lion Heart&quot;, &quot;Shake&quot;, &quot;Aoi Inazuma&quot;, which also have become some of the most popular songs in Japan. Throughout their career, the band has sold over 38.5 million records in Japan alone.

In April 1996, the group launched their weekly variety show, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, which quickly gained high ratings and became one of the most famous television shows in Japan. The distinct format of the program has received widespread critical praise. The show ranked No. 1 in the annual household share ratings in 1996, 1997, 1999–2002, 2006, and 2016, making it the most watched television show in Japan. The episode that aired on January 2002 is currently ranked No. 7 for the most watched Japanese variety show in history, with 34.2 million viewers. It is the eighth longest-running prime-time television program in Japan, as of 2016.

SMAP officially disbanded on December 31, 2016.

==History==

===1986–1991: Formation===
In 1986, Masahiro Nakai (age 14), auditioned to enter Johnny &amp; Associates, a Japanese talent agency that recruits and trains young boys, preteens to teens, to become singers and members of boy bands. Later, in 1987, Takuya Kimura (age 15), Goro Inagaki (age 14), Katsuyuki Mori (age 13), Tsuyoshi Kusanagi (age 13), and Shingo Katori (age 10) auditioned individually and joined the agency. In Autumn 1987, twenty boys, from ages ten to seventeen, were put together into a group called The Skate Boys, which was initially created as backup dancers for a famous boy band, Hikaru Genji. In April 1988, producer Johnny Kitagawa chose six out of the twenty boys to create a new boy band and named them &quot;SMAP&quot;.

While the group continued to work as backup dancers for Hikaru Genji, they spent their early years as actors and television personalities. In 1988, they starred in a weekly variety program, &quot;Watto Atsumare&quot;, with Masataka Itsumi and Cha Kato and appeared regularly until the program ended several months later. In 1989, they started to host their own music show, &quot;Uta no Big Fight&quot; and &quot;Pop City X&quot;, as well as appearing regularly on a variety program, &quot;Idol Kyowakoku&quot;, from 1989 to 1991. In 1988, SMAP made their acting debut in a drama television series, &quot;Abunai Shonen III&quot;, playing themselves as the main role. Their first self-titled variety program, &quot;SMAP no Gakuen Kids&quot;, aired from 1990 to 1991.

===1991–1993: Debut and early years===
On January 1, 1991, the band held their first concert in Nippon Budokan and their first tour from March through April, before releasing any music. On September 9, 1991, they released their first single, &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop -Loving-&quot; from Victor Entertainment, which peaked at No. 2 on the charts. Subsequent singles, &quot;Seigi no Mikata wa Ate ni Naranai&quot;, &quot;Kokoro no Kagami&quot;, &quot;Makeru na Baby&quot; peaked in the top 10. The band asked the fans to write the lyrics for &quot;Kokoro no Kagami&quot;, and the one submitted by a fourteen-year-old girl was chosen. The song was later used in a Panasonic television commercial. They were invited to perform the song at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;, an annual music show, on December 31, 1991.

At the same time of their debut, the Japanese music industry experienced what is frequently referred to as an &quot;Idol Ice Age&quot;, where many of the popular music shows that aired weekly since the 1980s ended, and singers and bands lost a place to perform, resulting in scarce opportunities for TV exposure. Therefore, the agency decided to market the band through variety programs, where members participated in sketch comedies and game shows along with other television personalities. This non-mainstream marketing approach turned out to be a success, as the members&#x27; humorous and playful spirits on these shows propelled them to gain new fans, despite not having many musical performances on television since their debut.

In 1991, the band&#x27;s first self-titled television show, &quot;SMAP no Gakuen Kids&quot;, got renewed and changed to, &quot;I Love SMAP&quot;, which aired until 1996. From October 7, 1991, Inagaki launched his radio program, &quot;Stop The SMAP&quot;, still airing as of 2016. From April 1992 to September 1995, the group appeared regularly on a weekly variety program, &quot;Yume ga Mori Mori&quot;. Due to the fact that this was the first time in Japanese history, that a band participated in a sketch comedy, this rare act attracted wide attention.

On January 1, 1992, they released their first album, &quot;SMAP 001&quot;, which peaked at No. 14 and released another album, &quot;SMAP 002&quot;, in the same year and peaked at No. 6. Their singles, &quot;Egao no Genki&quot;, &quot;Yuki ga Futtekita&quot;, &quot;Zutto Wasurenai&quot;, &quot;Hajimete no Natsu&quot;, &quot;Kimi wa Kimi dayo&quot;, &quot;$10&quot;, and &quot;Kimi iro Omoi&quot;, released from 1992 through 1994, all peaked at the top 10. They headlined three tours in 1992, from January to August. In 1993, they released their third and fourth album, &quot;SMAP 003&quot; and &quot;SMAP 004&quot;, which peaked at No. 11 and No. 3 respectively. In 1992, Inagaki starred in a drama television series, &quot;Hatachi no Yakusoku&quot;, as the main role. In 1993, Kimura starred in a drama television series, &quot;Asunaro Hakusho&quot;, which became a massive hit, with an average household share rating of 27% and 31.9% for the season finale. Kimura&#x27;s popularity soared and from then on, members of the band started their acting careers individually.

===1994–1995: Breakthrough, &quot;Gambarimashou&quot;, and &quot;SMAP 007 Gold Singer&quot;===
In 1994, they released two albums, &quot;SMAP 005&quot; and &quot;SMAP 006 Sexy Six&quot;, which both peaked at No. 2. On March 12, 1994, they released their 12th single, &quot;Hey Hey Ookini Maidoari&quot;, which gave the band their first number one hit. Subsequent singles, &quot;Original Smile&quot;, peaked at No. 2 and &quot;Gambarimashou&quot;, and &quot;Tabun Alright&quot;, reached number one. The two number-one singles became the band&#x27;s ninth and tenth best selling single. &quot;Gambarimashou&quot; saw a jump in sales from the previous singles, becoming one of the most popular songs in Japan and helped the band gain a broader fan base. From 2002, &quot;Original Smile&quot; appeared on text books used in music classes in high school. From April 1994, Nakai and Katori started starring on the most famous Japanese daytime live television program, &quot;Waratte Iitomo&quot;. In October 1995, Kusanagi joined in and the three members appeared regularly for 20 years, Katori on Mondays, Nakai on Tuesdays, and Kusanagi on Fridays, until the program ended in 2014. From July to August, the band held their first large-scale tour, &quot;Sexy Six Show&quot;, hitting the three major cities in Japan. The tour was released on VHS on November 11, 1994, and later on DVD on December 24, 2003. On March 12, 1994, SMAP starred in their first film, &quot;Shoot!&quot;. The film aired on television for the first time on January 4, 2010, sixteen years after its release.

On January 1, 1995, the band released their first compilation album, &quot;Cool&quot;, which reached number one. The band gave an opportunity for fans to create the track list and the top fourteen of their favorite songs made it into the album. Singles released in 1995, &quot;Kansha shite&quot;, &quot;Shiyouyo&quot;, &quot;Donna Iikoto&quot;, and &quot;Oretachini Asu wa Aru&quot;, all reached number one on the charts, giving the band six consecutive number-one singles since &quot;Gambarimasho&quot; released in the previous year. &quot;Oretachini Asu wa Aru&quot; became the band&#x27;s sixth best selling single. From January 1995, Kimura launched his weekly radio program, &quot;What&#x27;s Up SMAP&quot;, still airing as of 2016. In January 1995, Nakai landed his first drama television series, &quot;Ajiichi Monme&quot;, which became an instant hit. Two seasons and four special episodes were made through 1995 to 2013. While he started to pursue his acting career, he also started to work individually as a television personality and as a news presenter, carrying many of his own television programs, which lead to expanding the capacity of a boy band.

From April 1995, the group launched a variety show, &quot;SMAP no Gambarimashou&quot;, derived from the single released the previous year, which aired on weeknights. The content of the show changed daily. On Mondays they performed a theatrical act, Tuesdays were talk show-based with a musical segment, on Wednesdays they aired a short TV movie that they starred in, Thursdays were talk show-based with a guest celebrity, and on Fridays they performed sketch comedy. It is said that this program became a basic framework for &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot; which started a year after the program began. From April 1995, Kusanagi and Katori launched their radio program, &quot;SMAP Power Splash&quot;.

From July 1, 1995, Nakai launched his weekly radio program, &quot;Some Girl SMAP&quot; still airing as of 2016. On July 7, 1995, they released their seventh album, &quot;SMAP 007 Gold Singer&quot;, which became their first number-one studio album and was certified double platinum. They launched a tour, &quot;Summer Minna Atumare Party&quot;. After this tour, the band started to be called one of the hardest bands to get concert tickets for. In August 1995, they hosted the annual telethon, &quot;24 Hour Television&quot;, and raised 1.2 billion yen. The band started performing at an annual music show, &quot;FNS Kayosai&quot;, and has become one of the main performers of the show since. From 2005, Kusanagi became the host of the show until he passed on the position to a comedian in 2014. In December 1995, they hosted a TV special, &quot;Sanma&amp;SMAP&quot;, with comedian Sanma Akashiya and the program has become an annual event since for NTV, with 21 episodes aired.

===1996–1997: &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, Lonvaca phenomenon, Mori&#x27;s departure, and &quot;Shake&quot;===

On March 3, 1996, they released their eighth album, &quot;SMAP 008 Tacomax&quot;, which peaked at No. 2, with over 500,000 copies sold. Singles &quot;Munasawagi wo Tanomuyo&quot; and &quot;Hadaka no Osama&quot; both peaked at No. 2 on the charts and was certified double Platinum. &quot;Hadaka no Osama&quot; became Mori&#x27;s last single before his departure from the group. The band released another album, &quot;SMAP 009&quot;, on August 12, which reached number one. From March to April, they held their last tour as a six-piece.

On April 15, 1996, SMAP launched their self-titled variety show, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, commonly known as &quot;SmaSma&quot; (suma-suma), which was their first program on a prime-time slot. Along with the band&#x27;s ability to entertain and their humorous personalities, the distinct format of the program received widespread critical praise. The show quickly gained high ratings, as it topped the rankings of annual household share ratings, dominating other existing popular programs. Consisting with an interview/cooking-based segment &quot;Bistro SMAP&quot;, sketch comedy series, games, and musical performances by the group and with other musical guests, the program has had countless guests from around the world and is known for being the show with the widest range of guests in Japanese television history. The show ranked No. 1 in the annual household share ratings in 1996, 1997, 1999 – 2002, 2006, and 2016 making it the most watched television show in Japan. The episode aired in January 2002 is currently ranked No. 7 for the most watched Japanese variety show in history, with 34.2 million viewers. It is the eighth longest-running prime-time television program in Japan and Fuji Television&#x27;s second longest-running prime-time television program, as of 2016.

From April to June 1996, Nakai, Kimura, and Katori each landed a role on a drama television series. Nakai played the main role in &quot;Shori no Megami&quot;, Kimura in &quot;Long Vacation&quot;, and Katori in &quot;Tomei Ningen&quot;. All three series were successful and gained high ratings. Among the three, Kimura&#x27;s &quot;Long Vacation&quot;, which aired Monday nights, became a major success and a social phenomenon. Magazines and other media stated that, &quot;women disappear from the city on Mondays&quot;, pointing out the large viewership and how intoxicating the show was for women in Japan. After Kimura playing a young pianist, there was a rapid increase of young men who started taking piano lessons. The cultural impact and influences of the show is commonly referred to as the &quot;Lonvaca (ron-bake) phenomenon&quot;. This was also a breakthrough for Kimura as an actor and helped him gain recognition and a more broad fan base.

In May 1996, Mori&#x27;s departure from the band was announced. Mori had always wanted to pursue Auto Race, a Japanese version of motorcycle speedway, since he was a child. Due to the fact that there was an age limit of twenty-three for students who wanted to attend school for Auto Race, Mori left the band aged 22. On May 27, a special episode on &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, dedicated to Mori, was created and aired SMAP&#x27;s last performance as a six-piece. Nakai said that he had an emotional breakdown after Mori&#x27;s leave, not wanting to continue as a five-piece, fearing that their popularity will plummet and that he wished for a breakup.

On July 13 and 14, 1996, they hosted the annual twenty-seven-hour long television special, &quot;FNS 27 Hour Television&quot;. On July 15, 1996, the band released their single, &quot;Aoi Inazuma&quot;, the first material released after Mori&#x27;s departure, which reached number one on the charts. Their subsequent single, &quot;Shake&quot; was released in November, also reaching number one. These two songs were both certified triple platinum and became the band&#x27;s fifth and fourth best selling single, respectively. &quot;Shake&quot; has surpassed one million copies in terms of shipments. From July to August, they held their second stadium tour, &quot;Chomugendaisho&quot;, which was the first tour after Mori&#x27;s departure.

On January 3, 1997, SMAP starred in a TV movie, &quot;Boku ga Boku de Aru Tame ni&quot;. In February 1997, they released their single, &quot;Dynamite&quot;, which peaked at No. 3 in the charts and became the band&#x27;s eighth best selling single. In May 1997, they released their twenty-fifth single, &quot;Celery&quot;, which was a cover of a song first released by singer-songwriter Masayoshi Yamazaki in 1996. Although Yamazaki&#x27;s original version did not turn out to be a success, the cover version by SMAP peaked at No. 2 and was certified double Platinum. The band became a catalyst for the recognition of the song, turning it into one of the most popular songs in Japan. On March 26, 1997, the band released its second compilation album, &quot;Wool&quot;, which peaked at No. 2.

From April to June 1997, Kusanagi landed a role in a drama television series, &quot;Ii Hito&quot;. The band&#x27;s single &quot;Celery&quot; became the theme song for the show. Nakai and Kimura made a cameo appearance on the show. Nakai, Kimura, Inagaki, and Katori had played a main role in a television series and with Kusanagi starring in &quot;Ii Hito&quot;, all five members had become leading man-class actors.

From July to September 1997, the band headlined their third stadium tour, &quot;SMAP 1997 Su&quot;, which was released through VHS and DVD on December 17, 1997. On August 6, 1997, the band released their tenth album, &quot;SMAP 011 Su&quot;, which peaked at No. 3 in the charts and was certified Platinum. From this point on, SMAP changed the pace of their releases from two albums per year to one, due to their busy schedules after experiencing individual success, as actors and television personalities. In September 1997, they released a new single, &quot;Peace&quot;, which peaked at No. 2. On December 31, 1997, they performed at the annual music show, &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;, for the seventh consecutive year. While they appeared as the performer for the previous six years, Nakai became the host of the show, which is the most prestigious job for television personalities. Nakai also hosted the program in 1998 and established himself as a highly regarded host on television.

===1998–2000: &quot;Beyond the Night Sky&quot;, &quot;Lion Heart&quot;, and Shingo Mama phenomenon===
On January 14, 1998, the band&#x27;s twenty-seventh single, &quot;Beyond the Night Sky&quot;, was released. It reached number one on the charts and became the best selling single of that month and the second best selling single of that year. The song became the band&#x27;s second best selling single, with over 1,620,000 physical copies sold. From April 2002, it has appeared in text books used in music classes in middle school and has become one of the most recognized songs in Japan. Many artists have released a cover since its release. Its subsequent single, &quot;Taisetsu&quot;, which was used as the theme song for Nakai&#x27;s drama television series, &quot;Brothers&quot;, peaked at No. 4 and was certified platinum. On June 18, 1998, the band released their eleventh album, &quot;SMAP 012 Viva Amigos&quot;, which reached number one in the charts and became their tenth best selling album. The band headlined their fourth stadium tour, &quot;Viva Amigos&quot;. The tour was released through VHS on December 24, 1998, and later through DVD on December 6, 2000.

From October 1998, Nakai and Katori launched their own variety program, &quot;SataSma&quot;, which was created and aimed towards younger viewers and families. Katori starred in a segment titled, &quot;Shingo Mama&#x27;s Secret Breakfast&quot;, where Katori would cross-dress into a character called, &quot;Shingo Mama&quot;, and visit houses to cook breakfast for children instead of their mother, allowing her to sleep in and rest in the morning. Katori started to use the phrase, &quot;Ohha&quot;, a pun for &quot;Ohayo&quot;, meaning &quot;good morning&quot; during the segment as his trademark phrase, which soon became a popular word used among children. Shingo Mama, the lovable character Katori played, and the phrase &quot;Ohha&quot;, became a social phenomenon. As a result, SMAP incidentally brought in kindergartners and preteens to their fan base.

In January 1999, the band released &quot;Asahi wo Mini Ikouyo&quot;, which peaked at number 3 and its subsequent single, &quot;Fly&quot;, peaked at number 2 in the charts. On January 3, 1999, SMAP starred in a special episode on the popular Japanese detective-drama television series &quot;Furuhata Ninzaburo&quot;, as themselves. The episode became the most watched program among all television series broadcast in 1999, with 32.3 million viewers, and the second most watched television program after an episode of &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;. On July 14, 1999, they released their twelfth album, &quot;Birdman SMAP 013&quot;, which peaked at No. 2. From July to September, they headlined their fifth stadium tour, &quot;SMAP 1999 Tour Birdman&quot;. The tour was released through VHS on December 22, 1999, and through DVD on January 1, 2000.

In August 2000, the band released their thirty-second single, &quot;Lion Heart&quot;, which became a massive success with over 1,560,000 copies sold, reaching number one on the charts for two consecutive weeks. The song was used as the theme song for Kusanagi&#x27;s drama television series, &quot;Food Fight&quot;, and became the band&#x27;s third best selling single. It quickly became one of the most recognized songs in Japan. In August 2000, Katori also released a single, &quot;Shingo Mama&#x27;s Oha Rock&quot;, as Shingo Mama, which reached number one on the charts with over 1,300,000 physical copies sold and became a social phenomenon. James Brown guest-starred in the music video, along with other Japanese celebrities who made cameo appearances. In December 2000, the term &quot;Ohha&quot;, used by Katori, won the &quot;Ryukougo Taisho&quot;, an annual traditional event of announcing words that describes that year.

On October 14, 2000, the band released their thirteenth album, &quot;S map SMAP 014&quot;. From this point on, SMAP changed the pace of their releases from one album per year to one album every two years, due to their busy individual schedules, as actors and television personalities. They headlined their sixth stadium tour, &quot;S map Tour&quot;, from October to November. The tour was released through DVD on March 14, 2001. The number of shows performed changed to one per day from this tour on. Kimura announced his marriage to singer Shizuka Kudo and her pregnancy during the tour. He had a press conference after the show at Saitama Super Arena.

===2001–2003: &quot;SMAP Vest&quot;, &quot;pamS&quot;, &quot;Drink SMAP&quot;, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, and &quot;MIJ&quot;===
On March 23, 2001, the band released their third compilation album, &quot;Smap Vest&quot;, which reached number one in the charts. It sold one million copies during the first week of release and 1,800,000 copies in total, becoming the band&#x27;s best selling album. Singles, &quot;Smac&quot; and &quot;freebird&quot;, peaked at No. 3 and No. 1 on the charts respectively. &quot;Smac&quot; was released as the 10th anniversary single and lyrics from the band&#x27;s past singles were put together and made into a new song. On August 8, 2001, another compilation album, &quot;pamS&quot; (read as &quot;Ura-suma&quot;), was released just four months after &quot;Smap Vest&quot;. It was a compilation of fan-favorites and songs that the members personally like, that aren&#x27;t usually sang on tour or on television, such as B-sides and songs from past albums. From July to September, the band launched their seventh stadium tour, &quot;pamS Tour&quot;, which was also their first five-dome tour and the first five-dome tour ever headlined in history. SMAP invented the concept of a &quot;five-dome tour&quot;, a tour that hits the five dome-shaped stadiums located in Japan (Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya, Fukuoka, and Sapporo). Since the invention of this new touring style, the five-dome tour is now used by many artists in Japan, as a symbol of being a first-rank artist in the music industry. The &quot;pamS Tour&quot; was released through DVD on December 21, 2001.

Throughout the year 2001, all five members starred in their own drama television series individually. Nakai starred in &quot;Shiroi Kage&quot;, Kimura in a detective series, &quot;Hero&quot;, Inagaki in &quot;Onmyoji&quot;, and Kusanagi in &quot;Star no Koi&quot;. Katori starred in a special episode of a comedy-drama television series, &quot;Ohha wa Sekai wo Sukuu&quot;. All programs were that year&#x27;s high-rated programs. Among all shows, &quot;Hero&quot; became a massive success, becoming the most highest rated television series in Japanese history, becoming the only television series to have all episodes marking above the 30% sharehold rate.

On July 24, 2002, they released their fourteenth album, &quot;SMAP 015/Drink! Smap!&quot;, which peaked at No. 2 in the charts and became the band&#x27;s fourth best selling album. The title was derived from a superseded soft drink, called SMAP, which was sold in Japan in the 1980s. From July 23, 2002, a canned soft drink, Drink SMAP, was launched from Kirin Beverage Corporation. Six million drinks were shipped on the day of its release. From July to November, they launched their eighth stadium tour, &quot;SMAP 02 Drink Smap Tour&quot;, which became the largest tour in terms of attendance in Japanese history, with a total attendance of 1.2 million. They decided mainly to use soccer stadiums for their venues, as it was the year the 2002 FIFA World Cup was held. The tour was released through DVD on March 5, 2003. On September 21, 2002, they released their first video album, &quot;Clip! Smap!&quot;, a collection of ten music videos released since 1996.

On March 5, 2003, the band&#x27;s thirty-fifth single, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, was released. It reached number one in the charts for three consecutive weeks twice and for seven non-consecutive weeks. It became the best selling single in the 21st century and the fifth best selling single in Japanese history. The song appears in text books used in school as children are taught to learn the song at a young age and has become one of the most recognized songs in Japan. It is the band&#x27;s best selling single, with over 2,700,000 physical copies sold and their first record to sell over two million copies. In 2012, JASRAC, announced the winner of the JASRAC Award, in celebration of the award created in 1982. &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; received the award, as the copyrighted work in music with the highest paid royalties within the past thirty years. After thirteen years from its release, the single has continued to chart in the Top 200, for a total of two-hundred non-consecutive weeks and is currently ranked second with the highest total weeks in the charts, after &quot;Nada Soso&quot; (232 non-consecutive weeks). The song has been covered and re-arranged by heavy metal guitarist Marty Friedman on his 2006 album &quot;Loudspeaker&quot;.

On June 25, 2003, they released their fifteenth album, &quot;SMAP 016/MIJ&quot;, which peaked at number one and became the band&#x27;s eighth best selling album. From July to September 2003, the band launched their ninth stadium tour, &quot;MIJ Tour&quot;. SMAP became the third artist in history to hold a concert at the International Stadium Yokohama, after B&#x27;z and Eikichi Yazawa. Due to scheduling conflicts with Katori&#x27;s NHK Taiga drama, &quot;Shinsengumi&quot;, the number of shows were reduced compared to previous years, though the number of attendees surpassed one million two years in a row. The tour was released through DVD on December 24, 2003.

On December 31, 2003, SMAP appeared on the annual music show on NHK, &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;, and performed &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;. Out of the fifty-eight artists on the program, SMAP performed last for the first time, serving as the &quot;ootori&quot;, the most honorable and prestigious title in the Japanese music industry. SMAP became the first pop artist and the first group in history to perform as the &quot;ootori&quot; since the program started in 1951, as &quot;Kohaku&quot; is a historical and traditional music program and enka artists dominated the position of the &quot;ootori&quot;. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of fifty-eight artists and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s Kohaku, with a household share rating of 57.1%.

===2004–2005: Individual activities and &quot;SAMPLE Bang&quot;===
Although all five members were able to work actively as a group while pursuing solo careers since their debut, in 2004, their solo projects were on a tight schedule compared to the previous years, as they all carried their own television programs and worked as actors, on both television and film. They were not able to rearrange their schedules to fit in a time to work as a group, besides the taping of their weekly television program, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;. It was announced that the band did not have a single day that all five members could meet together, other than the taping of &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, which happened four times a month, commenting on the impossibility of shooting a music video, promoting a record, or going on tour. This led to a musical hiatus in a way, although they continued to perform their songs every week in a musical segment on &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;. This was the first time in thirteen years that the band did not release any new material or go on tour. A song titled &quot;Wonderful Life&quot; was initially scheduled to become the band&#x27;s new single in 2004. After finding out that the release was unlikely, they first decided to wait until the coming year but later had Inagaki release the song as a solo artist instead. He created a temporary stage name, &amp;G, and made his solo debut in March and the single reached number one in the charts.

From August 2004, Nakai launched his career as a sportscaster and became the host of the Olympic games on TBS. &quot;Susume Gold&quot;, a remix of their song form their fifteenth album, &quot;SMAP 016/MIJ&quot;, was scheduled to be released on September 8, 2004, as the band&#x27;s thirty-sixth single but was later canceled. The song served as the official song of the 2004 Summer Olympics and used during its television coverage on TBS. In December 2004, SMAP aired a television special as an apology for their musical hiatus and to show the fans their appreciation for their support on the group&#x27;s solo projects. By the end of 2004, their single, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, released in 2003, had become the best selling single in the 21st century and the most recognized song in Japan. Although many assumed that the band would be performing the song again at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot; as the &quot;ootori&quot;, as they did the previous year, the band declined their invitation from the show due to not releasing any new music in 2004. &quot;Kohaku&quot; experienced a fall in ratings that year and became the lowest-rated &quot;Kohaku&quot; in history and the absence of SMAP is thought to be the cause of this.

In January 2005, the band released their new single, &quot;Tomodachi e Say What You Will&quot;, a cover of Eric Clapton&#x27;s &quot;Say What You Will&quot;, which reached number one in the charts. Its subsequent singles, &quot;Bang Bang Vacation&quot; and &quot;Triangle&quot;, and their sixteenth album, &quot;Sample Bang!&quot;, released on July 27, 2005, all reached number one in the charts as well. &quot;Triangle&quot; served as the official song of all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi, such as the 2006 Winter Olympics, the 2006 World Baseball Classic, and the ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating. It was featured during the television coverage on TV Asahi from November 2005 through March 2006. Later in 2008, it was announced that &quot;Triangle&quot; would be appearing on text books used in music classes in school. From July to September 2005, they launched their tenth stadium tour, &quot;SMAP to Iku SMAP Sample Tour&quot;. SMAP became the first artist in history to perform at the National Olympic Stadium. The tour was released through DVD on December 14, 2005. In August 2005, Soichi Noguchi, a Japanese astronaut, played SMAP&#x27;s hit single, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, while flying in the Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery&quot; and it became the second Japanese song played in space. Noguchi also took with him, food that Inagaki, Kusanagi, and Katori cooked in Bistro SMAP, a cooking segment aired on &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, when he made a guest appearance on the show. On August 27 and 28, Kusanagi and Katori hosted NTV&#x27;s annual telethon, &quot;24 Hour Television&quot;, and raised one billion yen. It also became the highest-rated &quot;24 Hour Television&quot; since its launch in 1978. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;Triangle&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of fifty-four artists, and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s &quot;Kohaku&quot;, with a household share rating of 48.6%.

===2006–2010: &quot;Pop Up! Smap&quot;, &quot;super.modern.artistic.performance&quot;, and &quot;We are SMAP&quot;===
In April 2006, the band released their single, &quot;Dear Woman&quot;, and its subsequent single, &quot;Arigato&quot; in October, both which reached number one in the charts. &quot;Dear Woman&quot; became one of the most recognized songs in Japan after being used in a shampoo commercial in Japan. Katori designed the cover art for &quot;Arigato&quot;. &quot;Arigato&quot; served as the official song of the 2016 Summer Olympics, ten years after its release, and was featured during its television coverage on TBS. On July 26, 2006, the band released their seventeenth album, &quot;Pop Up! SMAP&quot;, which reached number one and became their ninth best selling album. From July to October, they launched their eleventh stadium tour, &quot;Pop Up! SMAP Tobimasu Tobidasu Tobisma Tour&quot;, and recorded an attendance of over one million, three years in a row. The tour was released through DVD on December 6, 2006. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;Arigato&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot; as the &quot;ootori&quot; for the second time. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of fifty-eight artists, and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s &quot;Kohaku&quot;, with a household share rating of 48.8%.

On January 18, 2007, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; was chosen as one of &quot;Nihon no Uta Hyakusen&quot;, a collection of one-hundred songs, widely beloved in Japan and encouraged to be sung in future generations. On September 8, 2007, Kimura starred in &quot;Hero&quot;, a sequel to the 2001–2005 detective television series of the same name. The film was a commercial success and became the highest-grossing film that year, as well as becoming the second highest-grossing film among all films starred by a SMAP member, after &quot;Howl&#x27;s Moving Castle&quot; (2004) starring Kimura. In December 2007, they released a new single, &quot;Dangan Fighter&quot;, which reached number one in the charts. It served as the official song of all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi and was featured during its television coverage. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;Dear Woman&quot; and &quot;Dangan Fighter&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of fifty-four artists, and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s &quot;Kohaku&quot;, with a household share rating of 43.9%. Their hit single from 2003, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; was performed by all fifty-four artists together as the finale and marked 46.1%.

In March 2008, they released a double-A-side single, &quot;Sonomama / White Message&quot;, which reached number one, giving them forty-two consecutive top ten singles. Its subsequent single, &quot;Sono toki, Kitto Yume janai&quot;, also topped the chart at number one, giving the band ten consecutive number ones. It also served as the official song of the 2008 Summer Olympics and was featured during the television coverage on TBS. On September 24, 2008, they released their eighteenth album, &quot;super.modern.artistic.performance&quot;, which reached number one in the charts. Will.i.am from The Black Eyed Peas produced the opening track, &quot;Theme of 019&quot;, and also wrote and produced Katori&#x27;s solo on the album, &quot;Here Is Your Hit&quot;. SMAP became the second artist in history to have a total album sales of ten million, after Chage and Aska. The band launched their twelfth stadium tour, &quot;super.modern.artistic.performance tour&quot;, from September to December. The tour was released through DVD on December 17, 2008, and later through Blu-ray on March 26, 2014. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;Sono toki, Kitto Yume janai&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;.

On January 31, 2009, SMAP hosted a three-hour television special, &quot;SMAP Gambarimasu&quot;, and became an annual television program until 2013, with five episodes aired in total. In August 2009, they released a double-A-side single, &quot;Sotto Kyutto / Super Star&quot;, which reached number one. &quot;Sotto Kyutto&quot; served as the theme song for Kusanagi&#x27;s high-rated drama television series, &quot;Ninkyo Helper&quot;, aired in 2009. &quot;Super Star&quot; served as the official song of all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi and was featured during its television coverage. The song was first aired through a live broadcast of the 2009 World Aquatics Championships. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;Sotto Kyutto&quot; and &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;.

On April 26, 2010, it was announced that SMAP would be hosting an event for their fans in China on June 13, 2010, as a part of Expo 2010 Shanghai China, though it was later canceled to avoid complications at the venue. Private companies in Shanghai released proposals stating that SMAP will be holding a concert at Shanghai as a pre-event of the expo, although they were later denied by Johnny &amp; Associates and Victor Entertainment, informing the fans that they were ticket frauds. The band was scheduled to have their concert on October 9 and 10, at the Shanghai Stadium but was canceled due to the deteriorating Sino-Japanese relations. After many discussions and negotiations, the concert was indefinitely put on hold for safety reasons.

On July 21, 2010, they released their nineteenth album, &quot;We are SMAP!&quot;, which reached number one, giving the band five consecutive number one albums. The band launched their thirteenth stadium tour, &quot;We are SMAP&quot;, from July to September. It was announced that the total number of concert attendees throughout their career surpassed ten million. During a show on September 16, SMAP announced that former band member, Mori, was in the audience. The tour was released through DVD on December 8, 2010, and later through Blu-ray on March 26, 2014, and reached number one on the charts. From July 6, 2010, a bottled sports drink, called We Are SMAP was sold in Japan. In August 2010, they released their new single, &quot;This is love&quot;, written for them by Love Psychedelico, which reached number one. On December 19, 2010, they hosted their annual television special, &quot;Sanma&amp;SMAP&quot;, with comedian Sanma Akashiya, which became the highest-rated program aired that year, with a household share of 23.4%. On December 31, SMAP performed &quot;This is love&quot; and &quot;Triangle&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot; as the &quot;ootori&quot; for the third time and for the first time in four years. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of forty-four artists, and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s &quot;Kohaku&quot;, with a household share rating of 48.9%

===2011–2015: &quot;Smap Aid&quot;, &quot;Gift of Smap&quot;, and &quot;Mr.S&quot;===
From March 2011, SMAP has shown active philanthropic support to the victims and regions affected by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. On May 4, their first and only digital single, &quot;Not Alone&quot; was released. It was initially scheduled to serve as the band&#x27;s 46th single but was canceled and released digitally in light of the earthquake and the situation in Japan, considering circumstances in power shortages and distribution. One hundred yen per single downloaded was donated to the victims. On July 23 and 24, 2011, Nakai hosted the annual twenty-seven-hour long television special, &quot;FNS 27 Hour Television&quot;, for the fifth time. A special episode of &quot;Bistro SMAP&quot; was aired during the show, titled &quot;Bistro SMAP On The Go&quot;. Four members flew to regions that were affected by the tsunami, Kimura and Inagaki to Iwate Prefecture and Kusanagi and Katori to Fukushima. The four members cooked a total of one-thousand meals to the victims evacuated in these areas. Nakai started to host his own music show, &quot;Ongaku no Hi&quot;, meaning &quot;music day&quot;, to show their support to all those affected by the earthquake and tsunami. The program is aired every summer since 2011.

On August 17, 2011, the band released their fifth compilation album, &quot;SMAP Aid&quot;, to support the people affect by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami. It was released for a limited- time period, until the end of December 2011. Two-hundred yen per album sold were donated to the victims. Fans were given the opportunity to create the track list by voting their favorite songs through the internet. The top fifteen songs made it into the album and the complete track list was announced on &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot; on August 8, 2011. The album reached number one and was certified platinum. Although they released an album, concerts were not held in consequence of the earthquake and tsunami but the band decided to host fan meetings in various venues, including the Seibuen Theme Park in Saitama, where they had their first fan meeting on the day of the debut in 1991. On September 16, 2011, their postponed concert in China was held in Peking. The concert was released through DVD on December 7, 2011, and reached number one on the charts. After several fan meetings at small venues, on November 12 and 13, they hosted another event, titled FanxFun Party, at Tokyo Dome, for those who couldn&#x27;t make it to the previous ones held that year. In December 2011, they released their new single, &quot;Boku no Hanbun&quot;, which reached number one. Throughout the year, a Chinese version of their hit singles, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; and &quot;Beyond the Night Sky&quot; was released in China. On December 31, they performed &quot;Not Alone&quot; and &quot;Original Smile&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;, as the &quot;ootori&quot;, for the fourth time.

In April 2012, they released their new single, &quot;Sakasama no Sora&quot;, which reached number one in the charts. The song was used as the theme song for NHK&#x27;s television drama series, &quot;Umechan Sensei&quot;, and SMAP became the first artist under Johnny &amp; Associates to contribute a song to an asadora. On August 1, 2012, they released their new single, &quot;Moment&quot;, and their twentieth album, &quot;Gift of SMAP&quot;, on August 8, both which reached number one in the charts. &quot;Moment&quot; served as the official song of the 2012 Summer Olympics and was featured during the television coverage on TBS. They launched their fourteenth stadium tour, &quot;Gift of SMAP Concert Tour&quot;, from August to December. The number of attendees for one tour surpassed one million, for the first time six years. The tour was released through DVD on December 5, 2012, and later through Blu-ray on March 26, 2014, and reached number one in the charts. On December 31, 2012, they performed &quot;Moment&quot; and &quot;Sakasama no Sora&quot; on &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;, as the &quot;ootori&quot;, for the fifth time. They became the first artist in history to serve as the &quot;ootori&quot; three years in a row. As artists are ranked according to the ratings during their performance, SMAP ranked number one out of forty-four artists, and was the most watched act of that year&#x27;s Kohaku, with a household share rating of 49.4%.

In February 2013, they released a double-A-side single, &quot;Mistake! / Battery&quot;, which reached number one. Subsequent singles, &quot;Joy&quot;, which was used as the theme song for Katori&#x27;s drama television series, &quot;Kasukana Kanojyo&quot;, and &quot;Shareotsu / Hello&quot;, also reached number one. From March 2013, SMAP launched a collaborative project with Universal Studios Japan titled, &quot;Universal Studios Japan x SMAP: World Entertainment Project&quot; and their song, &quot;Battery&quot; was used as background music for the attractions at the theme park. On March 15, the day the attraction was launched, it created the longest queue and waiting time in USJ&#x27;s history. On April 8, 2013, they aired a two-hour long special episode of &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, titled &quot;SMAP&#x27;s First 5-Member Trip&quot;, celebrating their 25th anniversary. The program became the third most watched television program that year, with a 20% household share rating and became the twelfth most watched episode of &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;. On September 9, a live episode of &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot; titled &quot;SMAP Nonstop Special&quot; was aired. The band performed all the past fifty singles in order of their releases in a medley, live for forty-minutes, without any commercials. On September 30, SMAP hosted a TV special, &quot;SMAP Go! Go!&quot;, and aired a short sequel to &quot;Furuhata vs SMAP&quot;, a special episode of the famous detective-drama television series, &quot;Furuhata Ninzaburo&quot;, aired in 1999. The drama was shot in one take during the broadcast of the TV special and aired live as they shot it. On December 31, they performed &quot;Mistake&quot; and &quot;Joy&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot; as the &quot;ootori&quot;, for the sixth time, four years in a row.

On March 26, 2014, SMAP was invited to the NPB Tigers-Giants Union vs MLB All Star, held in celebration of the eightieth anniversary of the Japan Professional Baseball and sang the national anthem. In April 2014, they released a double-A-side single, &quot;Yes we are / Kokokara&quot;, which reached number one. Their subsequent double-A-side single, &quot;Top Of The World / Amazing Discovery&quot;, which served as the official song for Universal Studios Japan, also reached number one. On April 18, SMAP became the first ambassador of Universal Studios Japan and attended the ceremony with Prime Minister Abe and Caroline Kennedy. It was announced that &quot;Yes we are&quot; will be used as the theme song for &quot;N Suta&quot; on TBS, a news program aired on weekdays, and that &quot;Kokokara&quot; will be used as the theme song for the Nihonbashi&#x27;s revitalizing project. On July 26 and 27, 2014, SMAP hosted the annual twenty-seven-hour long television program, &quot;FNS 27 Hour Television&quot;. Though Nakai had hosted the show several times on his own, it became the band&#x27;s first time to host as a group. A letter from former band member Katsuyuki Mori, who departed the group in 1996, was read during the show. On September 3, 2014, they released their twenty-first album, &quot;Mr.S&quot;, which reached number one, and the band launched their fifteenth stadium tour, &quot;Mr.S Saikou de Saikou no Concert Tour&quot;, from September to January 2015. The tour was released through DVD and Blu-ray on December 10, 2014, and reached number one in the charts. On December 31, they performed &quot;Shake&quot;, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot;, and &quot;Top of the World&quot; at &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;.

On January 25, 2015, Inagaki and Kusanagi hosted a TV special, &quot;Ichii jya nakutte Iijanai&quot;, together for the first time. In February, SMAP released a double A-side single, &quot;Kareinaru Gyakushu / Humor Shichauyo&quot;, which reached number one, bringing the total number of records sold to 35 million. From April 29 to June 2, Kusanagi and Katori starred in a two-act play, &quot;Burst!&quot;, written by playwright Kōki Mitani, at the Parco Theatre. Their fifty-fifth single, &quot;Otherside / Ai ga Tomarumadewa&quot;, was released on September 9, which was the same day the band&#x27;s debut single was released in 1991. The single gave them their twenty-second consecutive number one singles. On December 31, they performed &quot;Triangle&quot; and &quot;Otherside&quot; on &quot;Kohaku Uta Gassen&quot;. Throughout the year, SMAP became the representative for promoting and supporting &quot;NHK Nodojiman&quot;, in celebration of the program&#x27;s seventieth anniversary. On November 10, it was announced that SMAP will be the representative and supporter for the Paralympic games until the 2020 Summer Olympics and Paralympics, in partnership with the Nippon Foundation. Katori painted the forty-square feet mural in the building of the Nippon Foundation, which took about ten days to complete.

=== 2016: Disbandment ===
On January 13, 2016, media reported that Nakai, Inagaki, Kusanagi, and Katori were in talks to leave Johnny &amp; Associates agency, inevitably leading to a disbandment of SMAP. On January 18, such a breakup was denied later by the group through a live broadcast of their weekly variety program, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, issuing an apology for worrying the fans and creating chaos in the Japanese entertainment industry. On August 14, at 12:50 am, Johnny &amp; Associates announced through a press release that SMAP will disband on December 31, 2016.

From August to December, radio stations that carry programs hosted by the members of SMAP announced at their press conferences that the three programs, &quot;Some Girl SMAP&quot; hosted by Nakai, &quot;Stop the SMAP&quot; hosted by Inagaki, and &quot;SMAP Power Splash&quot; hosted by Kusanagi and Katori, will continue to air after the disbandment, though the name &quot;SMAP&quot; will be removed from the titles. In December, Kimura announced that his radio program, &quot;What&#x27;s Up SMAP&quot;, will continue as well, though he decided not to change the title, unlike the rest of the members. On December 30, the band&#x27;s weekday radio program, &quot;Ohayo SMAP&quot;, which debuted in 1994 ended its twenty-two-year-long broadcast.

On September 21, 2016, Victor Entertainment announced that a compilation album and a video album will be released, commemorating the band&#x27;s twenty-fifth anniversary. Fans were given the opportunity to choose the track list for the compilation album, by voting their favorites through the internet out of the 400 songs SMAP had released during their quarter-century-long career. On November 3, the full track list was revealed on Victor Entertainment&#x27;s website and announced on national news in Japan. On December 21, SMAP released their sixth compilation album, &quot;SMAP 25 YEARS&quot;. The album sold 668,000 physical copies during the first week of release and debuted at number one, giving the band its fifteenth number one album and becoming the fastest selling album of 2016.
It was certified triple Platinum on December 27 in its first week and was certified Diamond on January 10 during its third week, denoting physical sales of one million copies. The album stayed at number one for two consecutive weeks.

On December 26, 2016, the final episode of their weekly variety program, &quot;SMAPxSMAP&quot;, was aired. The five-hour-long episode was aired in a clip show format, primarily consisting of excerpts from past episodes that aired during the past twenty years since its debut on April 15, 1996. SMAP&#x27;s last singing performance as a group, which was taped on December 1, 2016, was aired at the end of the program. They sang their mega-hit song, &quot;The One and Only Flower in the World&quot; (世界に一つだけの花). At the ending credits, a heartwarming video of SMAP taking photos with the program&#x27;s staff was shown.

On December 28, 2016, SMAP released their second video album, &quot;Clip! Smap! Complete Singles&quot;, through DVD and Blu-ray, featuring all sixty-three music videos the band made during their twenty-five-year-long career. The DVD sold 192,000 copies and the Blu-ray sold 189,000 copies during its first week of release and debuted at number one simultaneously, giving the band their ninth number one DVD. Both stayed at number one for two consecutive weeks, becoming the first DVD and Blu-ray to reach number one for two weeks, since the official Blu-ray charts started in Japan in 2008. It was certified Platinum during its second week. After they disbanded, they sent the farewell messages to their fans.

In 2023, Nakai got in &quot;trouble&quot; with a woman and tried to pay her off, an arrangement in which Fuji Television executives were complicit.

==Members==
* Masahiro Nakai
* Takuya Kimura
* Goro Inagaki
* Tsuyoshi Kusanagi
* Shingo Katori
* Katsuyuki Mori

==Other ventures==

===Philanthropy===
SMAP was heavily involved in philanthropic activities. They have actively offered philanthropic support especially to the victims and regions affected by the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami and the 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes. On August 26 and 27, 1995, SMAP hosted NTV&#x27;s annual telethon, &quot;24 Hour Television&quot;, and raised 1.1 billion yen. On August 27 and 28, 2005, Kusanagi and Katori hosted the &quot;24 Hour Television&quot;, again, and raised one billion yen.

In 2011, after the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami, they bought a 30-second television commercial block in their weekly television program, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, to air a commercial on the information about the Japanese Red Cross Society and a message from the band members encouraging people to donate. Rather than reusing the ones aired in the past, they have been reshooting the commercial every time they have a taping and have them aired every week at the end of the program. Since March 2011, they have actively worked as the members of Marching J, a charity organization established by their agency, Johnny &amp; Associates. Each band member have also made individual donations.

On May 4, 2011, their first and only digital single, &quot;Not Alone&quot; was released. Initially scheduled to serve as the band&#x27;s 46th single, it was later canceled and released digitally in light of the earthquake and the situation in Japan, considering circumstances in power shortages and distribution. One hundred yen per single downloaded was donated to the victims. On July 23 and 24, 2011, Nakai hosted the annual twenty-seven-hour long television special, &quot;FNS 27 Hour Television&quot;, for the fifth time. A special episode of &quot;Bistro SMAP&quot;, a cooking segment on &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, was aired during the show, titled &quot;Bistro SMAP On The Go&quot;. Four members flew to regions that were affected by the earthquake and tsunami, Kimura and Inagaki to Iwate Prefecture and Kusanagi and Katori to Fukushima. The four members cooked a total of one-thousand meals to the victims evacuated in these areas. Nakai started to host his own music show, &quot;Ongaku no Hi&quot;, meaning &quot;music day&quot;, to show their support to all those affected by the earthquake and tsunami. The program is aired every summer since 2011. On August 17, 2011, the band released their fifth compilation album, &quot;SMAP Aid&quot;, to support the people affect by the earthquake and tsunami. Two-hundred yen per album sold were donated to the victims. Being that it was the band&#x27;s twentieth anniversary, many predicted a tour after the release of the album but the band canceled it due to power shortage in Japan that year.

After the 2016 Kumamoto earthquakes, the content of their 30-second long commercial changed, adding a new message by the band members toward the victims in Kumamoto. On April 24, ten days after the earthquake, Nakai made an unannounced surprise visit to an elementary school in Kumamoto, used as a shelter for the evacuees. He, later went back to Kumamoto on 2 more occasions: May 7 and again on May 15 with Katori. On June 12, Kimura made a visit to Kumamoto as well.

===Endorsements and partnerships===
SMAP is one of the highest paid celebrities for endorsements and commercial appearances in Japan, with an estimated contract of one hundred million yen per commercial. Since 1991, they have had over fifty contracts with Japan&#x27;s largest firms, both as a group and individually. Among the firms and products they have endorsed in the past, the most recognized are NTT, SoftBank, Dole, Meiji, Ajinomoto, and Suntory Boss Coffee. From 1991 to 1992, they contributed &quot;Seigi no Mikata wa Ate ni Naranai&quot; and &quot;Kokoro no Kagami&quot; to Panasonic&#x27;s television commercial. From 1992 to 1993, their songs &quot;Egao no Genki&quot;, &quot;Hajimete no Natsu&quot;, and &quot;Kimi wa Kimi dayo&quot; were used as the theme song for anime series, &quot;Hime-chan&#x27;s Ribbon&quot;. From 1994 to 1995, &quot;Original Smile&quot; and &quot;Shiyouyo were used in Kimura&#x27;s television commercial for Oronamin C Drink. In 1996, &quot;Munasawagi wo Tanomuyo&quot; was used in Kimura&#x27;s commercial for Kanebo Cosmetics. In 1999, &quot;Fly&quot; was used in the television commercials for NTT. From 2005 to 2006, &quot;Triangle&quot; served as the official song for all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi.

Since 2004, they have contributed their material to serve as the official song for the Olympics. Their song &quot;Susume&quot; was used for the 2004 Summer Olympics, &quot;Kono Toki, Kitto Yume Jyanai&quot; for the 2008 Summer Olympics, &quot;Moment&quot; for the 2012 Summer Olympics, and &quot;Arigato&quot; for the 2016 Summer Olympics, and were featured during the television coverage on TBS. In 2006, &quot;Triangle&quot; served as the official song for the 2006 Winter Olympics. In 2006, the band contributed their song &quot;Dear Woman&quot; to Shiseido&#x27;s shampoo commercial and led it to become number one in the Top 10 Best Commercials of 2006. In 2007, their debut single, &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop Loving&quot; was used in Otsuka Pharmaceutical&#x27;s television commercial for Pocari Sweat, after sixteen years since its release. In 2008, &quot;Dangan Fighter&quot; served as the official song for all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi. From 2009, they signed a deal with SoftBank. On August 1, the first commercial aired on 124 commercial broadcast television networks and five digital billboards located in Japan at the same time at 6:59 pm. On December 29, 2011, a 330-second long commercial aired, setting a record for the longest television commercial aired in Japan. In 2009, &quot;Super Star&quot; served as the official song for all sports broadcasts on TV Asahi. In 2012, they contributed &quot;Sakasama no Sora&quot; to NHK&#x27;s television series, &quot;Umechan Sensei&quot;.

From 2012, SMAP signed a partnership deal with 7-Eleven. While appearing in 7-Eleven&#x27;s television commercials, the product development department collaborated with Bistro SMAP, a cooking segment in the band&#x27;s weekly television program, &quot;SMAP×SMAP&quot;, where the band members cook food for celebrity guests. After airing Bistro SMAP for over fifteen years, the project was launched in response to requests from viewers and fans who wanted to try the food cooked by SMAP. Each member created their own food, such as sandwiches, snacks, noodle soups, and bentos, to sell at the 7-Eleven stores in Japan. The bentos were collectively called &quot;Bistro Bentos&quot;. The first set of menus were sold in 2012 and a new set was sold every year until 2015. In 2013, they signed a deal with Suntory&#x27;s Boss Coffee, starring in television commercials with Tommy Lee Jones. In 2013, they collaborated with Sanrio and contributed their song &quot;Hello&quot; in celebration of Hello Kitty&#x27;s 40th anniversary. In 2014, they became the ambassador for Universal Studios Japan and contributed their song &quot;Battery&quot; to play as the background music for the attractions at the theme park. &quot;Amazing Discovery&quot; served as the official song for Universal Studios Japan. The same year, their song &quot;Kokokara&quot; was used as the theme song for Nihonbashi&#x27;s Revitalization Project. In December 2014, they contributed &quot;Humor Shichauyo&quot; to be the official song for Shidax&#x27;s Heart&amp;Smile Project launched to help children in Africa and fifty yen per single sold was donated. From 2015, &quot;Ai ga Tomarumade wa&quot; was used in Katori&#x27;s television commercial for JA Group.

In November 2015, SMAP became the representative and the supporter for the Paralympic games until the 2020 Summer Olympics and Paralympics, in partnership with the Nippon Foundation. In the wake of SMAP&#x27;s disbandment in December 2016, Atarashii Chizu, a group consisting of former SMAP members Shingo Katori, Goro Inagaki, and Tsuyoshi Kusanagi have taken over as representatives and ambassadors for the Paralympics. As of October 2017, Katori has participated in an art exhibition organised by the Nippon Foundation.

==Discography==
Studio albums
Compilation albums
* 1995: &quot;Cool&quot;
* 1997: &quot;Wool&quot;
* 2001: &quot;Smap Vest&quot;
* 2001: &quot;pamS&quot;
* 2011: &quot;SMAP AID&quot;
* 2016: &quot;SMAP 25 Years&quot;

==Filmography==
===Television (as personality and performer)===
===Television (as actors)===
===Film===
===Theatre===
===Radio===
===Commercials===
==Concert tours==
*&quot;Spring SMAP 91&quot; (March–April 1991)
*&quot;SMAP 92 Yattekimashita Oshogatsu&quot; (January 1992)
*&quot;Spring SMAP 92&quot; (March–April 1992)
*&quot;SMAP 92 Summer Concert&quot; (August 1992)
*&quot;SMAP Live&quot; (November 1992)
*&quot;New Year Concert&quot; (January 1993)
*&quot;Spring SMAP 93&quot; (March–April 1993)
*&quot;New Year Concert&quot; (January 1994)
*&quot;Spring Concert&quot; (April–May 1994)
*&quot;Sexy Six Show&quot; (July–August 1994)
*&quot;Cool January&quot; (January 1995)
*&quot;Cool Spring&quot; (March–April 1995)
*&quot;Summer Minna Atumare Party&quot; (July–September 1995)
*&quot;Winter Concert&quot; (December 1995 – January 1996)
*&quot;Spring Concert&quot; (March–April 1996)
*&quot;Chomugendaisho&quot; (July–August 1996)
*&quot;SMAP Subarashii Sutekina Sugoizo&quot; (July–September 1997)
*&quot;Concert Tour 1998 Viva Amigos&quot; (July–September 1998)
*&quot;SMAP 1999 Tour Birdma&quot;n (July–September 1999)
*&quot;SMAP 00 S map Tour&quot; (October–November 2000)
*&quot;SMAP 01 pamS Tour&quot; (July–September 2001)
*&quot;SMAP 02 Drink Smap Tour&quot; (July–November 2002)
*&quot;SMAP 03 MIJ Tour&quot; (July–September 2003)
*&quot;SMAP Sample Tour&quot; (July–September 2005)
*&quot;Pop Up SMAP Tour&quot; (July–October 2006)
*&quot;super.modern.artistic.performance tour&quot; (September–December 2008)
*&quot;We are SMAP Concert Tour&quot; (July–September 2010)
*&quot;Gift of SMAP Concert Tour&quot; (August–December 2012)
*&quot;Mr.S Saikou de Saikou no Concert Tour&quot; (September 2014 – January 2015)

==Awards and nominations==

===Golden Arrow Award===
The Golden Arrow Award is presented by the Japan Magazine Publishers Association (JMPA) to recognize excellence in domestic media. SMAP has won two awards.
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 1991 || rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | SMAP || Best Newcomer || 
| Newcomer Award (Music) || 
===Japan Gold Disc Award===
The Japan Gold Disc Awards are the Recording Industry Association of Japan&#x27;s annual music awards. SMAP has won fifteen awards.
|-
| 1992
| SMAP
| Best 5 New Artist Award
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 1995
| &quot;Cool&quot;
| Album Award
|-
| &quot;Sexy Six Show&quot;
| Music Video Award
|-
| 1996
| &quot;SMAP 007: Gold Singer&quot;
| Album Award
|-
| 1997
| &quot;SMAP 008: Taxomax&quot;
| Album Award
|-
| 1999
| &quot;Yozora no Mukō&quot;
| Song of the Year (Special Award)
|-
| 2001
| &quot;Lion Heart&quot;
| Song of the Year
|-
| 2002
| &quot;SMAP Vest&quot;
| Pop Album of the Year
|-
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| 2004
| &quot;Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana&quot;
| Song of the Year
|-
| &quot;Smap! Tour! 2002!&quot;
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| Music Video of the Year
|-
| &quot;Live MIJ&quot;
|-
| 2006
| &quot;SMAP to Icchatta! SMAP Sample Tour2005&quot;
|-
| 2007
| &quot;Pop Up! SMAP Live&quot;
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| Best Music Videos
|-
| 2009
| &quot;SMAP 2008 Super Modern Artistic Performance Tour&quot;
|-
| 2017
| &quot;SMAP 25 Years
| Album of the Year
|}

===Japan Music Award===
The Japan Music Awards are presented by the Broadcast Music Producers Federation for outstanding achievements in the record industry. SMAP has won one award.
|-
| 1991 || &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop!! Loving&quot; || Rookie of the Year || 
===Japan Record Award===
The Japan Record Awards are presented by the Japan Composer&#x27;s Association for outstanding achievements in the record industry. SMAP declined their nominations, citing the lyrics of &quot;Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana&quot; which encourages listeners to seek individuality instead of being number one.
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | 2003 || rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | &quot;Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana&quot; || Japan Record Award || 
| Gold Award || 
==Publications==
* &quot;SMAP Super Photo Book The First&quot; (October 1992) 
* &quot;SMAP Photo Book Shonenki&quot; (June 1993) 
* &quot;SMAP Year Book 1993–1994 reminiscence&quot; (May 1994) 
* &quot;SMAP Year Book 1994–1995 revival &amp; evolution&quot; (June 1996) 
* &quot;Snap&quot; (December 2001) 
* &quot;The SMAP Magazine Super fashion &amp; Music Assemble Photo magazine&quot; (October 2010) 
* &quot;SMAP×SMAP Complete Book Gekkan SmaSma Shinbun Vol.1 Pink&quot; (June 19, 2012) 
* &quot;SMAP×SMAP Complete Book Gekkan SmaSma Shinbun Vol.2 Red&quot; (June 19, 2012) 
* &quot;SMAP×SMAP Complete Book Gekkan SmaSma Shinbun Vol.3 Blue&quot; (July 24, 2012) 
* &quot;SMAP×SMAP Complete Book Gekkan SmaSma Shinbun Vol.4 Yellow&quot; (August 28, 2012) 
* &quot;SMAP×SMAP Complete Book Gekkan SmaSma Shinbun Vol.5 Green&quot; (September 18, 2012) 

==See also==
* List of best-selling music artists in Japan
*&quot;Kōhaku Uta Gassen&quot;

==References==
==External links==

* Official Johnny&#x27;s website
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1205631" start="37" end="51" title="Masahiro Nakai" label="Masahiro Nakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q362254" start="53" end="66" title="Takuya Kimura" label="Takuya Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197189" start="68" end="80" title="Goro Inagaki" label="Goro Inagaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065661" start="82" end="99" title="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi" label="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377821" start="105" end="118" title="Shingo Katori" label="Shingo Katori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321093" start="168" end="183" title="Johnny Kitagawa" label="Johnny Kitagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="196" end="219" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369492" start="1579" end="1615" title="Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana" label="The One and Only Flower in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="2261" end="2270" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205631" start="2935" end="2949" title="Masahiro Nakai" label="Masahiro Nakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="2980" end="3003" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q362254" start="3146" end="3159" title="Takuya Kimura" label="Takuya Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197189" start="3170" end="3182" title="Goro Inagaki" label="Goro Inagaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138250" start="3193" end="3207" title="Katsuyuki Mori" label="Katsuyuki Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065661" start="3218" end="3235" title="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi" label="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377821" start="3250" end="3263" title="Shingo Katori" label="Shingo Katori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056450" start="3500" end="3512" title="Hikaru Genji (band)" label="Hikaru Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321093" start="3538" end="3553" title="Johnny Kitagawa" label="Johnny Kitagawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545209" start="3869" end="3884" title="Masataka Itsumi" label="Masataka Itsumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276668" start="3889" end="3897" title="Cha Kato" label="Cha Kato"/>
<link wikidata="Q386246" start="4508" end="4522" title="Nippon Budokan" label="Nippon Budokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202628" start="4696" end="4716" title="Victor Entertainment" label="Victor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="5070" end="5079" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="5150" end="5167" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q712742" start="7342" end="7357" title="Asunaro Hakusho" label="Asunaro Hakusho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156467" start="8553" end="8567" title="Waratte Iitomo" label="Waratte Iitomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="10855" end="10864" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075328" start="11897" end="11911" title="Sanma Akashiya" label="Sanma Akashiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="11965" end="11968" title="Nippon TV" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="12708" end="12717" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q744800" start="13827" end="13842" title="Fuji Television" label="Fuji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q708646" start="14092" end="14105" title="Long Vacation" label="Long Vacation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826114" start="14967" end="14976" title="Auto Race (Japanese sport)" label="Auto Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074694" start="16644" end="16662" title="Masayoshi Yamazaki" label="Masayoshi Yamazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="18132" end="18149" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="19897" end="19908" title="cross-dressing" label="cross-dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048605" start="20785" end="20803" title="Furuhata Ninzaburo" label="Furuhata Ninzaburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="21981" end="21992" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202567" start="22807" end="22819" title="Shizuka Kudo" label="Shizuka Kudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052149" start="22899" end="22918" title="Saitama Super Arena" label="Saitama Super Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="24254" end="24259" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="24261" end="24267" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q26600" start="24269" end="24276" title="Fukuoka" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q37951" start="24282" end="24289" title="Sapporo" label="Sapporo"/>
<link wikidata="Q626737" start="24714" end="24718" title="Hero (2001 TV series)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403399" start="25546" end="25572" title="Kirin Company" label="Kirin Beverage Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="25932" end="25951" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369492" start="26217" end="26253" title="Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana" label="The One and Only Flower in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q774842" start="26800" end="26806" title="JASRAC" label="JASRAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209411" start="27284" end="27293" title="Nada Soso" label="Nada Soso"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="27374" end="27385" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q297462" start="27396" end="27410" title="Marty Friedman (musician)" label="Marty Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981440" start="27435" end="27446" title="Loudspeaker (album)" label="Loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q116601" start="27777" end="27807" title="International Stadium Yokohama" label="International Stadium Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q150186" start="27815" end="27823" title="B&amp;#x27;z" label="B&amp;#x27;z"/>
<link wikidata="Q958089" start="27828" end="27842" title="Eikichi Yazawa" label="Eikichi Yazawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="27891" end="27894" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200935" start="27895" end="27906" title="Taiga drama" label="Taiga drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="28188" end="28191" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="28199" end="28216" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q873478" start="28691" end="28695" title="enka" label="enka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="29486" end="29495" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="30480" end="30492" title="Sports commentator" label="sportscaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766400" start="30537" end="30540" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System Television" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="30801" end="30821" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="31328" end="31345" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="31788" end="31800" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="32163" end="32171" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="32185" end="32205" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321947" start="32211" end="32238" title="2006 World Baseball Classic" label="2006 World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654923" start="32248" end="32280" title="ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating" label="ISU Grand Prix of Figure Skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="32332" end="32340" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14862239" start="32673" end="32697" title="National Olympic Stadium (Tokyo)" label="National Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q357450" start="32771" end="32785" title="Soichi Noguchi" label="Soichi Noguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="32798" end="32807" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="32910" end="32945" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="33236" end="33239" title="Nippon TV" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619206" start="33254" end="33262" title="telethon" label="telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="33475" end="33492" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="34259" end="34279" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q605233" start="34361" end="34364" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="34828" end="34845" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080220" start="35230" end="35251" title="Nihon no Uta Hyakusen" label="Nihon no Uta Hyakusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q903097" start="35413" end="35417" title="Hero (2007 film)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q29011" start="35686" end="35711" title="Howl&amp;#x27;s Moving Castle (film)" label="Howl&amp;#x27;s Moving Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="35915" end="35923" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="36067" end="36084" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="36840" end="36860" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q605233" start="36912" end="36915" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642606" start="36984" end="37017" title="Super Modern Artistic Performance" label="super.modern.artistic.performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185610" start="37065" end="37074" title="Will.i.am" label="Will.i.am"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="37080" end="37099" title="The Black Eyed Peas" label="The Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058820" start="37336" end="37350" title="Chage and Aska" label="Chage and Aska"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="37659" end="37676" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="38214" end="38222" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220561" start="38329" end="38362" title="2009 World Aquatics Championships" label="2009 World Aquatics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="38482" end="38499" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192452" start="38635" end="38659" title="Expo 2010 Shanghai China" label="Expo 2010 Shanghai China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="38895" end="38918" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202628" start="38923" end="38943" title="Victor Entertainment" label="Victor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q739528" start="39067" end="39083" title="Shanghai Stadium" label="Shanghai Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q75779" start="39126" end="39149" title="Sino-Japanese relations" label="Sino-Japanese relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q949948" start="39884" end="39896" title="sports drink" label="sports drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040839" start="40030" end="40047" title="Love Psychedelico" label="Love Psychedelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075328" start="40184" end="40198" title="Sanma Akashiya" label="Sanma Akashiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="40379" end="40396" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="40908" end="40942" title="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="40975" end="40989" title="digital single" label="digital single"/>
<link wikidata="Q48326" start="41666" end="41682" title="Iwate Prefecture" label="Iwate Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="41710" end="41719" title="Fukushima Prefecture" label="Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q134635" start="42832" end="42839" title="Saitama, Saitama" label="Saitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="42981" end="42987" title="Peking" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q733748" start="43204" end="43214" title="Tokyo Dome" label="Tokyo Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="43656" end="43673" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="43887" end="43890" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229824" start="43929" end="43943" title="Umechan Sensei" label="Umechan Sensei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="43990" end="44013" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138628" start="44041" end="44048" title="asadora" label="asadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="44286" end="44306" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q605233" start="44358" end="44361" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="44798" end="44815" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375103" start="45565" end="45588" title="Universal Studios Japan" label="Universal Studios Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="45962" end="45971" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="46283" end="46292" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048605" start="46588" end="46604" title="Furuhata Ninzaburo" label="Furuhata vs SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048605" start="46685" end="46703" title="Furuhata Ninzaburo" label="Furuhata Ninzaburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="46908" end="46925" title="Kohaku Utagassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17954995" start="47044" end="47083" title="2014 MLB Japan All-Star Series" label="NPB Tigers-Giants Union vs MLB All Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248063" start="47141" end="47168" title="Japan Professional Baseball" label="Japan Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="47182" end="47197" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375103" start="47440" end="47463" title="Universal Studios Japan" label="Universal Studios Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375103" start="47539" end="47562" title="Universal Studios Japan" label="Universal Studios Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="47609" end="47612" title="Shinzō Abe" label="Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q230303" start="47617" end="47633" title="Caroline Kennedy" label="Caroline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q605233" start="47737" end="47740" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962634" start="47744" end="47756" title="news program" label="news program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="47845" end="47855" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="48724" end="48741" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q616943" start="49179" end="49190" title="Kōki Mitani" label="Kōki Mitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="49547" end="49564" title="Kohaku Uta Gassen" label="Kohaku Uta Gassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954021" start="49659" end="49672" title="NHK Nodojiman" label="NHK Nodojiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="49833" end="49843" title="Paralympic" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="49860" end="49880" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q911978" start="49922" end="49939" title="Nippon Foundation" label="Nippon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="50193" end="50216" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="50394" end="50403" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="50538" end="50561" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202628" start="51410" end="51430" title="Victor Entertainment" label="Victor Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="52494" end="52503" title="SMAPxSMAP" label="SMAPxSMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257934" start="52564" end="52573" title="clip show" label="clip show"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="53153" end="53160" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q744800" start="53849" end="53864" title="Fuji Television" label="Fuji Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205631" start="53907" end="53921" title="Masahiro Nakai" label="Masahiro Nakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q362254" start="53924" end="53937" title="Takuya Kimura" label="Takuya Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197189" start="53940" end="53952" title="Goro Inagaki" label="Goro Inagaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065661" start="53955" end="53972" title="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi" label="Tsuyoshi Kusanagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377821" start="53975" end="53988" title="Shingo Katori" label="Shingo Katori"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="54204" end="54238" title="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami" label="2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q23825118" start="54247" end="54272" title="2016 Kumamoto earthquakes" label="2016 Kumamoto earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q864910" start="54313" end="54316" title="Nippon TV" label="NTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619206" start="54331" end="54339" title="telethon" label="telethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="54671" end="54680" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538440" start="54737" end="54763" title="Japanese Red Cross Society" label="Japanese Red Cross Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728013" start="55133" end="55156" title="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates" label="Johnny &amp;amp; Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="55813" end="55822" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q48326" start="56000" end="56016" title="Iwate Prefecture" label="Iwate Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q71707" start="56044" end="56053" title="Fukushima Prefecture" label="Fukushima"/>
<link wikidata="Q199889" start="56915" end="56923" title="Kumamoto" label="Kumamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054787" start="57632" end="57635" title="Nippon telegraph and telephone" label="NTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="57637" end="57645" title="SoftBank" label="SoftBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q492747" start="57647" end="57651" title="Dole Food Company" label="Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11512281" start="57653" end="57658" title="Meiji Dairies" label="Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q412826" start="57660" end="57669" title="Ajinomoto" label="Ajinomoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345267" start="57675" end="57682" title="Suntory" label="Suntory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947502" start="57683" end="57694" title="Boss Coffee" label="Boss Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="57814" end="57823" title="Panasonic" label="Panasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544102" start="58029" end="58052" title="Hime-chan&amp;#x27;s Ribbon" label="Hime-chan&amp;#x27;s Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103779" start="58178" end="58186" title="Oronamin" label="Oronamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="58469" end="58477" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="58624" end="58644" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="58695" end="58715" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="58744" end="58764" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="58798" end="58818" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766400" start="58872" end="58875" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System Television" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="58943" end="58963" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q728185" start="59032" end="59040" title="Shiseido" label="Shiseido"/>
<link wikidata="Q386434" start="59215" end="59236" title="Otsuka Pharmaceutical" label="Otsuka Pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q931226" start="59270" end="59282" title="Pocari Sweat" label="Pocari Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="59416" end="59424" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201653" start="59461" end="59469" title="SoftBank" label="SoftBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378498" start="59518" end="59538" title="commercial broadcasting" label="commercial broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q212128" start="59919" end="59922" title="NHK" label="NHK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229824" start="59955" end="59969" title="Umechan Sensei" label="Umechan Sensei"/>
<link wikidata="Q259340" start="60025" end="60033" title="7-Eleven" label="7-Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039114" start="60230" end="60239" title="SMAP×SMAP" label="SMAP×SMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="60547" end="60552" title="bento" label="bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345267" start="60779" end="60786" title="Suntory" label="Suntory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947502" start="60794" end="60805" title="Boss Coffee" label="Boss Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q170587" start="60847" end="60862" title="Tommy Lee Jones" label="Tommy Lee Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136885" start="60896" end="60902" title="Sanrio" label="Sanrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191794" start="60966" end="60977" title="Hello Kitty" label="Hello Kitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375103" start="61043" end="61066" title="Universal Studios Japan" label="Universal Studios Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141952" start="61350" end="61360" title="Nihonbashi" label="Nihonbashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496130" start="61483" end="61489" title="Shidax" label="Shidax"/>
<link wikidata="Q851257" start="61695" end="61703" title="Japan Agricultural Cooperatives" label="JA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="61781" end="61791" title="Paralympic" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181278" start="61808" end="61828" title="2020 Summer Olympics" label="2020 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q911978" start="61870" end="61887" title="Nippon Foundation" label="Nippon Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246497" start="62343" end="62352" title="Smap Vest" label="Smap Vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28123856" start="62427" end="62440" title="SMAP 25 Years" label="SMAP 25 Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354425" start="64239" end="64257" title="Golden Arrow Award" label="Golden Arrow Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q965355" start="64539" end="64560" title="Japan Gold Disc Award" label="Japan Gold Disc Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194476" start="64570" end="64609" title="Recording Industry Association of Japan" label="Recording Industry Association of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156691" start="65640" end="65658" title="Japan Music Awards" label="Japan Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q241257" start="65899" end="65917" title="Japan Record Award" label="Japan Record Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q685839" start="65940" end="65973" title="Japan Composer&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Japan Composer&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638243" start="66230" end="66234" title="45th Japan Record Awards" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607489" start="67217" end="67260" title="List of best-selling music artists in Japan" label="List of best-selling music artists in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q257913" start="67268" end="67285" title="Kōhaku Uta Gassen" label="Kōhaku Uta Gassen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490646" wikidata="Q2298524" url="?curid=490646" title="Cancellation property">
<text>In mathematics, the notion of cancellativity (or &quot;cancellability&quot;) is a generalization of the notion of invertibility.

An element &quot;a&quot; in a magma has the left cancellation property (or is left-cancellative) if for all &quot;b&quot; and &quot;c&quot; in &quot;M&quot;, always implies that .

An element &quot;a&quot; in a magma has the right cancellation property (or is right-cancellative) if for all &quot;b&quot; and &quot;c&quot; in &quot;M&quot;, always implies that .

An element &quot;a&quot; in a magma has the two-sided cancellation property (or is cancellative) if it is both left- and right-cancellative.

A magma is left-cancellative if all &quot;a&quot; in the magma are left cancellative, and similar definitions apply for the right cancellative or two-sided cancellative properties.

In a semigroup, a left-invertible element is left-cancellative, and analogously for right and two-sided. If &quot;a&quot;−1 is the left inverse of &quot;a&quot;, then implies , which implies by associativity.

For example, every quasigroup, and thus every group, is cancellative.

== Interpretation ==
To say that an element &quot;a&quot; in a magma is left-cancellative, is to say that the function is injective. That the function &quot;g&quot; is injective implies that given some equality of the form , where the only unknown is &quot;x&quot;, there is only one possible value of &quot;x&quot; satisfying the equality. More precisely, we are able to define some function &quot;f&quot;, the inverse of &quot;g&quot;, such that for all &quot;x&quot; . Put another way, for all &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;M&quot;, if , then .

Similarly, to say that the element &quot;a&quot; is right-cancellative, is to say that the function is injective and that for all &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; in &quot;M&quot;, if , then .

== Examples of cancellative monoids and semigroups ==
The positive (equally non-negative) integers form a cancellative semigroup under addition. The non-negative integers form a cancellative monoid under addition. Each of these is an example of a cancellative magma that is not a quasigroup.

Any free semigroup or monoid obeys the cancellative law, and in general, any semigroup or monoid that embeds into a group (as the above examples clearly do) will obey the cancellative law.

In a different vein, (a subsemigroup of) the multiplicative semigroup of elements of a ring that are not zero divisors (which is just the set of all nonzero elements if the ring in question is a domain, like the integers) has the cancellation property. This remains valid even if the ring in question is noncommutative and/or nonunital.

== Non-cancellative algebraic structures ==
Although the cancellation law holds for addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of real and complex numbers (with the single exception of multiplication by zero and division of zero by another number), there are a number of algebraic structures where the cancellation law is not valid.

The cross product of two vectors does not obey the cancellation law. If , then it does not follow that even if (take for example)
Matrix multiplication also does not necessarily obey the cancellation law. If and , then one must show that matrix A is &quot;invertible&quot; (i.e. has ) before one can conclude that . If , then B might not equal C, because the matrix equation will not have a unique solution for a non-invertible matrix A.

Also note that if and and the matrix A is &quot;invertible&quot; (i.e. has ), it is not necessarily true that . Cancellation works only for and (provided that matrix A is &quot;invertible&quot;) and not for and .

== See also ==
* Grothendieck group
* Invertible element
* Cancellative semigroup
* Integral domain

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="30" end="44" title="Cancellation property" label="cancellativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q242188" start="114" end="127" title="invertibility" label="invertibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q679903" start="160" end="165" title="magma (algebra)" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="174" end="200" title="Cancellation property" label="left cancellation property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="208" end="225" title="Cancellation property" label="left-cancellative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="355" end="382" title="Cancellation property" label="right cancellation property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="390" end="408" title="Cancellation property" label="right-cancellative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="538" end="569" title="Cancellation property" label="two-sided cancellation property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298524" start="577" end="589" title="Cancellation property" label="cancellative"/>
<link wikidata="Q207348" start="823" end="832" title="semigroup" label="semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503423" start="1047" end="1057" title="quasigroup" label="quasigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="1074" end="1079" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="1221" end="1230" title="injective" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q207348" start="1971" end="1980" title="semigroup" label="semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="2043" end="2049" title="monoid" label="monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="2422" end="2426" title="Ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851442" start="2530" end="2536" title="Domain (ring theory)" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2811" end="2815" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="2820" end="2834" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="2884" end="2888" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="3019" end="3032" title="cross product" label="cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="3145" end="3166" title="Matrix multiplication" label="Matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="3374" end="3380" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128678" start="3685" end="3703" title="Grothendieck group" label="Grothendieck group"/>
<link wikidata="Q338057" start="3706" end="3724" title="Invertible element" label="Invertible element"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031372" start="3727" end="3749" title="Cancellative semigroup" label="Cancellative semigroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q628792" start="3752" end="3767" title="Integral domain" label="Integral domain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490655" wikidata="Q380634" url="?curid=490655" title="Pras">
<text>Prakazrel Samuel Michel (born October 19, 1972), known professionally as Pras (), is an American rapper and record producer. He is best known as a member of the hip hop group Fugees, which he formed with fellow New Jerseyans Wyclef Jean and Lauryn Hill in 1990. 

As a solo act, he signed with Columbia Records in 1996 and earned two top 40 hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 with his 1997 single &quot;Avenues&quot; (with Refugee Camp All-Stars featuring Ky-Mani Marley) and his Grammy Award-nominated 1998 single, &quot;Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)&quot; (featuring Ol&#x27; Dirty Bastard and Mýa). The latter was released for the Warren Beatty film &quot;Bulworth&quot; (1998), while both preceded the release of his debut studio album, &quot;Ghetto Supastar&quot; (1998). 

He also collaborated with Jean and rock band Queen on the 1998 remix of &quot;Another One Bites the Dust&quot;, which reached the top five on the UK Singles Chart. In 2017, he won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series for his work as a producer on the web series &quot;The Bay&quot;.

In 2019, he began to face legal issues when he was charged with criminal conspiracy for alleged illegal donations to President Barack Obama&#x27;s 2012 presidential re-election campaign and lobbying the Trump administration to deter investigations into the 1MDB scandal involving fugitive Malaysian businessman Jho Low. On April 26, 2023, Pras was found guilty of 10 criminal counts in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia.

== Early life ==
Michel was born in Brooklyn, New York City, and raised in Irvington, New Jersey. He is Haitian-American. Pras cultivated an early interest in music. When he was 15, he met Lauryn Hill while both attended Columbia High School in Maplewood, New Jersey. In 1988, Pras introduced Hill to Wyclef Jean. Pras, Jean, and Hill began to rehearse under the guidance of Kool and the Gang&#x27;s producer, Ronald Khalis Bell, and subsequently they formed a musical group called The Rap Translators in 1989 (also known as Tranzlator Crew).

== Career ==
=== Music ===
From 1992 to 1993, The Fugees recorded their first album &quot;Blunted on Reality&quot;, under the supervision of Ronald Khalis Bell. Before and during this, Pras attended Rutgers University and Yale University, pursuing a double major in Philosophy and Psychology. In 1996, The Fugees achieved historic crossover success with &quot;The Score&quot;, which went multi-platinum.

Pras has also forged a successful solo career, beginning with an international hit single from his first full-length solo LP, &quot;Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)&quot;, featuring Mýa and Ol&#x27; Dirty Bastard. &quot;Ghetto Superstar&quot; became a top ten single in 1999, and the eighth most played single. The song earned Pras a performance at the World Music Awards. The hit single was included in the soundtrack for the film &quot;Bulworth&quot;. &quot;Ghetto Supastar&quot; spent eight weeks in the UK Top 5, peaking at No. 2 in July 1998, and reached US No. 15 a month later. &quot;Blue Angels&quot;, from the same album, was a UK Top 10 hit, reaching No. 6 in November.

Pras also featured on the track &quot;Turn You On&quot; by Swedish artist DeDe which was released in 2007. &quot;Turn You On&quot; was also written and produced by Pras. After nine weeks on Sweden&#x27;s single chart, it peaked at No. 2. He also featured &quot;Pushin&#x27;&quot; from the album &quot;Equalize&quot; by Swami, which was released in 2007.

The Fugees were scheduled to begin their international reunion tour originally in 2021 which was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2024, a new tour was announced. However, three days before the first show, it was cancelled without an explanation. In October 2024, Pras sued fellow member Lauryn Hill for breach of contract and fraud, also in regard to the cancelled tour. Hill herself replied that the lawsuit &quot;is full of false claims and unwarranted attacks. It notably omits that he was advanced overpayment for the last tour and has failed to repay substantial loans extended by myself as an act of good will.&quot;

=== Film ===
After making a cameo in the 1999 feature film &quot;Mystery Men&quot;, Pras became interested in Hollywood. In 2000, Pras starred in the New Line film, &quot;Turn It Up&quot;. In early 2002, he appeared in the Sony and Urban World release &quot;Higher Ed.&quot; and &quot;Go for Broke&quot; in which he starred and produced. He also co-starred in three 20th Century Fox films in 2007. These included &quot;The Mutant Chronicles&quot;.

In 2006, Pras created &quot;Skid Row, Los Angeles&quot;, a documentary account of his nine-day experience posing as a homeless person living in downtown Los Angeles. Using a hidden camera, Pras captured the reality of homelessness. The film was produced by Teryn Fogel. &quot;Skid Row&quot; was released on August 24, 2007.

In 2009, Pras traveled to Somalia to film the documentary &quot;Paper Dreams&quot;, which examines piracy off the African coast. During filming, pirates invaded the ship he was on, the &quot;MV Maersk Alabama&quot;, and took the captain of the ship hostage. Originally due to be released in 2014, the documentary remains unfinished due to a legal dispute.

In 2015, Pras completed a documentary, &quot;Sweet Micky For President&quot;, which chronicles the rise of Haitian musician Michel Martelly, through his election to fight corruption as President of Haiti, an election campaign that was strongly endorsed by Pras. The film had its world premiere at the 2015 Slamdance Film Festival. 

In 2017, he won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series as a producer on the web series &quot;The Bay&quot;.

== Political activism ==
In 2013, Michel became a &quot;top initial donor&quot; to Organizing for Action, a political advocacy group formed by Obama associates in January 2013.

== Legal issues ==

The United States Department of Justice (DOJ) indicted Michel on May 10, 2019, for his part in an alleged criminal conspiracy with Malaysian financier Jho Low. The DOJ alleged that between June 2012 and November 2012, Michel aided in the illegal transfer of approximately $865,000 from foreign entities into the Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign. The DOJ alleged that these funds were disguised as purportedly legitimate contributions, but were stolen from the Malaysian sovereign wealth fund 1Malaysia Development Berhad (1MDB). Ultimately, the DOJ alleged that $21 million in foreign campaign contributions were funneled into the 2012 US presidential election to benefit &quot;Candidate A&quot;. The &quot;Washington Post&quot; and &quot;The New York Times&quot; identified &quot;Candidate A&quot; as Barack Obama.

In June 2021, Michel was charged by a federal grand jury for running a back-channel campaign to get the Trump administration to drop an investigation of Jho Low and the 1MDB investment company.

He was also accused of advocating for the extradition of a Chinese dissident, Guo Wengui, from the United States. In the plea documents of former DOJ employee George Higginbotham, Michel was accused of paying Republican fundraiser Elliott Broidy and others to have Guo extradited to China. Though unnamed in the filings, Michel is &quot;easily identified&quot; due to linked cases and confirmation from sources close to the case. Michel &quot;vehemently and unequivocally&quot; denied accusations related to Higginbotham&#x27;s case.

, due to the charges against him, Michel cannot travel internationally. In January 2022, Fugees cancelled their planned international reunion tour, citing the COVID-19 pandemic.

On April 26, 2023, Michel was found guilty of 10 criminal counts in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. He is facing up to 20 years in prison, but is currently free on bond pending appeals.

== Discography ==

=== Albums ===
=== EPs ===
=== Singles ===

==== As lead artist ====
==== As featured artist ====
== Filmography ==
* &quot;Mystery Men&quot; (1999) – Tony C (credited as Prakazrel Michel)
* &quot;Turn It Up&quot; (2000) – Denzel/Diamond (credited as Pras Michel) (co-producer)
* &quot;Da Hip Hop Witch&quot; (2000) - Himself
* &quot;Higher Ed&quot; (2001) – Ed Green (credited as Pras Michel) (executive producer)
* &quot;Go for Broke&quot; (2002) – Jackson/Jackie (credited as Pras Michel) (producer)
* &quot;Nora&#x27;s Hair Salon&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Careful What You Wish For&quot; (2004) – Zen Salesman (credited as Pras Michel)
* &quot;Feel the Noise&quot; (2007) – Electric
* &quot;First Night&quot; (2007) – himself (producer)
* &quot;Skid Row&quot; (2007) – himself (producer)
* &quot;Mutant Chronicles&quot; (2007) – Captain Michaels (producer)
* &quot;Paper Dreams&quot; (2010) – himself (producer)
* &quot;Sweet Mickey for President&quot; (2015) – himself (producer)

== References ==
== External links ==
* MTV artist page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380634" start="0" end="23" title="Pras" label="Prakazrel Samuel Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380634" start="73" end="77" title="Pras" label="Pras"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="161" end="168" title="hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q159329" start="175" end="181" title="Fugees" label="Fugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="225" end="236" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q214226" start="241" end="252" title="Lauryn Hill" label="Lauryn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="294" end="310" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="334" end="340" title="top 40" label="top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="353" end="382" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688110" start="410" end="417" title="Avenues (song)" label="Avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307649" start="430" end="452" title="Refugee Camp All-Stars" label="Refugee Camp All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q741513" start="463" end="477" title="Ky-Mani Marley" label="Ky-Mani Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="487" end="499" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q950287" start="529" end="567" title="Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)" label="Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336924" start="585" end="607" title="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard" label="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q233736" start="612" end="615" title="Mýa" label="Mýa"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="650" end="663" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q576505" start="675" end="683" title="Bulworth" label="Bulworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179367" start="763" end="778" title="Ghetto Supastar" label="Ghetto Supastar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="840" end="845" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="873" end="899" title="Another One Bites the Dust#Wyclef Jean remix" label="Another One Bites the Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="941" end="957" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591823" start="977" end="1040" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series" label="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160980" start="1086" end="1105" title="The Bay (web series)" label="&amp;quot;The Bay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="1172" end="1191" title="criminal conspiracy" label="criminal conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="1235" end="1247" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858123" start="1255" end="1293" title="Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign" label="2012 presidential re-election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="1311" end="1331" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="1365" end="1377" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="1MDB scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696236" start="1419" end="1426" title="Jho Low" label="Jho Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="1498" end="1546" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1585" end="1593" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1595" end="1608" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086276" start="1624" end="1645" title="Irvington, New Jersey" label="Irvington, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639720" start="1653" end="1669" title="Haitian Americans" label="Haitian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q214226" start="1738" end="1749" title="Lauryn Hill" label="Lauryn Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149722" start="1770" end="1790" title="Columbia High School (New Jersey)" label="Columbia High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q32525" start="1794" end="1815" title="Maplewood, New Jersey" label="Maplewood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="1850" end="1861" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q850290" start="1924" end="1941" title="Kool and the Gang" label="Kool and the Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364677" start="1959" end="1977" title="Ronald Bell (musician)" label="Ronald Khalis Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560739" start="2183" end="2201" title="Blunted on Reality" label="Blunted on Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="2292" end="2310" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="2315" end="2330" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q938448" start="2453" end="2462" title="The Score (Fugees album)" label="The Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q950287" start="2630" end="2668" title="Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)" label="Ghetto Supastar (That Is What You Are)"/>
<link wikidata="Q233736" start="2686" end="2689" title="Mýa" label="Mýa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336924" start="2694" end="2716" title="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard" label="Ol&amp;#x27; Dirty Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q375990" start="2857" end="2875" title="World Music Awards" label="World Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q576505" start="2942" end="2950" title="Bulworth" label="Bulworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963550" start="3259" end="3263" title="Denise Lopez (Swedish singer)" label="DeDe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384214" start="3486" end="3494" title="Equalize" label="Equalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653142" start="3504" end="3509" title="Swami (band)" label="Swami"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3658" end="3675" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="4202" end="4207" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084074" start="4239" end="4250" title="Mystery Men" label="Mystery Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="4324" end="4332" title="New Line" label="New Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475818" start="4345" end="4355" title="Turn It Up (film)" label="Turn It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574988" start="4459" end="4471" title="Go for Broke (2002 film)" label="Go for Broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="4540" end="4556" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955804" start="4593" end="4614" title="The Mutant Chronicles" label="The Mutant Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057444" start="4767" end="4787" title="Skid Row, Los Angeles, California" label="downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="4974" end="4981" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214451" start="5047" end="5075" title="Piracy off the coast of Somalia" label="piracy off the African coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15296439" start="5139" end="5156" title="MV Maersk Alabama" label="MV Maersk Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q57512" start="5429" end="5444" title="Michel Martelly" label="Michel Martelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293687" start="5611" end="5634" title="Slamdance Film Festival" label="Slamdance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591823" start="5656" end="5719" title="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series" label="Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Digital Daytime Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160980" start="5752" end="5771" title="The Bay (web series)" label="&amp;quot;The Bay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102081" start="5857" end="5878" title="Organizing for Action" label="Organizing for Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="5976" end="6011" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="6078" end="6097" title="criminal conspiracy" label="criminal conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12696236" start="6123" end="6130" title="Jho Low" label="Jho Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858123" start="6284" end="6323" title="Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign" label="Barack Obama 2012 presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061648" start="6449" end="6470" title="sovereign wealth fund" label="sovereign wealth fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595888" start="6471" end="6499" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad" label="1Malaysia Development Berhad"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="6686" end="6701" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6718" end="6736" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="6900" end="6920" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005940" start="6929" end="6945" title="1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal" label="an investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840320" start="7069" end="7079" title="Guo Wengui" label="Guo Wengui"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631289" start="7222" end="7236" title="Elliott Broidy" label="Elliott Broidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7685" end="7702" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="7777" end="7825" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084074" start="8057" end="8068" title="Mystery Men" label="Mystery Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475818" start="8130" end="8140" title="Turn It Up (film)" label="Turn It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q651318" start="8219" end="8235" title="Da Hip Hop Witch" label="Da Hip Hop Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574988" start="8356" end="8368" title="Go for Broke (2002 film)" label="Go for Broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126640" start="8444" end="8466" title="Nora&amp;#x27;s Hair Salon" label="Nora&amp;#x27;s Hair Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q113859748" start="8488" end="8513" title="Careful What You Wish For (2004 film)" label="Careful What You Wish For"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042331" start="8728" end="8745" title="Mutant Chronicles" label="Mutant Chronicles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490656" wikidata="Q3091214" url="?curid=490656" title="Joyce Mansour">
<text>Joyce Mansour nee Joyce Patricia Adès, (25 July 1928 – 27 August 1986), was an Egyptian-French author, notable as a surrealist poet. She became the best known surrealist female poet, author of 16 books of poetry, as well as a number of important prose and theatre pieces.

==Biography==
Mansour was born in Bowden in England, to a Syrian-Jewish family originally from Aleppo, and lived in Cheshire for a month before her parents moved the family to Cairo, Egypt. During her youth, Mansour excelled as a runner and a high jumper. She also competed in equestrian competitions.

Mansour first came in contact with Parisian surrealism while still living in Cairo. She moved to Paris in 1953, at the age of 25. In 1947, her first marriage at the age of 19 ended after six months when her husband died. Her second marriage was to Samir Mansour in 1949 and they divided their time between Cairo and Paris. Mansour began to write in French.

She died of cancer in Paris in 1986.

== Career ==
Mansour’s first published collection of poems, titled: &quot;Cris&quot;, was published in Paris in 1953 by Pierre Seghers. This collection of work references male and female anatomy in explicit language that was unusual for the time. Religious language can also be found. However, it is inverted, replacing what would be Christ with the lover. References of Egyptian mythology are also present in &quot;Cris.&quot; Mansour references the White Goddess as well as Hathor.

In 1954, Joyce Mansour became involved with the surrealist movement after Jean-Louise Bédouin wrote a review praising &quot;Cris&quot; in &quot;Médium: Communication surréaliste&quot; that May. Joyce Mansour actively participated in the second wave of surrealism in Paris. Her apartment was a popular meeting place for members of the surrealist group. &quot;L&#x27;exécution du testament du Marquis de Sade,&quot; the performance piece by Jean Benoît took place in Mansour’s apartment.

She collaborated with representatives such as Pierre Alechinsky, Enrico Baj, Hans Bellmer, Gerardo Chávez, Jorge Camacho, Ted Joans, Pierre Molinier, Reinhoud d&#x27;Haese and Max Walter Svanberg.

==Work==

===Poetry===
* « &quot;Cris&quot;», Ed. Seghers, París, 1953
* « &quot;Déchirures&quot;», Les Éditions de Minuit, París, 1955
* « &quot;Rapaces&quot;», Ed. Seghers, París, 1960
* « &quot;Carré blanc&quot;», Le Soleil Noir, París, 1966
* « &quot;Les Damnations&quot;», Ed. Visat, París, 1967
* « &quot;Phallus et momies&quot;», Éd. Daily Bul, 1969
* « &quot;Astres et désastres&quot;», 1969
* « &quot;Anvil Flowers&quot;», 1970
* « &quot;Prédelle Alechinsky à la ligne&quot;», 1973
* « &quot;Pandemonium&quot;», 1976
* « &quot;Faire signe au machiniste&quot;», 1977
* « &quot;Sens interdits&quot;», 1979
* « &quot;Le Grand Jamais&quot;», 1981
* « &quot;Jasmin d&#x27;hiver&quot;», 1982
* « &quot;Flammes immobiles&quot;», 1985
* « &quot;Trous noirs&quot;», Ed. La pierre d&#x27;Alun, Bruxelles, 1986 (illustrated by fundamental Peruvian painter Gerardo Chávez)
* &quot;Emerald Wounds: Selected Poems&quot;, published by City Lights Books. 7/11/2023. .

===Prose===
* « &quot;Les Gisants satisfaits&quot;», Jean-Jacques Pauvert, París, 1958
* « &quot;Jules César&quot;», Éd. Pierre Seghers, París, 1956
* « &quot;Le Bleu des fonds&quot;», Le Soleil Noir, París, 1968
* « &quot;Ça&quot;», Le Soleil Noir, París, 1970
* « &quot;Histoires nocives&quot;», Gallimard, París, 1973

==Bibliography==
* Marie-Francine Mansour, &quot;Une vie surréaliste, Joyce Mansour, complice d&#x27;André Breton&quot;, France-Empire, 2014.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Marie-Claire Barnet, &quot;La Femme cent sexes ou les genres communicants. Deharme, Mansour, Prassinos&quot;, Peter Lang, 1998
* Jean-Louis Bédouin, &quot;Anthologie de la poésie surréaliste&quot;, Éd. Pierre Seghers, Paris, 1983, p. 285
* Adam Biro &amp; René Passeron, &quot;Dictionnaire général du surréalisme et de ses environs&quot;, co-édition Office du livre, Fribourg (Suisse) et Presses universitaires de France, Paris, 1982
* Stéphanie Caron, &quot;Réinventer le lyrisme. Le surréalisme de Joyce Mansour&quot;, Droz, Genève 2007. 
* Stéphanie Caron, « De la création comme (re)commencement. Petit aperçu sur la genèse des récits de Joyce Mansour : le cas &quot;Napoléon&quot; », in &quot;Pleine Marge&quot; n° 37, mai 2003
* Georgiana Colvile, &quot;Scandaleusement d&#x27;elles. Trente-quatre femmes surréalistes&quot;, Jean-Michel Place, Paris, 1999, pp. 186–195.
* Georgiana Colvile, « Joyce Mansour et &quot;Les Gisants satisfaits&quot;, trente ans après », in &quot;Avant-Garde&quot; no 4, Rodopi, 1990.
* Marco Conti, &quot;Joyce Mansour, l&#x27;eros senza fine&quot;, &quot;Poesia&quot; no 127, Crocetti, 1999
* Alain Marc, &quot;Écrire le cri, Sade, Bataille, Maïakovski...&quot;, preface by Pierre Bourgeade, l&#x27;Écarlate, 2000 
* J. H. Matthews, &quot;Joyce Mansour&quot;, Rodopi, Amsterdam, 1985
* Marie-Laure Missir, &quot;Joyce Mansour, une étrange demoiselle&quot;, Jean-Michel Place, Paris, 2005 
* Richard Stamelman, &quot;Le Fauve parfum du plaisir, poésie et éros chez Joyce Mansour&quot;, Lachenal &amp; Ritter
* Richard Stamelman, &quot;La Femme s&#x27;entête, la part du féminin dans le surréalisme&quot;, Lachenal &amp; Ritter &quot;Pleine Marge&quot;, 1998</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3091214" start="0" end="13" title="Joyce Mansour" label="Joyce Mansour"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="116" end="126" title="surrealist" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840268" start="331" end="344" title="Syrian Jews" label="Syrian-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="368" end="374" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="389" end="397" title="Cheshire" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="449" end="461" title="Cairo" label="Cairo, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="620" end="630" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="946" end="952" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386971" start="1092" end="1106" title="Pierre Seghers" label="Pierre Seghers"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="1159" end="1166" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133343" start="1448" end="1454" title="Hathor" label="Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="1505" end="1515" title="Surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1531" end="1550" title="Jean-Louise Bédouin" label="Jean-Louise Bédouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q472473" start="1896" end="1907" title="Jean Benoît" label="Jean Benoît"/>
<link wikidata="Q328248" start="1990" end="2007" title="Pierre Alechinsky" label="Pierre Alechinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q765758" start="2009" end="2019" title="Enrico Baj" label="Enrico Baj"/>
<link wikidata="Q213703" start="2021" end="2033" title="Hans Bellmer" label="Hans Bellmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75255" start="2035" end="2049" title="Gerardo Chávez" label="Gerardo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703783" start="2051" end="2064" title="Jorge Camacho (painter)" label="Jorge Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q719766" start="2066" end="2075" title="Ted Joans" label="Ted Joans"/>
<link wikidata="Q679299" start="2077" end="2092" title="Pierre Molinier" label="Pierre Molinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810287" start="2094" end="2115" title="Reinhoud d&amp;#x27;Haese" label="Reinhoud d&amp;#x27;Haese"/>
<link wikidata="Q524190" start="2120" end="2139" title="Max Walter Svanberg" label="Max Walter Svanberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q75255" start="2996" end="3010" title="Gerardo Chávez" label="Gerardo Chávez"/>
<link wikidata="Q446090" start="3157" end="3177" title="Jean-Jacques Pauvert" label="Jean-Jacques Pauvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273819" start="3402" end="3411" title="Éditions Gallimard" label="Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q607299" start="3681" end="3688" title="Lise Deharme" label="Deharme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107831" start="3699" end="3708" title="Gisèle Prassinos" label="Prassinos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3735" end="3753" title="Jean-Louis Bédouin" label="Jean-Louis Bédouin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4735" end="4745" title="Alain Marc (writer)" label="Alain Marc"/>
<link wikidata="Q913570" start="4816" end="4832" title="Pierre Bourgeade" label="Pierre Bourgeade"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490657" wikidata="Q484797" url="?curid=490657" title="Anal fissure">
<text>An anal fissure is a break or tear in the skin of the anal canal. Anal fissures may be noticed by bright red anal bleeding on toilet paper and undergarments, or sometimes in the toilet. If acute they are painful after defecation, but with chronic fissures, pain intensity often reduces and becomes cyclical.

== Causes ==

Most anal fissures are caused by stretching of the anal mucous membrane beyond its capability.

Superficial or shallow anal fissures look much like a paper cut, and may be hard to detect upon visual inspection; they will generally self-heal within a couple of weeks. However, some anal fissures become chronic and deep and will not heal. The most common cause of non-healing is spasming of the internal anal sphincter muscle which results in impaired blood supply to the anal mucosa. The result is a non-healing ulcer, which may become infected by fecal bacteria.

In adults, fissures may be caused by constipation, the passing of large, hard stools, or by prolonged diarrhea. In older adults, anal fissures may be caused by decreased blood flow to the area. When fissures are found laterally, tuberculosis, occult abscesses, leukemic infiltrates, carcinoma, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or inflammatory bowel disease should be considered as possible causes. Some sexually transmitted infections can promote the breakdown of tissue resulting in a fissure: syphilis, herpes, chlamydia and human papilloma virus.

Other common causes of anal fissures include: childbirth trauma in women, anal sex, Crohn&#x27;s disease, ulcerative colitis, and poor toileting in young children.

== Diagnosing ==

External anal fissures on the anal verge can be diagnosed by visual inspection.

In case of chronic anal fissure the sentinel piles on anal verge, papilla next to dentate line and fissures also commonly referred to in combination as classic fissure triad can also be seen during diagnosis.

Internal anal fissures stretching from anal verge till dentate line in adults on anterior side, posterior side or within any part of the inner circumference of the anal sphincter muscle can be diagnosed with a beak proctoscope of 23 mm diameter, a Hill Ferguson retractor of 23 mm diameter, a Park anal retractor or by digital rectal examination with a finger through the anal sphincter.

Narrow anal fissures might not be felt by finger palpation during the rectal exam due to gloves reducing tactile sensitivity.

Note that colonoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, or normal proctoscopy is for diagnosing internal hemorrhoids and other internal rectal diseases and not for diagnosing anal fissures.

== Prevention ==

For adults, the following may help prevent anal fissures:
* Avoiding straining when defecating. This includes treating and preventing constipation by eating food rich in dietary fiber, drinking enough water, occasional use of a stool softener, and avoiding constipating agents. Similarly, prompt treatment of diarrhea may reduce anal strain.
* Careful anal hygiene after defecation, including using soft toilet paper and cleaning with water, plus the use of sanitary wipes.
* In cases of pre-existing or suspected fissure, use of a lubricating ointment (It is important to note that hemorrhoid ointment is contraindicated because it constricts small blood vessels, thus causes a decrease in blood flow, which prevents healing).

In infants, frequent diaper change can prevent anal fissure. As constipation can be a cause, making sure the infant is drinking enough fluids (i.e. breastmilk, proper ratios when mixing formulas) is beneficial. In infants, once an anal fissure has occurred, addressing underlying causes is usually enough to ensure healing occurs.

== Treatment ==
Non-surgical treatments are recommended initially for acute and chronic anal fissures. These include topical nitroglycerin or calcium channel blockers (e.g. diltiazem), or injection of botulinum toxin into the anal sphincter.

Other measures include warm sitz baths, topical anesthetics, high-fiber diet and stool softeners.

=== Medication ===

Local application of medication to relax the sphincter muscle, thus allowing the healing to proceed, was first proposed in 1994 with nitroglycerine ointment,
and then calcium channel blockers in 1999 with nifedipine ointment,
and the following year with topical diltiazem.
Branded preparations are now available of topical nitroglycerine ointment (Rectogesic (Rectiv) as 0.2% in Australia and 0.4% in UK and US), topical nifedipine 0.3% with lidocaine 1.5% ointment (Antrolin in Italy since April 2004) and diltiazem 2% (Anoheal in UK, although still in Phase III development). A common side effect drawback of nitroglycerine ointment is headache, caused by systemic absorption of the drug, which limits patient acceptability.

A combined surgical and pharmacological treatment, administered by colorectal surgeons, is the direct injection of botulinum toxin (Botox) into the anal sphincter to relax it. This treatment was first investigated in 1993. However, in many cases involving Botox injections, the patients eventually had to choose another cure as the injections proved less and less potent, spending thousands of dollars in the meantime for a partial cure. Lateral sphincterotomy is the Gold Standard for curing this condition.
Combination of medical therapies may offer up to 98% cure rates.

=== Surgery ===

Surgical procedures are generally reserved for people with anal fissures who have tried medical therapy for at least one to three months and have not healed. It is not the first option in treatment.

The main concern with surgery is the development of anal incontinence. Anal incontinence can include the inability to control gas, mild fecal soiling, or loss of solid stool. Some degree of incontinence can occur in up to 45 percent of patients in the immediate surgical recovery period. However, incontinence is rarely permanent and is usually mild. The risk should be discussed with one&#x27;s surgeon.

Surgical treatment, under general anaesthesia, is either anal stretch (Lord&#x27;s operation) or lateral sphincterotomy where the internal anal sphincter muscle is incised. Both operations aim to decrease sphincter spasming and thereby restore normal blood supply to the anal mucosa. Surgical operations involve a general or regional anaesthesia. Anal stretch is also associated with anal incontinence in a small proportion of cases and thus sphincterotomy is the operation of choice.

==== Lateral internal sphincterotomy ====

Lateral internal sphincterotomy (LIS) is the surgical procedure of choice for anal fissures due to its simplicity and its high success rate (~95%). In this procedure the internal anal sphincter is partially divided in order to reduce spasming and thus improve the blood supply to the perianal area.

This improvement in the blood supply helps to heal the fissure, and the weakening of the sphincter is also believed to reduce the potential for recurrence. The procedure is generally performed as a day surgery after the patient is given general anesthesia. The pain from the sphincterotomy is usually mild and is often less than the pain of the fissure itself. Patients often return to normal activity within one week.

LIS does, however, have a number of potential side effects including problems with incision site healing and incontinence to flatus and faeces (some surveys of surgical results suggest incontinence rates of up to 36%).

Though lateral internal sphincterotomy (LIS) is considered safe on a short-term basis, there are concerns about its long-term safety. Pankaj Garg et al. published a systematic review and meta-analysis in which they analyzed the long-term continence disturbance two years after the LIS procedure. They found the incidence of long-term continence disturbance to be 14%, so caution and careful patient selection are needed before undergoing LIS.

==== Anal dilation ====

Anal dilation, or stretching of the anal canal (Lord&#x27;s operation), has fallen out of favour in recent years, primarily due to the unacceptably high incidence of fecal incontinence. In addition, anal stretching can increase the rate of flatus incontinence. The incidence of incontinence is thought to be due to a lack of standardization and that proper technique results in little chance that it will occur.

In the early 1990s, however, a repeatable method of anal dilation proved to be very effective and showed a very low incidence of side effects. Since then, at least one other controlled, randomized study has shown there to be little difference in healing rates and complications between controlled anal dilation and LIS, while another has again shown high success rates with anal dilation coupled with low incidence of side effects.

==== Fissurectomy ====

Fissurectomy involves excision of the skin on and around the anal fissure and excision of the sentinel pile if one is present. The surgical wound can be left open. New skin tissue grows and it heals.

== Epidemiology ==
The incidence of anal fissures is around 1 in 350 adults. They occur equally common in men and women and most often occur in adults aged 15 to 40.

== See also ==

* Anal fistula
* Hemorrhoid
* Pruritus ani

== References ==
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q484797" start="3" end="15" title="Anal fissure" label="anal fissure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465231" start="54" end="64" title="anal canal" label="anal canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q484797" start="109" end="122" title="anal bleeding" label="anal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="218" end="228" title="defecation" label="defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="379" end="394" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q574360" start="701" end="706" title="spasm" label="spasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601133" start="717" end="740" title="internal anal sphincter" label="internal anal sphincter"/>
<link wikidata="Q902010" start="871" end="885" title="coliform" label="fecal bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="925" end="937" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1117" end="1129" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33525" start="1171" end="1180" title="carcinoma" label="carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1218" end="1222" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q917447" start="1227" end="1253" title="inflammatory bowel disease" label="inflammatory bowel disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="1300" end="1330" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="1392" end="1400" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="1402" end="1408" title="herpes" label="herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="1410" end="1419" title="Chlamydia infection" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="1424" end="1445" title="human papilloma virus" label="human papilloma virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="1522" end="1530" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472" start="1532" end="1552" title="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Crohn&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="1554" end="1572" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q447295" start="2137" end="2148" title="Proctoscopy" label="proctoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618837" start="2225" end="2234" title="Retractor (medicine)" label="retractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q594341" start="2241" end="2267" title="digital rectal examination" label="digital rectal examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q178541" start="2400" end="2406" title="Medical glove" label="gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="2416" end="2435" title="Touch" label="tactile sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q840387" start="2448" end="2459" title="colonoscopy" label="colonoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q941169" start="2461" end="2474" title="sigmoidoscopy" label="sigmoidoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="2525" end="2535" title="hemorrhoid" label="hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="2556" end="2571" title="rectal diseases" label="rectal diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="2763" end="2775" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="2799" end="2812" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="2857" end="2871" title="stool softener" label="stool softener"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="3212" end="3222" title="hemorrhoid" label="hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="3361" end="3367" title="infant" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187359" start="3379" end="3385" title="diaper" label="diaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="3815" end="3828" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="3832" end="3856" title="calcium channel blockers" label="calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="3863" end="3872" title="diltiazem" label="diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="3891" end="3906" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532190" start="3961" end="3970" title="sitz bath" label="sitz bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221044" start="4185" end="4199" title="Glyceryl trinitrate (pharmacology)" label="nitroglycerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="4219" end="4243" title="calcium channel blockers" label="calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39111" start="4257" end="4267" title="nifedipine" label="nifedipine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422229" start="4314" end="4323" title="diltiazem" label="diltiazem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="4895" end="4910" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="5624" end="5641" title="anal incontinence" label="anal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166543" start="6004" end="6023" title="general anaesthesia" label="general anaesthesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6049" end="6070" title="Lord&amp;#x27;s operation" label="Lord&amp;#x27;s operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958696" start="6075" end="6097" title="Lateral internal sphincterotomy" label="lateral sphincterotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634645" start="6420" end="6434" title="sphincterotomy" label="sphincterotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="7352" end="7358" title="flatus" label="flatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="8082" end="8100" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8156" end="8175" title="fecal incontinence#Anal incontinence (flatus/gas incontinence)" label="flatus incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q484765" start="9172" end="9184" title="Anal fistula" label="Anal fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="9187" end="9197" title="Hemorrhoid" label="Hemorrhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633590" start="9200" end="9212" title="Pruritus ani" label="Pruritus ani"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490664" wikidata="Q1066345" url="?curid=490664" title="Bowman's capsule">
<text>Bowman&#x27;s capsule (or the Bowman capsule, capsula glomeruli, or glomerular capsule) is a cup-like sac at the beginning of the tubular component of a nephron in the mammalian kidney that performs the first step in the filtration of blood to form urine. A glomerulus is enclosed in the sac. Fluids from blood in the glomerulus are collected in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule.

==Structure==
Outside the capsule, there are two poles:
* The vascular pole is the side with the afferent arteriole and efferent arteriole.
* The tubular pole, is the side with the proximal convoluted tubule.

Inside the capsule, the layers are as follows, from outside to inside:
*&quot;Parietal layer&quot;—A single layer of simple squamous epithelium. Does not function in filtration.
*&quot;Bowman&#x27;s space (or &quot;urinary space&quot;, or &quot;capsular space&quot;)&quot;—Between the visceral and parietal layers, into which the filtrate enters after passing through the filtration slits.
*&quot;Visceral layer&quot;—Lies just above the thickened glomerular basement membrane and is made of podocytes. Beneath the visceral layer lie the glomerular capillaries.
*&quot;Filtration barrier&quot;—The filtration barrier is composed of the fenestrated endothelium of the glomerular capillaries, the fused basal lamina of the endothelial cells and podocytes, and the filtration slits of the podocytes. The barrier permits the passage of water, ions, and small molecules from the bloodstream into the Bowman&#x27;s space. The barrier prevents the passage of large and/or negatively charged proteins (such as albumin). The basal lamina of the filtration barrier is composed of three layers. The first layer is the lamina rara externa, adjacent to the podocyte processes. The second layer is the lamina rara interna, adjacent to the endothelial cells. The final layer is the lamina densa which is a darker central zone of the basal lamina. It consists of the meshwork of type IV collagen and laminin which act as a selective macromolecular filter.

==Function==

The process of filtration of the blood in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule is ultrafiltration, and the normal rate of filtration is 125 ml/min, equivalent to 80 times the daily blood volume. It is a major site for blood filtration (including glomerulus)

Any proteins under roughly 30 kilodaltons can pass freely through the membrane, although there is some extra hindrance for negatively charged molecules due to the negative charge of the basement membrane and the podocytes.

Any small molecules such as water, glucose, salt (NaCl), amino acids, and urea pass freely into Bowman&#x27;s space, but cells, platelets and large proteins do not.

As a result, the filtrate leaving the Bowman&#x27;s capsule is very similar to blood plasma (filtrate or glomerular filtrate is composed of blood plasma minus plasma protein i.e. it contains all the components of blood plasma except the proteins) in composition as it passes into the proximal convoluted tubule.

==Clinical significance==

Measuring the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is a diagnostic test of kidney function. A decreased GFR may be a sign of kidney failure.

A number of diseases can result in various problems within the glomerulus. Examples include acute proliferative (endocapillary) glomerulonephritis, mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis, mesangiocapillary (membranoproliferative) glomerulonephritis, acute crescentic glomerulonephritis, focal segmental glomerulonephritis, and diabetic glomerulosclerosis.

==History==
Bowman&#x27;s capsule is named after Sir William Bowman (1816–1892), a British surgeon and anatomist. However, thorough microscopical anatomy of kidney including the nephronic capsule was first described by a Ukrainian surgeon and anatomist from the Russian Empire, Prof. Alexander Schumlansky (1748–1795), in his 1782 doctoral thesis &quot;De structura renum&quot; (&quot;About Kidney Structure&quot;, in Latin); thus, much prior to Bowman.

Together with the glomerulus it is known as a renal corpuscle, or a Malpighian corpuscle, named after Marcello Malpighi (1628–1694), an Italian physician and biologist. This name is not used widely anymore, probably to avoid confusion with Malpighian bodies of the spleen.

==See also==
* Mesangium
* Blood–brain barrier
* List of distinct cell types in the adult human body

==Additional images==
==References==
==External links==
* Diagram at ircc.edu</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="0" end="21" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="30" end="44" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="Bowman capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="46" end="63" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="capsula glomeruli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="68" end="86" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="glomerular capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="130" end="147" title="Renal tubule" label="tubular component"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="153" end="160" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q113996097" start="168" end="184" title="mammalian kidney" label="mammalian kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q244772" start="221" end="231" title="filtration" label="filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="258" end="268" title="glomerulus (kidney)" label="glomerulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q251011" start="436" end="449" title="vascular pole" label="vascular pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713567" start="471" end="489" title="afferent arteriole" label="afferent arteriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635603" start="494" end="512" title="efferent arteriole" label="efferent arteriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q251011" start="520" end="532" title="tubular pole" label="tubular pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916078" start="555" end="581" title="proximal convoluted tubule" label="proximal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054269" start="701" end="727" title="simple squamous epithelium" label="simple squamous epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q138912" start="956" end="972" title="filtration slits" label="filtration slits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753456" start="1032" end="1060" title="glomerular basement membrane" label="glomerular basement membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q138912" start="1076" end="1084" title="podocyte" label="podocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="1122" end="1144" title="glomerular capillaries" label="glomerular capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880534" start="2110" end="2125" title="Ultrafiltration (renal)" label="ultrafiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="2142" end="2160" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="rate of filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="2274" end="2284" title="Glomerulus (kidney)" label="glomerulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="2317" end="2328" title="dalton (unit)" label="kilodaltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="2539" end="2544" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="2546" end="2553" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="2555" end="2559" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="2568" end="2578" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="2585" end="2589" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2632" end="2636" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="2639" end="2648" title="platelets" label="platelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="2659" end="2667" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="2756" end="2768" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916078" start="2961" end="2987" title="proximal convoluted tubule" label="proximal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="3031" end="3057" title="glomerular filtration rate" label="glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3069" end="3103" title="Renal physiology#Tests" label="diagnostic test of kidney function"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="3138" end="3152" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352869" start="3563" end="3581" title="Sir William Bowman" label="Sir William Bowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="3605" end="3612" title="Surgery" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="3617" end="3626" title="anatomist" label="anatomist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3798" end="3819" title=":ru:Шумлянский, Александр Михайлович" label="Alexander Schumlansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q251011" start="4015" end="4030" title="renal corpuscle" label="renal corpuscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="4059" end="4070" title="eponym" label="named after"/>
<link wikidata="Q232583" start="4071" end="4088" title="Marcello Malpighi" label="Marcello Malpighi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="4113" end="4122" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="4127" end="4136" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q626936" start="4209" end="4240" title="Splenic lymphoid nodules" label="Malpighian bodies of the spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="4258" end="4267" title="Mesangium" label="Mesangium"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="4270" end="4289" title="Blood–brain barrier" label="Blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662727" start="4292" end="4343" title="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body" label="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490665" wikidata="Q1563688" url="?curid=490665" title="HIDS">
<text>HIDS may refer to:

* Host-based intrusion detection system, in computing
* Hyper-IgD syndrome, in medicine

==See also==
* HID (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1563688" start="0" end="4" title="HIDS" label="HIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q917189" start="22" end="59" title="Host-based intrusion detection system" label="Host-based intrusion detection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043158" start="76" end="94" title="Hyper-IgD syndrome" label="Hyper-IgD syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q360156" start="124" end="144" title="HID (disambiguation)" label="HID (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490666" wikidata="Q79448" url="?curid=490666" title="Immunoglobulin G">
<text>Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is a type of antibody. Representing approximately 75% of serum antibodies in humans, IgG is the most common type of antibody found in blood circulation. IgG molecules are created and released by plasma B cells. Each IgG antibody has two paratopes.

== Function ==

Antibodies are major components of humoral immunity. IgG is the main type of antibody found in blood and extracellular fluid, allowing it to control infection of body tissues. By binding many kinds of pathogens such as viruses, bacteria, and fungi, IgG protects the body from infection.

It does this through several mechanisms:
* IgG-mediated binding of pathogens causes their immobilization and binding together via agglutination; IgG coating of pathogen surfaces (known as opsonization) allows their recognition and ingestion by phagocytic immune cells leading to the elimination of the pathogen itself;
* IgG activates the classical pathway of the complement system, a cascade of immune protein production that results in pathogen elimination;
* IgG also binds and neutralizes toxins;
* IgG also plays an important role in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and intracellular antibody-mediated proteolysis, in which it binds to TRIM21 (the receptor with greatest affinity to IgG in humans) in order to direct marked virions to the proteasome in the cytosol;
* IgG is also associated with type II and type III hypersensitivity reactions.

IgG antibodies are generated following class switching and maturation of the antibody response, thus they participate predominantly in the secondary immune response. 

IgG is secreted as a monomer that is small in size allowing it to easily diffuse into tissues. It is the only antibody isotype that has receptors to facilitate passage through the human placenta, thereby providing protection to the fetus &quot;in utero&quot;. Along with IgA secreted in the breast milk, residual IgG absorbed through the placenta provides the neonate with humoral immunity before its own immune system develops. Colostrum contains a high percentage of IgG, especially bovine colostrum. In individuals with prior immunity to a pathogen, IgG appears about 24–48 hours after antigenic stimulation.

Therefore, in the first six months of life, the newborn has the same antibodies as the mother and the child can defend itself against all the pathogens that the mother encountered in her life (even if only through vaccination) until these antibodies are degraded. This repertoire of immunoglobulins is crucial for the newborns who are very sensitive to infections, especially within the respiratory and digestive systems.

IgG are also involved in the regulation of allergic reactions. According to Finkelman, there are two pathways of systemic anaphylaxis: antigens can cause systemic anaphylaxis in mice through classic pathway by cross-linking IgE bound to the mast cell receptor FcεRI, stimulating the release of both histamine and platelet activating factor (PAF). In the alternative pathway, antigens form complexes with IgG, which then cross-link macrophage receptor FcγRIII and stimulates only PAF release.

IgG antibodies can prevent IgE mediated anaphylaxis by intercepting a specific antigen before it binds to mast cell–associated IgE. Consequently, IgG antibodies block systemic anaphylaxis induced by small quantities of antigen but can mediate systemic anaphylaxis induced by larger quantities.

== Structure ==

IgG antibodies are large globular proteins made of four peptide chains; two identical γ (gamma) heavy chains of about 50 kDa and two identical light chains of about 25 kDa. The resulting tetrameric quaternary structure, therefore, has a total molecular weight of about 150 kDa. The two heavy chains are linked to each other and to a light chain each by disulfide bonds. The resulting tetramer has two identical halves, which together form a Y-like shape. Each end of the fork contains an identical antigen binding site. The various regions and domains of a typical IgG are depicted in the figure &quot;Anatomy of an IgG&quot;. 

The Fc regions of IgGs bear a highly conserved N-glycosylation site at asparagine 297 in the constant region of the heavy chain. The N-glycans attached to this site are predominantly core-fucosylated biantennary structures of the complex type. In addition, small amounts of these N-glycans also bear bisecting GlcNAc and α-2,6-linked sialic acid residues. The N-glycan composition in IgG has been linked to several autoimmune, infectious and metabolic diseases.

== Subclasses ==

There are four IgG subclasses (IgG1, 2, 3, and 4) in humans, named in order of their abundance in serum (IgG1 being the most abundant).

Note: IgG affinity to Fc receptors on phagocytic cells is specific to individual species from which the antibody comes as well as the class. The structure of the hinge regions (region 6 in the diagram) contributes to the unique biological properties of each of the four IgG classes. Even though there is about 95% similarity between their Fc regions, the structure of the hinge regions is relatively different.

Given the opposing properties of the IgG subclasses (fixing and failing to fix complement; binding and failing to bind FcR), and the fact that the immune response to most antigens includes a mix of all four subclasses, it has been difficult to understand how IgG subclasses can work together to provide protective immunity. In 2013, the Temporal Model of human IgE and IgG function was proposed.&lt;ref name=&quot;10/16/2013&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; This model suggests that IgG3 (and IgE) appear early in a response. The IgG3, though of relatively low affinity, allows IgG-mediated defences to join IgM-mediated defences in clearing foreign antigens. Subsequently, higher affinity IgG1 and IgG2 are produced. The relative balance of these subclasses, in any immune complexes that form, helps determine the strength of the inflammatory processes that follow. Finally, if antigen persists, high affinity IgG4 is produced, which dampens down inflammation by helping to curtail FcR-mediated processes.

The relative ability of different IgG subclasses to fix complement may explain why some anti-donor antibody responses do harm a graft after organ transplantation.

In a mouse model of autoantibody mediated anemia using IgG isotype switch variants of an anti erythrocytes autoantibody, it was found that mouse IgG2a was superior to IgG1 in activating complement. Moreover, it was found that the IgG2a isotype was able to interact very efficiently with FcgammaR. As a result, 20 times higher doses of IgG1, in relationship to IgG2a autoantibodies, were required to induce autoantibody mediated pathology. Since mouse IgG1 and human IgG1 are not entirely similar in function, and the inference of human antibody function from mouse studies must be done with great care. However, both human and mouse antibodies have different abilities to fix complement and to bind to Fc receptors.

== Role in diagnosis ==

The measurement of immunoglobulin G can be a diagnostic tool for certain conditions, such as autoimmune hepatitis, if indicated by certain symptoms. Clinically, measured IgG antibody levels are generally considered to be indicative of an individual&#x27;s immune status to particular pathogens. A common example of this practice are titers drawn to demonstrate serologic immunity to measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR), hepatitis B virus, and varicella (chickenpox), among others.

Testing of IgG is not indicated for diagnosis of allergy, and there is no evidence that it has any relationship to food intolerances.

== See also ==
* Epitope
* IgG4-related disease

== References ==

== External links ==
* Janeway Immunobiology – The structure of a typical antibody (IgG)
* A booklet with everything you wanted to know about IgG subclasses</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="0" end="16" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="Immunoglobulin G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="18" end="21" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28" end="32" title="Antibody#Classes" label="type"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="36" end="44" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="80" end="85" title="blood plasma" label="serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="157" end="174" title="Circulatory system" label="blood circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="218" end="231" title="plasma B cell" label="plasma B cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q489135" start="260" end="268" title="paratope" label="paratope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="323" end="339" title="humoral immunity" label="humoral immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="383" end="388" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="393" end="412" title="extracellular fluid" label="extracellular fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="455" end="461" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="489" end="497" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="507" end="512" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="516" end="524" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="530" end="535" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q393294" start="706" end="719" title="agglutination (biology)" label="agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q420107" start="764" end="776" title="opsonization" label="opsonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="820" end="843" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytic immune cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128320" start="915" end="932" title="classical complement pathway" label="classical pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="940" end="957" title="complement system" label="complement system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="979" end="986" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003054" start="1057" end="1068" title="neutralisation (immunology)" label="neutralizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="1069" end="1074" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21418091" start="1115" end="1160" title="antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity" label="antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058341" start="1172" end="1215" title="intracellular antibody-mediated proteolysis" label="intracellular antibody-mediated proteolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031719" start="1238" end="1244" title="TRIM21" label="TRIM21"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878333" start="1341" end="1351" title="proteasome" label="proteasome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="1419" end="1435" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386881" start="1487" end="1502" title="class switching" label="class switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195394" start="1587" end="1612" title="Memory B cell" label="secondary immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="1689" end="1696" title="Diffusion" label="diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1726" end="1742" title="Antibody#Isotypes" label="antibody isotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q21101413" start="1752" end="1761" title="Neonatal Fc receptor" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="1802" end="1810" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="1848" end="1853" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="1860" end="1868" title="Uterus" label="in utero"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="1887" end="1890" title="IgA" label="IgA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="1907" end="1918" title="breast milk" label="breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q998" start="1976" end="1983" title="neonate" label="neonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="2021" end="2034" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="2045" end="2054" title="Colostrum" label="Colostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="2774" end="2785" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="2876" end="2879" title="IgE" label="IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="2893" end="2902" title="mast cell" label="mast cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="2951" end="2960" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420577" start="2965" end="2991" title="platelet activating factor" label="platelet activating factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="3083" end="3093" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="3364" end="3371" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="3730" end="3733" title="kDa" label="kDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="3810" end="3825" title="disulfide bonds" label="disulfide bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="3955" end="3962" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334151" start="4133" end="4148" title="N-linked glycosylation" label="N-glycosylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q417823" start="6979" end="6990" title="Fc receptor" label="Fc receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q786844" start="7112" end="7132" title="autoimmune hepatitis" label="autoimmune hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844" start="7437" end="7454" title="hepatitis B virus" label="hepatitis B virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128711" start="7651" end="7658" title="Epitope" label="Epitope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11039483" start="7661" end="7681" title="IgG4-related disease" label="IgG4-related disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490667" wikidata="Q1542839" url="?curid=490667" title="Glomerular filtration rate">
<text>Renal functions include maintaining an acid–base balance; regulating fluid balance; regulating sodium, potassium, and other electrolytes; clearing toxins; absorption of glucose, amino acids, and other small molecules; regulation of blood pressure; production of various hormones, such as erythropoietin; and activation of vitamin D.

The kidney has many functions, which a well-functioning kidney realizes by filtering blood in a process known as glomerular filtration. A major measure of kidney function is the glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
The glomerular filtration rate is the flow rate of filtered fluid through the kidney. The creatinine clearance rate (CCr or CrCl) is the volume of blood plasma that is cleared of creatinine per unit time and is a useful measure for approximating the GFR. Creatinine clearance exceeds GFR due to creatinine secretion, which can be blocked by cimetidine. Both GFR and CCr may be accurately calculated by comparative measurements of substances in the blood and urine, or estimated by formulas using just a blood test result (eGFR and eCCr) The results of these tests are used to assess the excretory function of the kidneys. Staging of chronic kidney disease is based on categories of GFR as well as albuminuria and cause of kidney disease.

Estimated GFR (eGFR) is recommended by clinical practice guidelines and regulatory agencies for routine evaluation of GFR whereas measured GFR (mGFR) is recommended as a confirmatory test when more accurate assessment is required.

==Definition==
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the volume of fluid filtered from the renal (kidney) glomerular capillaries into the Bowman&#x27;s capsule per unit time. Central to the physiologic maintenance of GFR is the differential basal tone of the afferent (input) and efferent (output) arterioles (see diagram). In other words, the filtration rate is dependent on the difference between the higher blood pressure created by vasoconstriction of the afferent arteriole versus the lower blood pressure created by lesser vasoconstriction of the efferent arteriole.

GFR is equal to the renal clearance rate when any solute is freely filtered and is neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the kidneys. The rate therefore measured is the quantity of the substance in the urine that originated from a calculable volume of blood. Relating this principle to the below equation – for the substance used, the product of urine concentration and urine flow equals the mass of substance excreted during the time that urine has been collected. This mass equals the mass filtered at the glomerulus as nothing is added or removed in the nephron. Dividing this mass by the plasma concentration gives the volume of plasma which the mass must have originally come from, and thus the volume of plasma fluid that has entered Bowman&#x27;s capsule within the aforementioned period of time. The GFR is typically recorded in units of &quot;volume per time&quot;, e.g., milliliters per minute (mL/min). Compare to filtration fraction.

:formula_1

There are several different techniques used to calculate or estimate the glomerular filtration rate (GFR or eGFR). The above formula only applies for GFR calculation when it is equal to the Clearance Rate.

==Measurement==

=== Creatinine ===
In clinical practice, however, creatinine clearance or estimates of creatinine clearance based on the serum creatinine level are used to measure GFR. Creatinine is produced naturally by the body (creatinine is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate, which is found in muscle). It is freely filtered by the glomerulus, but also actively secreted by the peritubular capillaries in very small amounts such that creatinine clearance overestimates actual GFR by 10–20%. This margin of error is acceptable, considering the ease with which creatinine clearance is measured. Unlike precise GFR measurements involving constant infusions of inulin, creatinine is already at a steady-state concentration in the blood, and so measuring creatinine clearance is much less cumbersome. However, creatinine estimates of GFR have their limitations. All of the estimating equations depend on a prediction of the 24-hour creatinine excretion rate, which is a function of muscle mass which is quite variable. One of the equations, the Cockcroft and Gault equation (see below) does not correct for race. With a higher muscle mass, serum creatinine will be higher for any given rate of clearance.

===Inulin===
The GFR can be determined by injecting inulin or the inulin-analog sinistrin into the blood stream. Since both inulin and sinistrin are neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the kidney after glomerular filtration, their rate of excretion is directly proportional to the rate of filtration of water and solutes across the glomerular filter. Incomplete urine collection is an important source of error in inulin clearance measurement.
Using inulin to measure kidney function is the &quot;gold standard&quot; for comparison with other means of estimating glomerular filtration rate. In 2018, the French pharmacovigilance agency withdrew inulin and sinistrin-based products from the market after some patients experienced hypersensitivity reactions including a fatal outcome. Consequently, the contrast agents Iohexol and Iothalamate have become more popular alternatives to determine GFR and are considered to show sufficient accuracy to determine GFR.

===Radioactive tracers===
GFR can be accurately measured using radioactive substances, in particular chromium-51 and technetium-99m. These come close to the ideal properties of inulin (undergoing only glomerular filtration) but can be measured more practically with only a few urine or blood samples. Measurement of renal or plasma clearance of 51Cr-EDTA is widely used in Europe but not available in the United States, where 99mTc-DTPA may be used instead. Renal and plasma clearance 51Cr-EDTA has been shown to be accurate in comparison with the gold standard, inulin. Use of 51Cr‑EDTA is considered a reference standard measure in UK guidance.

===Cystatin C===
Problems with creatinine (varying muscle mass, recent meat ingestion (much less dependent on the diet than urea), etc.) have led to evaluation of alternative agents for estimation of GFR. One of these is cystatin C, a ubiquitous protein secreted by most cells in the body (it is an inhibitor of cysteine protease).

Cystatin C is freely filtered at the glomerulus. After filtration, Cystatin C is reabsorbed and catabolized by the tubular epithelial cells, with only small amounts excreted in the urine. Cystatin C levels are therefore measured not in the urine, but in the bloodstream.

Equations have been developed linking estimated GFR to serum cystatin C levels. Most recently, some proposed equations have combined sex, age, adjusted cystatin C and creatinine. In 2022, the National Kidney Foundation (NKF) and American Society of Nephrology (ASN)&#x27;s Joint Task Force on Reassessing the Inclusion of Race in Diagnosing Kidney Diseases recommended national efforts to facilitate increased, routine, and timely use of cystatin C. They noted that cystatin C would be useful particularly to confirm estimated GFR in adults who are at risk for or have chronic kidney disease. They suggested that combining filtration markers (creatinine and cystatin C) is more accurate and would support better clinical decisions than either marker alone.

==Calculation==
INTEGRATION

More precisely, GFR is the fluid flow rate between the glomerular capillaries and the Bowman&#x27;s capsule:

: formula_2

Where:
* formula_3 is the GFR.
* formula_4 is called the &quot;filtration constant&quot; and is defined as the product of the hydraulic conductivity and the surface area of the glomerular capillaries.
* formula_5 is the hydrostatic pressure within the glomerular capillaries.
* formula_6 is the hydrostatic pressure within the Bowman&#x27;s capsule.
* formula_7 is the colloid osmotic pressure within the glomerular capillaries.
* and formula_8 is the colloid osmotic pressure within the Bowman&#x27;s capsule.

Because this constant is a measurement of hydraulic conductivity multiplied by the capillary surface area, it is almost impossible to measure physically. However, it can be determined experimentally. Methods of determining the GFR are listed in the above and below sections and it is clear from our equation that formula_4 can be found by dividing the experimental GFR by the net filtration pressure:

: formula_10

The hydrostatic pressure within the glomerular capillaries is determined by the pressure difference between the fluid entering immediately from the afferent arteriole and leaving through the efferent arteriole. The pressure difference is approximated by the product of the total resistance of the respective arteriole and the flux of blood through it:

: formula_11

: formula_12

Where:
* formula_13 is the afferent arteriole pressure.
* formula_5 is the hydrostatic pressure within the glomerular capillaries.
* formula_15 is the efferent arteriole pressure.
* formula_16 is the afferent arteriole resistance.
* formula_17 is the efferent arteriole resistance.
* formula_18 is the afferent arteriole flux.
* And, formula_19 is the efferent arteriole flux.

The pressure in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule and proximal tubule can be determined by the difference between the pressure in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule and the descending tubule:

: formula_20

Where:
* formula_21 is the pressure in the descending tubule.
* And, formula_22 is the resistance of the descending tubule.

Blood plasma has a good many proteins in it and they exert an inward directed force called the osmotic pressure on the water in hypotonic solutions across a membrane, i.e., in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule. Because plasma proteins are virtually incapable of escaping the glomerular capillaries, this oncotic pressure is defined, simply, by the ideal gas law:

: formula_23

Where:
* R is the universal gas constant
* T is the temperature.
* And, c is concentration in mol/L of plasma &quot;proteins&quot; (remember the solutes can freely diffuse through the glomerular capsule).

This value is almost always taken to be equal to zero because in a healthy nephron, there should be no proteins in the Bowman&#x27;s capsule.

==Clearance and filtration fraction==
=== Filtration fraction ===
The filtration fraction is the amount of plasma that is actually filtered through the kidney. This can be defined using the equation:
* FF is the filtration fraction
* GFR is the glomerular filtration rate
* RPF is the renal plasma flow
Normal human FF is 20%.

=== Renal clearance ===

* is the clearance of X (normally in units of mL/min).
* is the urine concentration of X.
* is the plasma concentration of X.
* is the urine flow rate.

== Estimation ==
In clinical practice, however, creatinine clearance or estimates of creatinine clearance based on the serum creatinine level are used to measure GFR. Creatinine is produced naturally by the body (creatinine is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate, which is found in muscle). It is freely filtered by the glomerulus, but also actively secreted by the peritubular capillaries in very small amounts such that creatinine clearance overestimates actual GFR by 10–20%. This margin of error is acceptable, considering the ease with which creatinine clearance is measured. Unlike precise GFR measurements involving constant infusions of inulin, creatinine is already at a steady-state concentration in the blood, and so measuring creatinine clearance is much less cumbersome. However, creatinine estimates of GFR have their limitations. All of the estimating equations depend on a prediction of the 24-hour creatinine excretion rate, which is a function of muscle mass which is quite variable. The Cockcroft-Gault and CKD-EPI 2021 equations (see below) do not correct for race. With a higher muscle mass, serum creatinine will be higher for any given rate of clearance.

A common mistake made when just looking at serum creatinine is the failure to account for muscle mass. Hence, an older woman with a serum creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL may actually have a moderately severe chronic kidney disease, whereas a young muscular male can have a normal level of renal function at this serum creatinine level. Creatinine-based equations should be used with caution in cachectic patients and patients with cirrhosis. They often have very low muscle mass and a much lower creatinine excretion rate than predicted by the equations below, such that a cirrhotic patient with a serum creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL may have a moderately severe degree of chronic kidney disease.

Estimated GFR (eGFR) is now recommended by clinical practice guidelines and regulatory agencies for routine evaluation of GFR whereas measured GFR (mGFR) is recommended as a confirmatory test when more accurate assessment is required.

=== Creatinine clearance CCr ===
One method of determining GFR from creatinine is to collect urine (usually for 24 h) to determine the amount of creatinine that was removed from the blood over a given time interval. If one removes 1440 mg in 24 h, this is equivalent to removing 1 mg/min. If the blood concentration is 0.01 mg/mL (1 mg/dL), then one can say that 100 mL/min of blood is being &quot;cleared&quot; of creatinine, since, to get 1 mg of creatinine, 100 mL of blood containing 0.01 mg/mL would need to have been cleared.

Creatinine clearance (CCr) is calculated from the creatinine concentration in the collected urine sample (UCr), urine flow rate (V&quot;dt&quot;), and the plasma concentration (PCr). Since the product of urine concentration and urine flow rate yields creatinine excretion rate, which is the rate of removal from the blood, creatinine clearance is calculated as removal rate per min (UCr×V&quot;dt&quot;) divided by the plasma creatinine concentration. This is commonly represented mathematically as

:formula_24

Example: A person has a plasma creatinine concentration of 0.01 mg/mL and in 1 hour produces 60 mL of urine with a creatinine concentration of 1.25 mg/mL.
:formula_25

The common procedure involves undertaking a 24-hour urine collection, from empty-bladder one morning to the contents of the bladder the following morning, with a comparative blood test then taken. The urinary flow rate is still calculated per minute, hence:
:formula_26

To allow comparison of results between people of different sizes, the CCr is often corrected for the body surface area (BSA) and expressed compared to the average sized man as mL/min/1.73 m2. While most adults have a BSA that approaches 1.7 m2 (1.6 m2 to 1.9 m2), extremely obese or slim patients should have their CCr corrected for their &quot;actual&quot; BSA.

:formula_27
:BSA can be calculated on the basis of weight and height.

Twenty-four-hour urine collection to assess creatinine clearance is no longer widely performed, due to difficulty in assuring complete specimen collection. To assess the adequacy of a complete collection, one always calculates the amount of creatinine excreted over a 24-hour period. This amount varies with muscle mass and is higher in young people/old, and in men/women. An unexpectedly low or high 24-hour creatinine excretion rate voids the test. Nevertheless, in cases where estimates of creatinine clearance from serum creatinine are unreliable, creatinine clearance remains a useful test. These cases include &quot;estimation of GFR in individuals with variation in dietary intake (vegetarian diet, creatine supplements) or muscle mass (amputation, malnutrition, muscle wasting), since these factors are not specifically taken into account in prediction equations.&quot;

A number of formulae have been devised to estimate GFR or Ccr values on the basis of serum creatinine levels. Where not otherwise stated serum creatinine is assumed to be stated in mg/dL, not μmol/L—divide by 88.4 to convert from μmol/Lto mg/dL.

=== Cockcroft–Gault formula ===
A commonly used surrogate marker for the estimation of creatinine clearance is the Cockcroft–Gault (CG) formula, which in turn estimates GFR in ml/min: It is named after the scientists, the asthmologist (b. 1946) and the nephrologist (1925–2003), who first published the formula in 1976, and it employs serum creatinine measurements and a patient&#x27;s weight to predict the creatinine clearance.
The formula, as originally published, is:
:formula_28
:This formula expects weight to be measured in kilograms and creatinine to be measured in mg/dL, as is standard in the US. The resulting value is multiplied by a constant of 0.85 if the patient is female. This formula is useful because the calculations are simple and can often be performed without the aid of a calculator.

When serum creatinine is measured in μmol/L:
:formula_29
:Where &quot;Constant&quot; is for men and for women.

One interesting feature of the Cockcroft and Gault equation is that it shows how dependent the estimation of CCr is based on age. The age term is (140 – age). This means that a 20-year-old person (140 – 20 = 120) will have twice the creatinine clearance as an 80-year-old (140 – 80 = 60) for the same level of serum creatinine. The C-G equation assumes that a woman will have a 15% lower creatinine clearance than a man at the same level of serum creatinine.

===Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) formula===
Another formula for calculating the GFR is the one developed by the &quot;Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study Group&quot;. Most laboratories in Australia, and the United Kingdom now calculate and report the estimated GFR along with creatinine measurements and this forms the basis of diagnosis of chronic kidney disease. The adoption of the automatic reporting of MDRD-eGFR has been widely criticised.

The most commonly used formula is the &quot;4-variable MDRD&quot;, which estimates GFR using four variables: serum creatinine, age, ethnicity, and gender. The original MDRD used six variables with the additional variables being the blood urea nitrogen and albumin levels. The equations have been validated in patients with chronic kidney disease; however, both versions underestimate the GFR in healthy patients with GFRs over 60 mL/min. The equations have not been validated in acute renal failure.

For creatinine in μmol/L:
:formula_30

For creatinine in mg/dL:
:formula_31
:Creatinine levels in μmol/L can be converted to mg/dL by dividing them by 88.4. The 32788 number above is equal to 186×88.41.154.

A more elaborate version of the MDRD equation also includes serum albumin and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels:
:formula_32
:where the creatinine and blood urea nitrogen concentrations are both in mg/dL. The albumin concentration is in g/dL.

These MDRD equations are to be used only if the laboratory has NOT calibrated its serum creatinine measurements to isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS). When IDMS-calibrated serum creatinine is used (which is about 6% lower), the above equations should be multiplied by 175/186 or by 0.94086.

Since these formulae do not adjust for body size, results are given in units of mL/min per 1.73 m2, 1.73 m2 being the estimated body surface area of an adult with a mass of 63 kg and a height of 1.7 m.

===CKD-EPI formula===
The CKD-EPI (Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration) formula was first published in May 2009. It was developed in an effort to create a formula more accurate than the MDRD formula, especially when actual GFR is greater than 60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. This is the formula currently recommended by NICE in the UK.

Researchers pooled data from multiple studies to develop and validate this new equation. They used 10 studies that included 8254 participants, randomly using 2/3 of the data sets for development and the other 1/3 for internal validation. Sixteen additional studies, which included 3896 participants, were used for external validation.

The CKD-EPI equation performed better than the MDRD (Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study) equation, especially at higher GFR, with less bias and greater accuracy. When looking at NHANES (National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey) data, the median estimated GFR was 94.5 mL/min per 1.73 m2 vs. 85.0 mL/min per 1.73 m2, and the prevalence of chronic kidney disease was 11.5% versus 13.1%. Despite its overall superiority to the MDRD equation, the CKD-EPI equations performed poorly in certain populations, including black women, the elderly and the obese, and was less popular among clinicians than the MDRD estimate.

The 2009 CKD-EPI equation is:

:formula_33

where SCr is serum creatinine (mg/dL), k is 0.7 for females and 0.9 for males, a is −0.329 for females and −0.411 for males, min indicates the minimum of SCr/k or 1, and max indicates the maximum of SCr/k or 1.

As separate equations for different populations:
For creatinine (IDMS calibrated) in mg/dL:
;Male, not black
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.9
:: formula_34
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.9
:: formula_35

;Female, not black
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.7
:: formula_36
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.7
:: formula_37

;Black male
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.9
:: formula_38
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.9
:: formula_39

;Black female
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.7
:: formula_40
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.7
:: formula_41

This formula was developed by Levey et al.

The 2009 CKD-EPI formula was suggested to improve cardiovascular risk prediction over the MDRD Study formula in a middle-age population.

The 2021 CKD-EPI formula does not include a race coefficient (see discussion below).
The 2021 CKD-EPI equation is:

:formula_42

where SCr is serum creatinine (mg/dL), k is 0.7 for females and 0.9 for males, a is −0.241 for females and −0.302 for males, min indicates the minimum of SCr/k or 1, and max indicates the maximum of SCr/k or 1.

As separate equations for different populations:
For creatinine (IDMS calibrated) in mg/dL:
;Male
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.9
:: formula_43
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.9
:: formula_44

;Female
: If serum creatinine (Scr) ≤ 0.7
:: formula_45
: If serum creatinine (Scr) &gt; 0.7
:: formula_46

===Mayo Quadratic formula===
Another estimation tool to calculate GFR is the Mayo Quadratic formula. This formula was developed by Rule et al., in an attempt to better estimate GFR in patients with preserved kidney function. It is well recognized that the MDRD formula tends to underestimate GFR in patients with preserved kidney function. Studies in 2008 found that the Mayo Clinic Quadratic Equation compared moderately well with radionuclide GFR, but had inferior bias and accuracy than the MDRD equation in a clinical setting.

The equation is:
:formula_47

If Serum Creatinine &lt; 0.8 mg/dL, use 0.8 mg/dL for Serum Creatinine.

===Schwartz formula===
In children, the Schwartz formula is used. This employs the serum creatinine (mg/dL), the child&#x27;s height (cm) and a constant to estimate the glomerular filtration rate:
:formula_48
:Where &quot;k&quot; is a constant that depends on muscle mass, which itself varies with a child&#x27;s age:
::In first year of life, for pre-term babies &quot;k&quot;=0.33 and for full-term infants &quot;k&quot;=0.45
::For infants and children of age 1 to 12 years, &quot;k&quot;=0.55.

The method of selection of the constant &quot;k&quot; has been questioned as being dependent upon the gold-standard of renal function used (i.e. inulin clearance, creatinine clearance, etc.) and also may be dependent upon the urinary flow rate at the time of measurement.

In 2009 the formula was updated to use standardized serum creatinine (recommend &quot;k&quot;=0.413) and additional formulas that allow improved precision were derived if serum &quot;cystatin C&quot; is measured in addition to serum creatinine.

===IDMS standardization effort===
One problem with any creatinine-based equation for GFR is that the methods used to assay creatinine in the blood differ widely in their susceptibility to non-specific chromogens, which cause the creatinine value to be overestimated. In particular, the MDRD equation was derived using serum creatinine measurements that had this problem. The NKDEP program in the United States has attempted to solve this problem by trying to get all laboratories to calibrate their measures of creatinine to a &quot;gold standard&quot;, which in this case is isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS). In late 2009 not all labs in the U.S. had changed over to the new system. There are two forms of the MDRD equation that are available, depending on whether or not creatinine was measured by an IDMS-calibrated assay. The CKD-EPI equation is designed to be used with IDMS-calibrated serum creatinine values only.

==Normal ranges==
The normal range of GFR, adjusted for body surface area, is 100–130 average 125 mL/min/1.73m2 in men and 90–120 ml/min/1.73m2 in women younger than the age of 40. In children, GFR measured by inulin clearance is 110 mL/min/1.73 m2 until 2 years of age in both sexes, and then it progressively decreases. After age 40, GFR decreases progressively with age, by 0.4–1.2 mL/min per year.

==Decreased GFR==
A decreased renal function can be caused by many types of kidney disease. Upon presentation of decreased renal function, it is recommended to perform a history and physical examination, as well as performing a renal ultrasound and a urinalysis. The most relevant items in the history are medications, edema, nocturia, gross hematuria, family history of kidney disease, diabetes and polyuria. The most important items in a physical examination are signs of vasculitis, lupus erythematosus, diabetes, endocarditis and hypertension.

A urinalysis is helpful even when not showing any pathology, as this finding suggests an extrarenal etiology. Proteinuria and/or urinary sediment usually indicates the presence of glomerular disease. Hematuria may be caused by glomerular disease or by a disease along the urinary tract.

The most relevant assessments in a renal ultrasound are renal sizes, echogenicity and any signs of hydronephrosis. Renal enlargement usually indicates diabetic nephropathy, focal segmental glomerular sclerosis or myeloma. Renal atrophy suggests longstanding chronic renal disease.

===Chronic kidney disease stages===

Risk factors for kidney disease include diabetes, high blood pressure, family history, older age, ethnic group and smoking.
For most patients, a GFR over 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 is adequate. But significant decline of the GFR from a previous test result can be an early indicator of kidney disease requiring medical intervention. The sooner kidney dysfunction is diagnosed and treated the greater odds of preserving remaining nephrons, and preventing the need for dialysis.
The severity of chronic kidney disease (CKD) is described by six stages; the most severe three are defined by the MDRD-eGFR value, and first three also depend on whether there is other evidence of kidney disease (e.g., proteinuria):
:0) Normal kidney function – GFR above 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 and no proteinuria
:1) CKD1 – GFR above 90 mL/min/1.73 m2 with evidence of kidney damage
:2) CKD2 (mild) – GFR of 60 to 89 mL/min/1.73 m2 with evidence of kidney damage
:3) CKD3 (moderate) – GFR of 30 to 59 mL/min/1.73 m2
:4) CKD4 (severe) – GFR of 15 to 29 mL/min/1.73 m2
:5) CKD5 kidney failure – GFR less than 15 mL/min/1.73 m2 Some people add CKD5D for those stage 5 patients requiring dialysis; many patients in CKD5 are not yet on dialysis.

Note: others add a &quot;T&quot; to patients who have had a transplant regardless of stage.

Not all clinicians agree with the above classification, suggesting that it may mislabel patients with mildly reduced kidney function, especially the elderly, as having a disease. A conference was held in 2009 regarding these controversies by Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) on CKD: Definition, Classification and Prognosis, gathering data on CKD prognosis to refine the definition and staging of CKD.

==Removal of race from eGFR Calculations==
In 2017, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center dropped the Black race coefficient in their estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) report, resulting in a steady increase in the percentage of Black patients listed before starting dialysis. Hoenig et al said on the topic &quot;Race is a social construct that cannot be measured, can be used imprecisely and may contribute to disparities in kidney transplant access for Black patients.&quot;

In 2020, Vyas et al published an article in &quot;The New England Journal of Medicine&quot; criticizing the use of race in eGFR calculations which resulted in higher reported eGFR values for black-identifying patients. They noted that &quot;The algorithm developers justified these outcomes with evidence of higher average serum creatinine concentrations among black people than among white people. Explanations that have been given for this finding include the notion that black people release more creatinine into their blood at baseline, in part because they are reportedly more muscular. Analyses have cast doubt on this claim, but the &quot;race-corrected&quot; eGFR remains the standard.&quot; They concluded saying &quot;As long as uncertainty persists about the cause of racial differences in serum creatinine levels, we should favor practices that may alleviate health inequities over those that may exacerbate them.&quot;

In February 2022, the National Kidney Foundation (NKF) and American Society of Nephrology (ASN)&#x27;s Joint Task Force on Reassessing the Inclusion of Race in Diagnosing Kidney Diseases recommended use of the 2021 CKD-EPI equation which discontinues using a race modifier.

In July 2022 the OPTN Board eliminated race-based calculations for transplant candidate listing across all transplant hospitals in the US.

==See also==
* Clearance
* Dialysis
* Filtration fraction
* Kt/V
* Pharmacokinetics
* Renal clearance ratio
* Renal failure
* Standardized Kt/V
* Tubuloglomerular feedback
* Urea reduction ratio

==References==
==External links==

===Online calculators===
* Online GFR Calculator
* Schwartz formula for estimating pediatric renal function
* Creatinine clearance calculator (Cockcroft–Gault Equation) by MDCalc
* MDRD GFR Equation
* GFR calculator using Cystatin C

===Reference links===
* National Kidney Disease Education Program website. Includes professional references and GFR calculators
* eGFR at Lab Tests Online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="0" end="15" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="Renal functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275718" start="39" end="56" title="acid–base balance" label="acid–base balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q728393" start="69" end="82" title="fluid balance" label="fluid balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="95" end="101" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="103" end="112" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="124" end="135" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="138" end="146" title="clearance (medicine)" label="clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="147" end="152" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="169" end="176" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="178" end="188" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="232" end="246" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="270" end="277" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="288" end="302" title="erythropoietin" label="erythropoietin"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="322" end="331" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="338" end="344" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="447" end="468" title="glomerular filtration" label="glomerular filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q108377937" start="489" end="504" title="kidney function" label="kidney function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="512" end="538" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="540" end="543" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="GFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="636" end="661" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="creatinine clearance rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="663" end="666" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="CCr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="670" end="674" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="CrCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="693" end="705" title="blood plasma" label="blood plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="725" end="735" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409492" start="887" end="897" title="cimetidine" label="cimetidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="1068" end="1072" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="eGFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542839" start="1077" end="1081" title="Glomerular filtration rate" label="eCCr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1168" end="1175" title="Chronic kidney disease#Stages" label="Staging"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="1179" end="1201" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q974792" start="1243" end="1254" title="albuminuria" label="albuminuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="1268" end="1282" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="1606" end="1611" title="kidney" label="renal"/>
<link wikidata="Q909882" start="1621" end="1631" title="Glomerulus (kidney)" label="glomerular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066345" start="1653" end="1674" title="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule" label="Bowman&amp;#x27;s capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="2109" end="2129" title="Clearance rate (biochemistry)" label="renal clearance rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449277" start="3011" end="3030" title="filtration fraction" label="filtration fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="3484" end="3494" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984607" start="3521" end="3539" title="creatine phosphate" label="creatine phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3627" end="3666" title="Renal physiology#Secretion" label="secreted by the peritubular capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="4518" end="4524" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289396" start="4546" end="4555" title="sinistrin" label="sinistrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108377937" start="4933" end="4948" title="kidney function" label="kidney function"/>
<link wikidata="Q514654" start="4956" end="4981" title="Gold standard (test)" label="&amp;quot;gold standard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5028" end="5054" title="Renal function#Glomerular filtration rate" label="glomerular filtration rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550789" start="5076" end="5093" title="pharmacovigilance" label="pharmacovigilance"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="5110" end="5116" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289396" start="5121" end="5130" title="sinistrin" label="sinistrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849688" start="5266" end="5280" title="contrast agent" label="contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q410683" start="5282" end="5289" title="Iohexol" label="Iohexol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064129" start="5294" end="5305" title="Iothalamate" label="Iothalamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q221276" start="5528" end="5539" title="chromium-51" label="chromium-51"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373354" start="5544" end="5558" title="technetium-99m" label="technetium-99m"/>
<link wikidata="Q408032" start="5777" end="5781" title="EDTA" label="EDTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q416487" start="5859" end="5863" title="DTPA" label="DTPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q413243" start="6296" end="6306" title="cystatin C" label="cystatin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783041" start="7716" end="7738" title="hydraulic conductivity" label="hydraulic conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="7810" end="7830" title="hydrostatic pressure" label="hydrostatic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16670987" start="7959" end="7983" title="Oncotic pressure" label="colloid osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783041" start="8144" end="8166" title="hydraulic conductivity" label="hydraulic conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713567" start="8666" end="8684" title="afferent arteriole" label="afferent arteriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635603" start="8709" end="8727" title="efferent arteriole" label="efferent arteriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="8974" end="8994" title="hydrostatic pressure" label="hydrostatic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16670987" start="9687" end="9703" title="Oncotic pressure" label="osmotic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="9980" end="10002" title="universal gas constant" label="universal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="10243" end="10250" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449277" start="10523" end="10542" title="filtration fraction" label="filtration fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129139" start="10596" end="10613" title="renal blood flow" label="renal plasma flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="11030" end="11040" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984607" start="11067" end="11085" title="creatine phosphate" label="creatine phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11173" end="11212" title="Renal physiology#Secretion" label="secreted by the peritubular capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="12202" end="12224" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003455" start="12388" end="12397" title="Cachexia" label="cachectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="12425" end="12434" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500975" start="13567" end="13582" title="urine flow rate" label="urine flow rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796666" start="14508" end="14525" title="body surface area" label="body surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q108377937" start="16055" end="16075" title="creatinine clearance" label="creatinine clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="16309" end="16319" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="16499" end="16507" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="16764" end="16774" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17713" end="17735" title="Chronic kidney disease#Stages" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q764079" start="18051" end="18070" title="blood urea nitrogen" label="blood urea nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q169219" start="18075" end="18082" title="albumin" label="albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721976" start="18588" end="18601" title="Human serum albumin" label="serum albumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q764079" start="18606" end="18625" title="blood urea nitrogen" label="blood urea nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="22946" end="22956" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707695" start="24449" end="24483" title="Isotope dilution" label="isotope dilution mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796666" start="24860" end="24877" title="body surface area" label="body surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054718" start="25283" end="25297" title="kidney disease" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="25377" end="25384" title="medical history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="25389" end="25409" title="physical examination" label="physical examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804227" start="25435" end="25451" title="renal ultrasound" label="renal ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q842424" start="25458" end="25468" title="urinalysis" label="urinalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="25513" end="25524" title="pharmaceutical drug" label="medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="25526" end="25531" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426443" start="25533" end="25541" title="nocturia" label="nocturia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="25549" end="25558" title="hematuria" label="hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="25560" end="25574" title="family history" label="family history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="25594" end="25602" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124286" start="25607" end="25615" title="polyuria" label="polyuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q644318" start="25681" end="25691" title="vasculitis" label="vasculitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188297" start="25693" end="25712" title="lupus erythematosus" label="lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="25714" end="25722" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="25724" end="25736" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="25741" end="25753" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q570197" start="25866" end="25877" title="Proteinuria" label="Proteinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q245639" start="25885" end="25901" title="urinary sediment" label="urinary sediment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25936" end="25954" title="glomerular disease" label="glomerular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q373597" start="25956" end="25965" title="Hematuria" label="Hematuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181100" start="26028" end="26041" title="urinary tract" label="urinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q48804227" start="26079" end="26095" title="renal ultrasound" label="renal ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501532" start="26113" end="26125" title="echogenicity" label="echogenicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q730877" start="26143" end="26157" title="hydronephrosis" label="hydronephrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435223" start="26217" end="26253" title="focal segmental glomerular sclerosis" label="focal segmental glomerular sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="26257" end="26264" title="myeloma" label="myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26835" end="26869" title="chronic kidney disease#Stages" label="severity of chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q570197" start="27050" end="27061" title="proteinuria" label="proteinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q582728" start="28619" end="28654" title="The New England Journal of Medicine" label="The New England Journal of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974671" start="29794" end="29798" title="National Organ Transplant Act of 1984" label="OPTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="29844" end="29854" title="Organ transplantation" label="transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="29932" end="29941" title="Clearance (medicine)" label="Clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="29944" end="29952" title="Kidney dialysis" label="Dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449277" start="29955" end="29974" title="Filtration fraction" label="Filtration fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q29403" start="29977" end="29981" title="Kt/V" label="Kt/V"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="29984" end="30000" title="Pharmacokinetics" label="Pharmacokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436737" start="30003" end="30024" title="Renal clearance ratio" label="Renal clearance ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="30027" end="30040" title="Renal failure" label="Renal failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598396" start="30043" end="30060" title="Standardized Kt/V" label="Standardized Kt/V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742013" start="30063" end="30088" title="Tubuloglomerular feedback" label="Tubuloglomerular feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q935336" start="30091" end="30111" title="Urea reduction ratio" label="Urea reduction ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782815" start="30320" end="30326" title="MDCalc" label="MDCalc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490668" wikidata="Q79453" url="?curid=490668" title="Immunoglobulin A">
<text>Immunoglobulin A (Ig A, also referred to as sIgA in its secretory form) is an antibody that plays a role in the immune function of mucous membranes. The amount of IgA produced in association with mucosal membranes is greater than all other types of antibody combined. In absolute terms, between three and five grams are secreted into the intestinal lumen each day. This represents up to 15% of total immunoglobulins produced throughout the body.

IgA has two subclasses (IgA1 and IgA2) and can be produced as a monomeric as well as a dimeric form. The IgA dimeric form is the most prevalent and, when it has bound the Secretory component, is also called &quot;secretory IgA&quot; (sIgA). sIgA is the main immunoglobulin found in mucous secretions, including tears, saliva, sweat, colostrum and secretions from the genitourinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, prostate and respiratory epithelium. It is also found in small amounts in blood. The secretory component of sIgA protects the immunoglobulin from being degraded by proteolytic enzymes; thus, sIgA can survive in the harsh gastrointestinal tract environment and provide protection against microbes that multiply in body secretions. sIgA can also inhibit inflammatory effects of other immunoglobulins. IgA is a poor activator of the complement system, and opsonizes only weakly.

==Forms==

===IgA1 vs. IgA2===
IgA exists in two isotypes, IgA1 and IgA2. They are both heavily glycosylated proteins. While IgA1 predominates in serum (~80%), IgA2 percentages are higher in secretions than in serum (~35% in secretions); the ratio of IgA1 and IgA2 secreting cells varies in the different lymphoid tissues of the human body:
* IgA1 is the predominant IgA subclass found in serum. Most lymphoid tissues have a predominance of IgA1-producing cells.
* In IgA2, the heavy and light chains are not linked with disulfide, but with non-covalent bonds. In secretory lymphoid tissues (e.g., gut-associated lymphoid tissue, or GALT), the share of IgA2 production is larger than in the non-secretory lymphoid organs (e.g. spleen, peripheral lymph nodes).
Both IgA1 and IgA2 have been found in external secretions like colostrum, maternal milk, tears and saliva, where IgA2 is more prominent than in the blood.
Polysaccharide antigens tend to induce more IgA2 than protein antigens.

Both IgA1 and IgA2 can be in membrane-bound form. (&quot;see B-cell receptor&quot;)

The heavy chain of IgA1, in contrast to IgA2, features an extended hinge region. This is thought to allow IgA1 to adapt more effectively to varying epitope spacings on multivalent antigens, while also presenting less resistance to bacterial proteases.

===Serum vs. secretory IgA===
It is also possible to distinguish forms of IgA based upon their location – serum IgA vs. secretory IgA. In serum IgA is predominantly monomeric with a minor population of IgA polymers (dimers in healthy individuals).

IgA has the unique ability to be secreted by B cells either as a monomer or as a covalently-linked polymer of multiple IgA subunits. Polymers of 2–4 IgA monomers, but most commonly 2, are covalently linked to one molecule of the J chain (joining chain) inside the B cell prior to secretion as a J chain-coupled polymeric IgA molecule. The J chain is a polypeptide with a backbone molecular mass of 15 kDa but typically ~18 kDa when glycosylated, rich with cysteine and structurally completely different from other immunoglobulin chains. As such, the molecular weight of a J chain-coupled dimer of IgA is ~340 kDa.

The oligomeric forms of IgA in the external (mucosal) secretions also contain a polypeptide of a much larger molecular mass (70 kDa) called the secretory component that is produced by epithelial cells. This molecule originates from the poly-Ig receptor (130 kDa) that is responsible for the uptake and transcellular transport of J chain-containing polymeric (but not monomeric, which is devoid of J chain) IgA across the epithelial cells and into secretions such as tears, saliva, sweat and gut fluid.

==Physiology==

=== Serum IgA ===
In the blood, IgA interacts with an Fc receptor called FcαRI (or CD89), which is expressed on immune effector cells, to initiate inflammatory reactions. Ligation of FcαRI by IgA containing immune complexes causes antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), degranulation of eosinophils and basophils, phagocytosis by monocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils, and triggering of respiratory burst activity by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Unlike IgM and IgG, which activate complement through the classical pathway, IgA can activate complement via the alternative and lectin pathways.

=== Secretory IgA ===
The high prevalence of IgA in mucosal areas is a result of a cooperation between plasma cells that produce polymeric IgA (pIgA), and mucosal epithelial cells that express polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR). Polymeric IgA (mainly the secretory dimer) is produced by plasma cells in the lamina propria adjacent to mucosal surfaces. It binds to the pIgR on the basolateral surface of epithelial cells, and is taken up into the cell via endocytosis. The receptor-IgA complex passes through the cellular compartments before being secreted on the luminal surface of the epithelial cells, still attached to the receptor. Proteolysis of the receptor occurs, and the dimeric IgA molecule, along with a portion of the receptor known as the secretory component (SC), is free to diffuse throughout the lumen, with dimeric IgA and SC together forming the so-called secretory IgA (sIgA) In the gut, IgA can bind to the mucus layer covering the epithelial cells. In this way, a barrier capable of neutralizing threats before they reach the epithelial cells is formed.

Secretory IgA levels fluctuate diurnally, with the highest levels found in the small intestine and feces around ZT6, the middle of the light period. The regulation of IgA secretion is related to the microbiota, and IgA is known to control specific members of oscillating microbes through direct interactions. However, the underlying cause of the rhythmic secretion of IgA is not completely understood and may differ from one region of the body to another.

Production of sIgA against specific antigens depends on sampling of M cells and underlying dendritic cells, T cell activation, and B cell class switching in GALT, mesenteric lymph nodes, and isolated lymphoid follicles in the small intestine.

sIgA primarily acts by blockading epithelial receptors (e.g. by binding their ligands on pathogens), by sterically hindering attachment to epithelial cells, and by immune exclusion. Immune exclusion is a process of agglutinating polyvalent antigens or pathogens by crosslinking them with antibody, trapping them in the mucus layer, and/or clearing them peristaltically. The oligosaccharide chains of the component of IgA can associate with the mucus layer that sits atop epithelial cells. Since sIgA is a poor opsonin and activator of complement, simply binding a pathogen isn&#x27;t necessarily enough to contain it—specific epitopes may have to be bound to sterically hinder access to the epithelium.

Clearance of IgA is mediated at least in part by asialoglycoprotein receptors, which recognizes galactose-terminating IgA N-glycans.

==Pathology==

===Genetic===
Decreased or absent IgA due to an inherited inability to produce IgA is termed selective IgA deficiency and can produce a clinically significant immunodeficiency.

Anti-IgA antibodies, sometimes present in individuals with low or absent IgA, can result in serious anaphylactic reactions when transfused with blood products that incidentally contain IgA. However, most persons with suspected IgA anaphylactic reactions had experienced acute generalized reactions that were from causes other than anti-IgA transfusion.

===Microbial===
&quot;Neisseria&quot; species including &quot;Neisseria gonorrhoeae&quot; (which causes gonorrhea), &quot;Streptococcus pneumoniae&quot;, and &quot;Haemophilus influenzae&quot; type B all release a protease that destroys IgA. Additionally, &quot;Blastocystis&quot; species have been shown to have several subtypes that generate cysteine and aspartic protease enzymes which degrade human IgA.

===Autoimmune and immune-mediated===
IgA nephropathy is caused by IgA deposits in the kidneys. The pathogenesis involves the production of hypoglycosylated IgA1, which accumulates and subsequently leads to the formation of immune complexes and the production of IgA-specific IgG, further leading to tissue inflammation.

Celiac disease involves IgA pathology due to the presence of IgA antiendomysial antibodies. Additional testing has been conducted using IgA trans-glutaminase autoantibodies which has been identified as a specific and sensitive for the detection of celiac disease.

Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a systemic vasculitis caused by deposits of IgA and complement component 3 (C3) in small blood vessels. HSP occurs usually in small children and involves the skin and connective tissues, scrotum, joints, gastrointestinal tract and kidneys. It usually follows an upper respiratory infection and resolves within a couple weeks as the liver clears out the IgA aggregates.

Linear IgA bullous dermatosis and IgA pemphigus are two examples of IgA-mediated immunobullous diseases. IgA-mediated immunobullous diseases can often be difficult to treat even with usually effective medications such as rituximab.

===Drug-induced===
Vancomycin can induce a linear IgA bullous dermatosis in some patients.

== See also ==
* List of target antigens in pemphigus
* TGF beta

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="0" end="16" title="Immunoglobulin A" label="Immunoglobulin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="18" end="22" title="Immunoglobulin A" label="Ig A"/>
<link wikidata="Q79453" start="44" end="48" title="Immunoglobulin A" label="sIgA"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="78" end="86" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="112" end="127" title="Immunity (medical)" label="immune function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="131" end="146" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="349" end="354" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027697" start="471" end="475" title="IGHA1" label="IgA1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027700" start="480" end="484" title="IGHA2" label="IgA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="705" end="719" title="immunoglobulin" label="immunoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="729" end="746" title="mucous membrane" label="mucous secretions"/>
<link wikidata="Q76469" start="758" end="763" title="tears" label="tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="765" end="771" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="773" end="778" title="sweat" label="sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="780" end="789" title="colostrum" label="colostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712977" start="814" end="833" title="genitourinary tract" label="genitourinary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="835" end="857" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="859" end="867" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428754" start="872" end="894" title="respiratory epithelium" label="respiratory epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="1080" end="1102" title="gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="1146" end="1153" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="1289" end="1306" title="complement system" label="complement system"/>
<link wikidata="Q420107" start="1312" end="1320" title="Opsonin" label="opsonize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396793" start="1385" end="1393" title="Isotype (immunology)" label="isotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q898365" start="1432" end="1444" title="glycosylated" label="glycosylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="1857" end="1866" title="disulfide" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915446" start="1877" end="1889" title="non-covalent" label="non-covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q854346" start="1934" end="1964" title="gut-associated lymphoid tissue" label="gut-associated lymphoid tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q192746" start="2159" end="2168" title="colostrum" label="colostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76469" start="2185" end="2190" title="tears" label="tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q155925" start="2195" end="2201" title="saliva" label="saliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100474" start="2385" end="2400" title="B-cell receptor" label="B-cell receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="3044" end="3052" title="Polymers" label="Polymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="3064" end="3072" title="monomers" label="monomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027731" start="3140" end="3147" title="J chain" label="J chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027731" start="3250" end="3257" title="J chain" label="J chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="3263" end="3274" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="3367" end="3375" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="3461" end="3477" title="molecular weight" label="molecular weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444455" start="3670" end="3689" title="secretory component" label="secretory component"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="3710" end="3726" title="epithelial cells" label="epithelial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q417823" start="4099" end="4110" title="Fc receptor" label="Fc receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21101404" start="4128" end="4132" title="CD89" label="CD89"/>
<link wikidata="Q21418091" start="4276" end="4321" title="antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity" label="antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107238" start="4347" end="4357" title="eosinophil" label="eosinophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q107988" start="4363" end="4371" title="basophil" label="basophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="4374" end="4386" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107244" start="4390" end="4398" title="monocyte" label="monocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="4401" end="4411" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="4418" end="4428" title="neutrophil" label="neutrophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q223143" start="4479" end="4506" title="polymorphonuclear leukocyte" label="polymorphonuclear leukocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="4516" end="4519" title="Immunoglobulin M" label="IgM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="4524" end="4527" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736500" start="4622" end="4633" title="Alternative complement pathway" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864145" start="4638" end="4653" title="Lectin pathway" label="lectin pathways"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="4759" end="4770" title="plasma cell" label="plasma cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18253018" start="4849" end="4882" title="polymeric immunoglobulin receptor" label="polymeric immunoglobulin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="4949" end="4960" title="plasma cell" label="plasma cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725675" start="4969" end="4983" title="lamina propria" label="lamina propria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="5042" end="5053" title="basolateral" label="basolateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189814" start="5117" end="5128" title="endocytosis" label="endocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="5225" end="5240" title="Lumen (anatomy)" label="luminal surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="5298" end="5309" title="Proteolysis" label="Proteolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444455" start="5414" end="5433" title="secretory component" label="secretory component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="5474" end="5479" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815955" start="6263" end="6269" title="microfold cell" label="M cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q506253" start="6286" end="6300" title="dendritic cell" label="dendritic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386881" start="6333" end="6348" title="class switching" label="class switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643652" start="6358" end="6380" title="mesenteric lymph nodes" label="mesenteric lymph nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="6473" end="6483" title="epithelial" label="epithelial"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="6668" end="6678" title="polyvalent antibody" label="polyvalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q308695" start="6792" end="6807" title="peristalsis" label="peristaltically"/>
<link wikidata="Q898238" start="7098" end="7115" title="steric hindrance" label="sterically hinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q727265" start="7192" end="7219" title="asialoglycoprotein receptor" label="asialoglycoprotein receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66589593" start="7239" end="7248" title="galactose" label="galactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553138" start="7267" end="7273" title="glycan" label="glycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q942926" start="7385" end="7409" title="selective IgA deficiency" label="selective IgA deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="7451" end="7467" title="immunodeficiency" label="immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q132209" start="7846" end="7855" title="Neisseria" label="Neisseria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131129" start="7886" end="7907" title="Neisseria gonorrhoeae" label="Neisseria gonorrhoeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="7928" end="7937" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="7946" end="7970" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="Streptococcus pneumoniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141979" start="7988" end="8010" title="Haemophilus influenzae" label="Haemophilus influenzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13033769" start="8038" end="8064" title="IgA specific serine endopeptidase" label="protease that destroys IgA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756496" start="8086" end="8098" title="Blastocystis" label="Blastocystis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419343" start="8168" end="8176" title="Cysteine protease" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410111" start="8181" end="8198" title="aspartic protease" label="aspartic protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146454" start="8270" end="8285" title="IgA nephropathy" label="IgA nephropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="8554" end="8568" title="Celiac disease" label="Celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035319" start="8819" end="8843" title="Henoch–Schönlein purpura" label="Henoch–Schönlein purpura"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874317" start="8905" end="8927" title="complement component 3" label="complement component 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q424027" start="9475" end="9485" title="Vancomycin" label="Vancomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642478" start="9565" end="9601" title="List of target antigens in pemphigus" label="List of target antigens in pemphigus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24785672" start="9604" end="9612" title="TGF beta" label="TGF beta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490669" wikidata="Q79447" url="?curid=490669" title="Immunoglobulin D">
<text>Immunoglobulin D (IgD) is an antibody isotype that makes up about 1% of proteins in the plasma membranes of immature B-lymphocytes where it is usually co-expressed with another cell surface antibody called IgM. IgD is also produced in a secreted form that is found in very small amounts in blood serum, representing 0.25% of immunoglobulins in serum. The relative molecular mass and half-life of secreted IgD is 185 kDa and 2.8 days, respectively. Secreted IgD is produced as a monomeric antibody with two heavy chains of the delta (δ) class, and two Ig light chains.

==Function==
The function of IgD has been a puzzle in immunology since its discovery in 1964. IgD is present in species from cartilaginous fish to humans (with the possible exception of birds). This nearly ubiquitous appearance in species with an adaptive immune system demonstrates that IgD may be as ancient as IgM and suggests that IgD has important immunological functions.

In B cells, the function of IgD is to signal the B cells to be activated. By being activated, B cells are ready to take part in the defense of the body as part of the immune system. During B cell differentiation, IgM is the exclusive isotype expressed by immature B cells. IgD starts to be expressed when the B cell exits the bone marrow to populate peripheral lymphoid tissues. When a B cell reaches its mature state, it co-expresses both IgM and IgD. A 2016 study by Übelhart and colleagues found that IgD signaling is only triggered by repetitive multivalent immunogens, while IgM can be triggered either by soluble monomeric or by multivalent immunogens. Cδ knockout mice (mice that have been genetically altered so that they do not produce IgD) have no major B cell intrinsic defects. IgD may have some role in allergic reactions.

IgD was found to bind to basophils and mast cells and activate these cells to produce antimicrobial factors to participate in respiratory immune defense in humans. It also stimulates basophils to release B cell homeostatic factors. This is consistent with the reduction in the number of peripheral B cells, reduced serum IgE level and defective primary IgG1 response in IgD knockout mice.

== Structural diversity ==
IgD has structural diversity throughout evolution of vertebrates because it is a structurally flexible locus to complement the function of IgM. One of the important features of IgD is that it can substitute for the function of IgM in the case of IgM defects. B cells may express IgD by alternative RNA splicing and class switch recombination. Alternative splicing is promoted in all jawed vertebrates but class switch recombination occurs only in higher vertebrates and increases diversification of IgD. In jawed fishes, the structure of the constant region is highly diverse with amplifications of Cδ exons. Different splice variants exist due to alternative splicing. In humans and primates, IgD has three Cδ domains and a long H region with an amino-terminal region rich in alanine and threonine residues. C-terminal regions are rich in lysine, glutamate and arginine residues modified with O-glycosylation for binding a putative IgD receptor on the surface of activated T cells. Human IgD with its H region interacts with heparin and heparan sulphate proteglycans expressed in the basophils and mast cells. Mouse IgD has a shorter H region and different amino acid composition modified with N-glycosylation.

==Method of coexpression==
In the human heavy chain locus, 3&#x27; of the V-D-J cassette is a series of C (for constant) genes, each conferring an Ig isotype.
The Cμ (IgM) gene is 3&#x27; and closest to the V-D-J cassette, with the Cδ gene appearing 3&#x27; to Cμ.

A primary mRNA transcript will contain the transcribed V-D-J cassette, and the Cμ and Cδ genes, with introns in between them.

Alternative splicing can then occur, causing a selection of either Cμ or Cδ to appear on the functional mRNA (μ mRNA and δ mRNA respectively). Alternative splicing is thought to be possible due to two polyadenylation sites, one appearing between the Cμ and Cδ, and the other 3&#x27; of Cδ (polyadenylation in the latter site would cause Cμ to be spliced away along with the intron). The precise mechanism of how the polyadenylation site is chosen remains unclear.

The resulting functional mRNA will have the V-D-J and C regions contiguous, and its translation will generate either a μ heavy chain or δ heavy chain. The heavy chains then couple with either κ or λ light chains to create the final IgM or IgD antibody.

Zinc finger protein 318 (ZNF318) has a role in the promotion of IgD expression and controlling the alternative splicing of the long pre-mRNA. In immature B cells that mainly express the μ transcript, there is no ZFP318 expression, but in mature B cells with dual IgM and IgD expression, both δ and μ transcript is made and ZFP318 is expressed. Enders et al. (2014) found in mice that null mutations in ZFP318 resulted in no IgD expression.

== Activation of immune system via IgD ==
Innate and adaptive Immune responses can be activated via membrane-anchored IgD that functions as a part of B-cell receptor (BCR) complexes or secreted IgD that binds to monocytes, mast cells, and basophils. Counter-intuitive to the contemporary dogmas that suggest these activated immune responses via IgD expression can potentiate autoimmune diseases and allergic inflammation, a 2010 study by Nguyen TG et al. has first demonstrated that treatments with a B-cell activating monoclonal anti-IgD antibody can attenuate disease severity in an animal model of collagen-induced arthritis. This novel therapeutic effect by anti-IgD antibody treatment was later confirmed in mouse models of epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and in chronic contact hypersensitivity. Studies have shown that levels of secreted lgD are usually elevated in patients with an autoimmune disease, and recently it has been demonstrated that IgD enhanced the activation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) patients leading to the hypothesis that IgD could be an immunotherapeutic target for the management of RA. Activated immune responses via IgD-BCR and secreted IgD may exert suppressive effects on autoimmune diseases and allergic inflammations, suggesting a potential immune regulatory function of IgD.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79447" start="0" end="16" title="Immunoglobulin D" label="Immunoglobulin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q79447" start="18" end="21" title="Immunoglobulin D" label="IgD"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="29" end="37" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396793" start="38" end="45" title="Isotype (immunology)" label="isotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="72" end="79" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="88" end="103" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="117" end="129" title="B-lymphocyte" label="B-lymphocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="206" end="209" title="IgM" label="IgM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="290" end="301" title="blood plasma" label="blood serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="355" end="378" title="relative molecular mass" label="relative molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="416" end="419" title="kDa" label="kDa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178827" start="478" end="485" title="monomer" label="monomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776943" start="506" end="517" title="Immunoglobulin heavy chain" label="heavy chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q949267" start="554" end="565" title="immunoglobulin light chain" label="light chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="816" end="838" title="adaptive immune system" label="adaptive immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="951" end="957" title="B cell" label="B cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="1274" end="1285" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133550" start="1610" end="1618" title="gene knockout" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364740" start="1619" end="1623" title="knockout mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="1764" end="1782" title="allergic reactions" label="allergic reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q107988" start="1810" end="1819" title="basophils" label="basophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="1824" end="1834" title="mast cells" label="mast cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093098" start="3489" end="3494" title="V(D)J recombination" label="V-D-J"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="3691" end="3695" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="3782" end="3788" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q21114084" start="3808" end="3828" title="Alternative splicing" label="Alternative splicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q412148" start="4009" end="4024" title="polyadenylation" label="polyadenylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="4357" end="4368" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18037667" start="4552" end="4558" title="ZNF318" label="ZNF318"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490670" wikidata="Q79455" url="?curid=490670" title="Immunoglobulin E">
<text>Immunoglobulin E (IgE) is a type of antibody (or immunoglobulin (Ig) &quot;isoform&quot;) that has been found only in mammals. IgE is synthesised by plasma cells. Monomers of IgE consist of two heavy chains (ε chain) and two light chains, with the ε chain containing four Ig-like constant domains (Cε1–Cε4). IgE is thought to be an important part of the immune response against infection by certain parasitic worms, including &quot;Schistosoma mansoni&quot;, &quot;Trichinella spiralis&quot;, and &quot;Fasciola hepatica&quot;. IgE is also utilized during immune defense against certain protozoan parasites such as &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot;. IgE may have evolved as a defense to protect against venoms.

IgE also has an essential role in type I hypersensitivity, which manifests in various allergic diseases, such as allergic asthma, most types of sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, food allergies, and specific types of chronic urticaria and atopic dermatitis. IgE also plays a pivotal role in responses to allergens, such as anaphylactic reactions to drugs, bee stings, and antigen preparations used in desensitization immunotherapy.

IgE is typically the least abundant isotype: blood serum IgE levels in a non-atopic individual are less than 0.0001% of the total Ig concentration, compared to 75% for the IgGs at 10 mg/ml. Despite this, it is capable of triggering anaphylaxis, one of the most rapid and severe immunological reactions.

==Discovery==
IgE was simultaneously discovered in 1966 and 1967 by two independent groups: by Kimishige Ishizaka and his wife Teruko Ishizaka at the Children&#x27;s Asthma Research Institute and Hospital in Denver, Colorado, and by Gunnar Johansson and in Uppsala, Sweden. Their joint paper was published in April 1969.

== Receptors ==
IgE primes the IgE-mediated allergic response by binding to Fc receptors found on the surface of mast cells and basophils. Fc receptors are also found on eosinophils, monocytes, macrophages and platelets in humans. There are two types of Fcε receptors:
* FcεRI (type I Fcε receptor), the high-affinity IgE receptor
* FcεRII (type II Fcε receptor), also known as CD23, the low-affinity IgE receptor

IgE can upregulate the expression of both types of Fcε receptors. FcεRI is expressed on mast cells, basophils, and the antigen-presenting dendritic cells in both mice and humans. Binding of antigens to IgE already bound by the FcεRI on mast cells causes cross-linking of the bound IgE and the aggregation of the underlying FcεRI, leading to degranulation (the release of mediators) and the secretion of several types of type 2 cytokines like interleukin (IL)-3 and stem cell factor (SCF), which both help the mast cells survive and accumulate in tissue, and IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, and IL-33, which in turn activate group 2-innate lymphoid cells (ILC2 or natural helper cells). Basophils share a common haemopoietic progenitor with mast cells; upon the cross-linking of their surface bound IgE by antigens, also release type 2 cytokines, including IL-4 and IL-13, and other inflammatory mediators. The low-affinity receptor (FcεRII) is always expressed on B cells; but IL-4 can induce its expression on the surfaces of macrophages, eosinophils, platelets, and some T cells.

== Function ==

=== Parasite hypothesis ===
The IgE isotype has co-evolved with basophils and mast cells in the defence against parasites like helminths (like Schistosoma) but may be also effective in bacterial infections.
Epidemiological research shows that IgE level is increased when infected by &quot;Schistosoma mansoni&quot;, &quot;Necator americanus&quot;, and nematodes in humans. It is most likely beneficial in removal of hookworms from the lung.

=== Toxin hypothesis of allergic disease ===
In 1981 Margie Profet suggested that allergic reactions have evolved as a last line of defense to protect against venoms. Although controversial at the time, new work supports some of Profet&#x27;s thoughts on the adaptive role of allergies as a defense against noxious toxins.

In 2013 it emerged that IgE-antibodies play an essential role in acquired resistance to honey bee and Russell&#x27;s viper venoms. The authors concluded that &quot;a small dose of bee venom conferred immunity to a much larger, fatal dose&quot; and &quot;this kind of venom-specific, IgE-associated, adaptive immune response developed, at least in evolutionary terms, to protect the host against potentially toxic amounts of venom, such as would happen if the animal encountered a whole nest of bees, or in the event of a snakebite&quot;. The major allergen of bee venom (phospholipase A2) induces a Th2 immune responses, associated with production of IgE antibodies, which may &quot;increase the resistance of mice to challenge with potentially lethal doses&quot;.

=== Cancer ===
Although it is not yet well understood, IgE may play an important role in the immune system&#x27;s recognition of cancer, in which the stimulation of a strong cytotoxic response against cells displaying only small amounts of early cancer markers would be beneficial. If this were the case, anti-IgE treatments such as omalizumab (for allergies) might have some undesirable side effects. However, a recent study, which was performed based on pooled analysis using comprehensive data from 67 phase I to IV clinical trials of omalizumab in various indications, concluded that a causal relationship between omalizumab therapy and malignancy is unlikely.

== Role in disease ==
Atopic individuals can have up to ten times the normal level of IgE in their blood (as do sufferers of hyper-IgE syndrome). However, this may not be a requirement for symptoms to occur as has been seen in asthmatics with normal IgE levels in their blood—recent research has shown that IgE production can occur locally in the nasal mucosa.

IgE that can specifically recognise an allergen (typically this is a protein, such as dust mite Der p 1, cat Fel d 1, grass or ragweed pollen, food protein, etc.) has a unique long-lived interaction with its high-affinity receptor FcεRI so that basophils and mast cells, capable of mediating inflammatory reactions, become &quot;primed&quot;, ready to release chemicals like histamine, leukotrienes, and certain interleukins. These chemicals cause many of the symptoms we associate with allergy, such as airway constriction in asthma, local inflammation in eczema, increased mucus secretion in allergic rhinitis, and increased vascular permeability, it is presumed, to allow other immune cells to gain access to tissues, but which can lead to a potentially fatal drop in blood pressure as in anaphylaxis.

IgE is known to be elevated in various autoimmune disorders such as SLE, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and psoriasis, and is theorized to be of pathogenetic importance in SLE and RA by eliciting a hypersensitivity reaction.

Regulation of IgE levels through control of B cell differentiation to antibody-secreting plasma cells is thought to involve the &quot;low-affinity&quot; receptor FcεRII, or CD23. CD23 may also allow facilitated antigen presentation, an IgE-dependent mechanism whereby B cells expressing CD23 are able to present allergen to (and stimulate) specific T helper cells, causing the perpetuation of a Th2 response, one of the hallmarks of which is the production of more antibodies.

=== Role in diagnosis ===
Diagnosis of allergy is most often done by reviewing a person&#x27;s medical history and finding a positive result for the presence of allergen specific IgE when conducting a skin or blood test. Specific IgE testing is the proven test for allergy detection; evidence does not show that indiscriminate IgE testing or testing for immunoglobulin G (IgG) can support allergy diagnosis.

==Drugs targeting the IgE pathway==
Currently, allergic diseases and asthma are usually treated with one or more of the following drugs: (1) antihistamines and antileukotrienes, which antagonize the inflammatory mediators histamine and leukotrienes, (2) local or systemic (oral or injectable) corticosteroids, which suppress a broad spectrum of inflammatory mechanisms, (3) short or long-acting bronchodilators, which relax smooth muscle of constricted airway in asthma, or (4) mast cell stabilizers, which inhibit the degranulation of mast cells that is normally triggered by IgE-binding at FcεRI. Long-term uses of systemic corticosteroids are known to cause many serious side effects and are advisable to avoid, if alternative therapies are available.

IgE, the IgE synthesis pathway, and the IgE-mediated allergic/inflammatory pathway are all important targets in intervening with the pathological processes of allergy, asthma, and other IgE-mediated diseases. The B lymphocyte differentiation and maturation pathway that eventually generate IgE-secreting plasma cells go through the intermediate steps of IgE-expressing B lymphoblasts and involves the interaction with IgE-expressing memory B cells. Tanox, a biotech company based in Houston, Texas, proposed in 1987 that by targeting membrane-bound IgE (mIgE) on B lymphoblast and memory B cells, those cells can be lysed or down-regulated, thus achieving the inhibition of the production of antigen-specific IgE and hence a shift of immune balance toward non-IgE mechanisms. Two approaches targeting the IgE pathway were evolved and both are in active development. In the first approach, the anti-IgE antibody drug omalizumab (trade name Xolair) recognises IgE not bound to its receptors and is used to neutralise or mop-up existing IgE and prevent it from binding to the receptors on mast cells and basophils. Xolair has been approved in many countries for treating severe, persistent allergic asthma. It has also been approved in March 2014 in the European Union and the U. S. for treating chronic spontaneous urticaria, which cannot be adequately treated with H1-antihistamines. In the second approach, antibodies specific for a domain of 52 amino acid residues, referred to as CεmX or M1&#x27; (M1 prime), present only on human mIgE on B cells and not on free, soluble IgE, have been prepared and are under clinical development for the treatment of allergy and asthma. An anti-M1&#x27; humanized antibody, quilizumab, is in phase IIb clinical trial.

In 2002, researchers at the Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics determined the structure of IgE. Understanding of this structure (which is atypical of other isotypes in that it is highly bent and asymmetric) and of the interaction of IgE with receptor FcεRI will enable development of a new generation of allergy drugs that seek to interfere with the IgE-receptor interaction. It may be possible to design treatments cheaper than monoclonal antibodies (for instance, small molecule drugs) that use a similar approach to inhibit binding of IgE to its receptor.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="0" end="16" title="Immunoglobulin E" label="Immunoglobulin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q79455" start="18" end="21" title="Immunoglobulin E" label="IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="36" end="44" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="49" end="63" title="immunoglobulin" label="immunoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q609809" start="75" end="82" title="Protein isoform" label="isoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="118" end="124" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="149" end="160" title="plasma cell" label="plasma cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="354" end="369" title="immune response" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129936" start="399" end="413" title="parasitic worm" label="parasitic worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324689" start="432" end="451" title="Schistosoma mansoni" label="Schistosoma mansoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q730937" start="465" end="485" title="Trichinella spiralis" label="Trichinella spiralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334149" start="503" end="520" title="Fasciola hepatica" label="Fasciola hepatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="587" end="595" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="597" end="605" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="621" end="642" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941165" start="746" end="769" title="type I hypersensitivity" label="type I hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="834" end="840" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="856" end="865" title="sinusitis" label="sinusitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="867" end="884" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="924" end="941" title="chronic urticaria" label="chronic urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q268667" start="946" end="963" title="atopic dermatitis" label="atopic dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="1030" end="1042" title="anaphylactic" label="anaphylactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427096" start="1124" end="1137" title="immunotherapy" label="immunotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110084" start="1185" end="1196" title="blood serum" label="blood serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q757678" start="1217" end="1223" title="atopic" label="atopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="1312" end="1316" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgGs"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="1372" end="1383" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q544711" start="1539" end="1557" title="Kimishige Ishizaka" label="Kimishige Ishizaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673899" start="1571" end="1586" title="Teruko Ishizaka" label="Teruko Ishizaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="1652" end="1658" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="1660" end="1668" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q23044698" start="1677" end="1693" title="Gunnar Johansson (biochemist)" label="Gunnar Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="1701" end="1708" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1710" end="1716" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q417823" start="1842" end="1853" title="Fc receptor" label="Fc receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="1879" end="1888" title="mast cell" label="mast cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q107988" start="1894" end="1902" title="basophil" label="basophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q107238" start="1936" end="1946" title="eosinophil" label="eosinophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q107244" start="1949" end="1957" title="monocyte" label="monocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="1960" end="1970" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="1976" end="1984" title="platelet" label="platelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50261951" start="2037" end="2042" title="FcεRI" label="FcεRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845302" start="2099" end="2105" title="FcεRII" label="FcεRII"/>
<link wikidata="Q506253" start="2319" end="2333" title="dendritic cell" label="dendritic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="2371" end="2378" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251810" start="2522" end="2535" title="degranulation" label="degranulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="2608" end="2616" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194908" start="2623" end="2634" title="interleukin" label="interleukin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14866169" start="2635" end="2641" title="interleukin 3" label="(IL)-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q909331" start="2646" end="2662" title="stem cell factor" label="stem cell factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q118368435" start="2739" end="2743" title="interleukin 4" label="IL-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877650" start="2745" end="2749" title="interleukin 5" label="IL-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q14878303" start="2751" end="2756" title="interleukin 13" label="IL-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q18048437" start="2762" end="2767" title="interleukin 33" label="IL-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314227" start="2823" end="2827" title="ILC2" label="ILC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="3132" end="3138" title="B cell" label="B cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="3241" end="3247" title="T cell" label="T cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433913" start="3589" end="3607" title="Necator americanus" label="Necator americanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="3619" end="3627" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290605" start="3762" end="3775" title="Margie Profet" label="Margie Profet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386847" start="3868" end="3873" title="venom" label="venom"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="4121" end="4130" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q330548" start="4135" end="4155" title="Russell&amp;#x27;s viper" label="Russell&amp;#x27;s viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768001" start="4604" end="4620" title="phospholipase A2" label="phospholipase A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="4632" end="4635" title="Th2" label="Th2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="4928" end="4934" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q415392" start="5132" end="5142" title="omalizumab" label="omalizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q757678" start="5487" end="5493" title="Atopic" label="Atopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336873" start="5590" end="5608" title="hyper-IgE syndrome" label="hyper-IgE syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186752" start="5866" end="5874" title="allergen" label="allergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29938" start="5913" end="5922" title="dust mite" label="dust mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12856807" start="5923" end="5930" title="Peptidase 1 (mite)" label="Der p 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092156" start="5936" end="5943" title="Fel d 1" label="Fel d 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q844270" start="5954" end="5961" title="ragweed" label="ragweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="6049" end="6057" title="biochemistry" label="receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q107988" start="6072" end="6081" title="basophils" label="basophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q191989" start="6086" end="6096" title="mast cells" label="mast cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="6202" end="6211" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424190" start="6213" end="6224" title="leukotriene" label="leukotriene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="6354" end="6360" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="6384" end="6390" title="eczema" label="eczema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649349" start="6402" end="6407" title="mucus" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="6421" end="6438" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="6619" end="6630" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="6701" end="6704" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="SLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="6706" end="6726" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="6737" end="6746" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="6944" end="6956" title="plasma cells" label="plasma cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845302" start="7028" end="7032" title="CD23" label="CD23"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845302" start="7034" end="7038" title="CD23" label="CD23"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="7123" end="7130" title="B cells" label="B cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845302" start="7142" end="7146" title="CD23" label="CD23"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="7204" end="7218" title="T helper cells" label="T helper cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="7883" end="7897" title="antihistamines" label="antihistamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534541" start="7902" end="7917" title="antileukotriene" label="antileukotriene"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="8035" end="8050" title="corticosteroids" label="corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q927234" start="8137" end="8152" title="bronchodilators" label="bronchodilators"/>
<link wikidata="Q745130" start="8220" end="8240" title="mast cell stabilizer" label="mast cell stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251810" start="8261" end="8274" title="degranulation" label="degranulation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8334" end="8339" title="Fc receptor#Fc-epsilon receptors" label="FcεRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683742" start="8947" end="8952" title="Tanox" label="Tanox"/>
<link wikidata="Q112039114" start="9391" end="9399" title="anti-IgE" label="anti-IgE"/>
<link wikidata="Q415392" start="9414" end="9424" title="omalizumab" label="omalizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q415392" start="9437" end="9443" title="Xolair" label="Xolair"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296062" start="9791" end="9820" title="chronic spontaneous urticaria" label="chronic spontaneous urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="9865" end="9879" title="antihistamines" label="antihistamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271973" start="10209" end="10219" title="quilizumab" label="quilizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291530" start="10282" end="10331" title="Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics" label="Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490672" wikidata="Q2406409" url="?curid=490672" title="Leiden University Medical Center">
<text>Leiden University Medical Center (Dutch: &quot;Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum&quot;) or LUMC is the university hospital affiliated with Leiden University, of which it forms the medical faculty. It is located in Leiden, Netherlands. LUMC is a modern university medical center for research, education and patient care. Its research practice ranges from pure fundamental medical research to applied clinical research.

== Patient care ==
The hospital has clinical departments of all medical specialties, and acts as a tertiary referral centre for the northern part of the province of South Holland. Special units include:
* Ophthalmology
* Neurosurgery
* Cardiothoracic surgery
* Neonatal and pediatric surgery and intensive care
* Pediatric oncology
* Orthopedic medicine
* Biliary surgery
* Rheumatology
* Level I trauma center

== Research ==
The LUMC aims at identifying the causes of disease, improving diagnosis, prevention, and ultimately developing effective treatments. Within LUMC different specialists work together around research themes. Combining cross-border expertise may solve biomedical problems and bring answers not found when working in a stand-alone fashion. The themes are:
* Vascular and Regenerative medicine
* Immunity, Infection and Tolerance
* Translational Neuroscience
* Cancer Pathogenesis and Therapy
* Ageing
* Innovation in Health Strategy and Quality of Care
* Biomedical Imaging

== Education ==
LUMC offers a large range of education and hosts the Faculty of Medicine of Leiden University. Education is seen as a joint responsibility of students and professors and a critical scientific attitude and curiosity are valued highly. Enjoying studies and student life is also considered to be important. LUMC offers the following university courses:
* Bachelor and master in Medicine
* Bachelor and master in Biomedical Sciences 
* Bachelor in Clinical Technology (joined programme with TU Delft and Erasmus MC)
* Master in Vitality and Ageing. 
* Master in Pharmacy
* Electives and exchange options for international students
LUMC also offers continuing education and training for doctors, scientists and other healthcare professionals. Continuing education is organized by the departments Boerhaave Nascholing and Educatie Zorgsector.

== History of LUMC ==

In the very first teaching hospital in the Caeciliagasthuis in Leiden (now the Boerhaave Museum) professors gave bedside lectures – for example, Herman Boerhaave, in the 18th century. Several times, patients and professors moved to larger and better furnished premises and in 1873 the first university hospital to be built as such opened its doors on Steenstraat (it now houses the National Museum for Ethnology).

At the time, the building did justice to nursing practices and operation techniques, but after a few decades it was already obsolete. More laboratory space was needed, and safer and more comfortable conditions for patients and staff alike. The new hospital on Rijnsburgerweg, built in the early 1920s on the basis of the pavilion system, made way in the 1980s and 1990s for the present Building 1 of the LUMC.

Medicine has changed and developed beyond recognition over the centuries. After World War II, fundamental research became an increasingly important task of Leiden University&#x27;s Faculty of Medicine. The Biomedical Science study programme is an expression of this. In patient care, high technology treatments have come in the place of admissions lasting weeks or months.

The many years of collaboration between the university and the teaching hospital acquired greater permanence in 1996 when the hospital and medical faculty merged to form Leiden University Medical Center, with patient care, instruction, study programmes, continuing education and research as its five core tasks.

The opening of two new buildings on 1 December 2006 was the fulfilment of a wish of long standing: all the core tasks are now under one roof. The various buildings are linked by skyways and tunnels, thus symbolising the interrelationship of the core tasks.

In 2016 Leiden University Medical Centre founded a branch at Campus The Hague, with research, teaching and a training programme for GPs.

==EU Funding Fraud==
In 2023 the LUMC was formally accused of fraud by the European Union in seven studies. Dean Pancras Hogendoorn stepped down because of the investigation which is currently in progress. 
==PREVENT-nCoV consortium==

Leiden University Medical Center is part of the PREVENT-nCoV consortium comprising ExpreS2ion Biotechnologies, AdaptVac (a joint-venture between ExpreS2ion Biotechnologies and the University of Copenhagen spin-out NextGen Vaccines), the Institute for Tropical Medicine Tübingen, The Department of Immunology and Microbiology (ISIM) at the University of Copenhagen, and the Laboratory of Virology at Wageningen University and Research. In March 2020 the consortium was awarded an EU Horizon 2020 grant of €2.7million for the development of a COVID-19 vaccine candidate.

== See also ==
* Universiteit Leiden
* Leiden
* &quot;Homunculus loxodontus&quot;

==References==
== External links ==
* LUMC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2406409" start="0" end="32" title="Leiden University Medical Center" label="Leiden University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406409" start="92" end="96" title="Leiden University Medical Center" label="LUMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="140" end="157" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="181" end="196" title="medical faculty" label="medical faculty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="484" end="491" title="medicine" label="medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="585" end="598" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473971" start="809" end="830" title="Level I trauma center" label="Level I trauma center"/>
<link wikidata="Q759169" start="2373" end="2389" title="Museum Boerhaave" label="Boerhaave Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="2439" end="2455" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406409" start="4073" end="4105" title="Leiden University Medical Centre" label="Leiden University Medical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519332" start="4126" end="4142" title="Campus The Hague" label="Campus The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="4197" end="4200" title="General practitioner" label="GPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377541" start="4522" end="4548" title="ExpreS2ion Biotechnologies" label="ExpreS2ion Biotechnologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="4619" end="4643" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q31839349" start="4676" end="4716" title="Institute for Tropical Medicine Tübingen" label="Institute for Tropical Medicine Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422208" start="4838" end="4872" title="Wageningen University and Research" label="Wageningen University and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438124" start="4921" end="4933" title="Horizon 2020" label="Horizon 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="4980" end="4996" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="5026" end="5045" title="Universiteit Leiden" label="Universiteit Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="5048" end="5054" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q28698141" start="5063" end="5084" title="Homunculus loxodontus" label="Homunculus loxodontus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490673" wikidata="Q79451" url="?curid=490673" title="Immunoglobulin M">
<text>Immunoglobulin M (IgM) is the largest of several isotypes of antibodies (also known as immunoglobulin) that are produced by vertebrates. IgM is the first antibody to appear in the response to initial exposure to an antigen; causing it to also be called an acute phase antibody. In humans and other mammals that have been studied, plasmablasts in the spleen are the main source of specific IgM production.

==History==
In 1937, an antibody was observed in horses hyper-immunized with pneumococcus polysaccharide that was much larger in size than the typical rabbit γ-globulin, with a molecular weight of 990,000 daltons. In accordance with its larger size, the new antibody was originally referred to as γ-macroglobulin, and subsequently termed IgM—M for “macro”. The V domains of normal immunoglobulin are highly heterogeneous, reflecting their role in protecting against the great variety of infectious microbes, and this heterogeneity impeded detailed structural analysis of IgM. Two sources of homogeneous IgM were subsequently discovered. First, the high molecular weight protein produced by some multiple myeloma patients was recognized to be a tumor-produced γ-macroglobulin, and because the tumor is a clone, the IgM it produces is homogeneous. In the 1960s, methods were developed for inducing immunoglobulin-producing tumors (plasmacytomas) in mice, thus providing a source of homogeneous immunoglobulins of various isotypes, including IgM (reviewed in). More recently, the expression of engineered immunoglobulin genes in tissue culture can be used to produce IgM with specific alterations and thus to identify the molecular requirements for features of interest.

==Structure==
Immunoglobulins are composed of light chains and heavy chains. The light chain (λ or κ) is a protein of ~220 amino acids, composed of a variable domain, VL (a segment of approximately 110 amino acids), and a constant domain, CL (also approximately 110 amino acids long). The μ heavy chain of IgM is a protein of ~576 amino acids, includes a variable domain (VH ~110 amino acids), four distinct constant region domains (Cμ1, Cμ2, Cμ3, Cμ4, each ~110 amino acids) and a &quot;tailpiece&quot; of ~20 amino acids. The μ heavy chain bears oligosaccharides at five asparagine residues. The oligosaccharides on mouse and human IgM have been partially characterized by a variety of techniques, including NMR, lectin binding, various chromatographic systems, and enzymatic sensitivity (reviewed in). The structure of the oligosaccharides at each site varies in detail, and the predominant oligosaccharides—biantennary, triantennary, and high mannose—differ among the sites.

The multimeric structure of IgM is shown schematically in Figure 1. Figure 1A shows the &quot;heterodimer&quot; composed of one light chain, denoted L, and one heavy chain, denoted μ. The heavy and light chains are held together both by disulfide bonds (depicted as red triangles) and by non-covalent interactions.

Figure 1B shows two μL units linked by a disulfide bond in the Cμ2 domains; this (μL)2 structure is often referred to as the IgM &quot;monomer&quot;, as it is analogous in some ways to the structure of immunoglobulin G (IgG).

On the basis of its sedimentation velocity and appearance in electron micrographs, it was inferred that IgM usually occurs as a &quot;pentamer&quot;, i.e., a polymer composed of five “monomers” [(μL)2]5, and was originally depicted by the models in Figures 1C and 1D, with disulfide bonds between the Cμ3 domains and between the tail pieces. Also shown is that pentameric IgM includes a third protein, the J chain. J chain (J for joining) was discovered as a covalently bonded component of polymeric IgA and IgM. The J chain is a small (~137 amino acids), acidic protein. As shown, the J chain joins two μ chains via disulfide bonds involving cysteines in the tailpieces.

===Molecular requirements for forming polymeric IgM===
It was initially expected that the J chain would be important for forming the polymeric immunoglobulins, and indeed polymerization of IgA depends strongly (but not absolutely) on the J chain. In contrast, polymeric IgM forms efficiently in the absence of the J chain.

The predominant form of human and mouse IgM is the pentamer. By way of comparison, the structure of IgM from frogs (Xenopus) is predominantly hexameric, IgM from bony fish is predominantly tetrameric, and IgM from cartilaginous fish (mainly sharks) is predominantly pentameric. Although the pentameric form predominates in mice and humans, the hexameric form has also been observed. Subsequent studies using recombinant DNA expression systems indicated that a hexamer is a major form of mouse IgM when the IgM is produced under conditions where the incorporation of the J chain is prevented, either by producing IgM in cells that lack the J chain or by producing IgM with a μ heavy chain that lacks the cysteine in the tailpiece. In summary, hexameric IgM never contains the J chain; pentameric IgM can be formed so as to include or not include the J chain.

An important difference between the μ and γ heavy chains is the availability of cysteines for forming disulfide bonds between heavy chains. In the case of the γ heavy chain, the only inter-γ bonds are formed by cysteines in the hinge, and accordingly, each γ chain binds to only one other γ chain. By contrast, the Cμ2 and Cμ3 domains and the tailpiece each include a cysteine that form a disulfide bond with another μ chain. The cysteines in the Cμ2 domains mediate the formation of monomeric IgM (μL)2. The tailpiece along with the included cysteine is necessary and sufficient for the formation of polymeric immunoglobulins. That is, deleting the tailpiece from the μ heavy chain prevents the formation of polymeric IgM. Conversely, cells expressing a γ heavy chain that has been modified to include the tailpiece produce polymeric IgG.

The role of the cysteine in the Cμ3 domain is more subtle. Figures 1C and 1D represent possible models for pentameric IgM. In these models, each μ chain is envisaged to bind two other μ chains. However, neither model alone can fully account for the structure of polymeric IgM. For example, the model in Figure 1C predicts that the disulfide bond between the Cμ2 domains is essential for making disulfide-bonded polymeric IgM. The model in Figure 1D predicts that the disulfide bond between the Cμ3 domains is essential. Disulfide bonded, polymeric, IgM can still be made if any one of the three cysteines is absent. In the context of models in which each μ chain interacts with only two other μ chains, these results suggest that some molecules are like Figure 1C and some like Figure 1D. However, the availability of three cysteines for inter-μ chain bonding suggests that the μ chains might each bind three other μ chains, as illustrated in Figure 2. In the same spirit, Figure 2C presents a model for a J chain-containing pentamer that reflects evidence that the J chain joins μ chains that are not joined to other μ chains by the cysteines in the Cμ3 domains. These and other models, both regular and irregular are discussed elsewhere.

Pentameric IgM is typically represented as containing a single J chain per polymer, but in actuality the measurements of J chain stoichiometry have ranged from one J molecule per polymer to three J molecules per polymer. The wide range might be due to technical problems, such as incomplete radiolabeling or imprecisely quantitating an Ouchterlony line. However, the variation might also be due to heterogeneity in the IgM preparations, i.e., the various preparations might have differed substantially in their content of J-containing and J-deficient polymers.

===Tertiary and quaternary structure of the μ constant region===
Individual C2, C3, and C4tp domains were generated independently in &quot;E. coli&quot; and then studied using a range of approaches, including sedimentation rate, X-ray crystallography, and NMR spectroscopy, to obtain insight into the detailed three-dimensional structure of the chain. The domains of the heavy chain, like those of other immunoglobulins, have the distinctive overlaying -sheets of seven strands, which are stabilized by intra-domain disulfide linkages. Overall, the IgM constant region has a &quot;mushroom-like&quot; shape, with the C2-C3 domains forming a disk similar to the mushroom&#x27;s head and the C4tp domains protruding like a short stem.

==Function==
IgM interacts with several other physiological molecules:

# IgM can bind complement component C1 and activate the classical pathway, leading to opsonization of antigens and cytolysis.
# IgM binds to the polyimmunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) in a process that brings IgM to mucosal surfaces, such as the gut lumen and into breast milk. This binding depends on the J chain.
# Two other Fc receptors that bind IgM—Fcα/μ-R and Fcμ-R -- have been detected. Fcα/μ-R, like pIgR, binds polymeric IgM and IgA. Fcα/μ-R can mediate endocytosis, and its expression in the gut suggests a role in mucosal immunity. Fcμ-R (formerly known as Toso/Faim3) binds IgM exclusively and can mediate cellular uptake of IgM-conjugated antigen. Inactivation of the corresponding genes in knock-out mice produces a phenotype, but the physiological functions of these receptors are still uncertain

===Regulation of the immune response===
Specific immunoglobulins that are injected into animals together with their antigen can influence the antibody response to this same antigen. Endogenous antibodies produced after a primary immunization can also affect the antibody response to a booster immunization, suggesting that similar effects occur during physiological conditions. The ”regulatory” effects can be either positive or negative. That is, depending on the type of antigen and the isotype of the antibody, the effect can be suppression or enhancement of the antibody response. Such effects are well illustrated by experiments involving immunization with xenogenic (foreign) erythrocytes (red blood cells). For example, when IgG is administered together with xenogenic erythrocytes, this combination causes almost complete suppression of the erythrocyte-specific antibody response. This effect is used clinically to prevent Rh-negative mothers from becoming immunized against fetal Rh-positive erythrocytes, and its use has dramatically decreased the incidence of hemolytic disease in newborns.
In contrast to the effect of IgG, antigen-specific IgM can greatly enhance the antibody response, especially in the case of large antigens. Thus, when IgM specific for erythrocytes is injected into animals (including humans) together with erythrocytes, a much stronger antibody response to the erythrocytes is induced than when erythrocytes are administered alone.
Several lines of evidence indicate that the ability of IgM to activate complement is required for its enhancing effect. That is, IgM-mediated enhancement does not occur in animals that have been depleted for complement component C3, nor in mutant animals lacking complement receptors 1 and 2. Similarly, mutant IgM that cannot activate complement does not enhance the immune response.
A possible explanation for IgM-mediated enhancement is that B lymphocytes capture IgM-antigen-complement complexes and transport the complexes into areas in the spleen where efficient immune responses are generated. Because IgM is produced early in an immune response, this might be important in the initiation of antibody responses.

==Synthesis==
In germ-line cells (sperm and ova) the genes that will eventually encode immunoglobulins are not in a functional form (see V(D)J recombination). In the case of the heavy chain, three germ-line segments denoted V, D and J are ligated together and adjoined to the DNA encoding the μ heavy chain constant region. Early in ontogeny, B cells express both the μ and the δ heavy chains; co-expression of these two heavy chains, each bearing the same V domain depends on alternative splicing and alternative poly-A addition sites. The expression of the other isotypes (γ, ε and α) is affected by another type of DNA rearrangement, a process called Immunoglobulin class switching.

==Clinical significance==
IgM is the first immunoglobulin expressed in the human fetus (around 20 weeks) and phylogenetically the earliest antibody to develop.

IgM antibodies appear early in the course of an infection and usually reappear, to a lesser extent, after further exposure. IgM antibodies do not pass across the human placenta (only isotype IgG).

These two biological properties of IgM make it useful in the diagnosis of infectious diseases. Demonstrating IgM antibodies in a patient&#x27;s serum indicates recent infection, or in a neonate&#x27;s serum indicates intrauterine infection (e.g. congenital rubella syndrome).

The development of anti-donor IgM after organ transplantation is not associated with graft rejection but it may have a protective effect.

IgM in normal serum is often found to bind to specific antigens, even in the absence of prior immunization. For this reason, IgM has sometimes been called a &quot;natural antibody&quot;. This phenomenon is probably due to the high avidity of IgM that allows it to bind detectably even to weakly cross-reacting antigens that are naturally occurring. For example, the IgM antibodies that bind to the red blood cell A and B antigens might be formed in early life as a result of exposure to A- and B-like substances that are present in bacteria or perhaps also in plant materials.

IgM antibodies are mainly responsible for the clumping (agglutination) of red blood cells if the recipient of a blood transfusion receives blood that is not compatible with their blood type.

A mutation of the mu chain within IgM causes autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia.

The presence of IgM or, rarely, IgG is one of the obligate criteria for a diagnosis of Schnitzler&#x27;s syndrome.

==See also==
* Immunodeficiency with hyper-immunoglobulin M
* Immunoglobulin M deficiency
* Immune system

==References==
== External links ==
* Immunoglobulin M Deficiency Reference from Medscape.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="0" end="16" title="Immunoglobulin M" label="Immunoglobulin M"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="18" end="21" title="Immunoglobulin M" label="IgM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396793" start="49" end="57" title="Isotype (immunology)" label="isotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="61" end="71" title="antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q79451" start="87" end="101" title="Immunoglobulin M" label="immunoglobulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="124" end="134" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="180" end="188" title="Immune response" label="response"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="215" end="222" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q250694" start="330" end="341" title="plasmablast" label="plasmablast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="350" end="356" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="430" end="438" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q221179" start="483" end="495" title="Streptococcus pneumoniae" label="pneumococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="611" end="618" title="Dalton (unit)" label="daltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="664" end="672" title="antibody" label="antibody"/>
<link wikidata="Q24784914" start="767" end="776" title="Immunoglobulin V-set domain" label="V domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="1101" end="1117" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308178" start="1209" end="1214" title="Clone (cell biology)" label="clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="3173" end="3195" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="immunoglobulin G (IgG)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="3815" end="3830" title="Disulfide" label="disulfide bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="7427" end="7440" title="radiolabeling" label="radiolabeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="7837" end="7844" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="7927" end="7948" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="7954" end="7970" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="NMR spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="8519" end="8529" title="Complement system" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834949" start="8540" end="8542" title="C1 complex" label="C1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128320" start="8560" end="8577" title="classical complement pathway" label="classical pathway"/>
<link wikidata="Q420107" start="8590" end="8602" title="opsonization" label="opsonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="8606" end="8614" title="antigens" label="antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663023" start="8619" end="8628" title="cytolysis" label="cytolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18253018" start="8649" end="8683" title="Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor" label="polyimmunoglobulin receptor (pIgR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="8716" end="8723" title="mucosal" label="mucosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141325" start="8750" end="8755" title="lumen (anatomy)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189814" start="8964" end="8975" title="endocytosis" label="endocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="9231" end="9240" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="9363" end="9378" title="immunoglobulins" label="immunoglobulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="9430" end="9437" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="10852" end="10862" title="complement system" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156412" start="11044" end="11064" title="complement receptors" label="complement receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093098" start="11638" end="11657" title="V(D)J recombination" label="V(D)J recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386881" start="12155" end="12185" title="Immunoglobulin class switching" label="Immunoglobulin class switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q79448" start="12540" end="12543" title="Immunoglobulin G" label="IgG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724539" start="12793" end="12820" title="congenital rubella syndrome" label="congenital rubella syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="13273" end="13280" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188010" start="13376" end="13392" title="ABO blood group system" label="A and B antigens"/>
<link wikidata="Q393294" start="13597" end="13610" title="Agglutination (biology)" label="agglutination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="13615" end="13629" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="13653" end="13670" title="blood transfusion" label="blood transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="13720" end="13730" title="blood type" label="blood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027725" start="13751" end="13759" title="IGHM" label="mu chain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13778" end="13816" title="autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia" label="autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259421" start="13906" end="13932" title="Schnitzler&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Schnitzler&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919814" start="13950" end="13994" title="Immunodeficiency with hyper-immunoglobulin M" label="Immunodeficiency with hyper-immunoglobulin M"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085903" start="13997" end="14024" title="Immunoglobulin M deficiency" label="Immunoglobulin M deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="14027" end="14040" title="Immune system" label="Immune system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490677" wikidata="Q6255822" url="?curid=490677" title="John Rowland">
<text>John Rowland may refer to:

* Bo Rowland (1903–1964), American football player and coach, basketball player
* John A. Rowland (1791–1873), California pioneer
* John G. Rowland (born 1957), American (former) Governor of Connecticut
* John Sharpe Rowland (1798–1863), 19th-century American politician
* John Rowland (diplomat) (1925–1996), Australian diplomat
* John Rowland (footballer, born 1936) (1936–2002), Welsh footballer
* John Rowland (footballer, born 1941) (1941–2020), English footballer
* John Cambrian Rowland (1819–1890), Welsh painter
* John T. Rowland (1871–1945), American architect
* John Rowland (MP), represented Winchelsea

==Characters==
* John Rowland (&quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;), character in the U.S. television series &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;
* John Rowland: the main protagonist in the 1898 novella &quot;The Wreck of the Titan: Or, Futility&quot; by Morgan Robertson

==See also==
* John Roland (1941–2023), American news presenter and reporter
* John Rowlands (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6255822" start="0" end="12" title="John Rowland" label="John Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931155" start="30" end="40" title="Bo Rowland" label="Bo Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065484" start="110" end="125" title="John A. Rowland" label="John A. Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q885204" start="160" end="175" title="John G. Rowland" label="John G. Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16065983" start="233" end="252" title="John Sharpe Rowland" label="John Sharpe Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696620" start="301" end="324" title="John Rowland (diplomat)" label="John Rowland (diplomat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255826" start="360" end="396" title="John Rowland (footballer, born 1936)" label="John Rowland (footballer, born 1936)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255828" start="429" end="465" title="John Rowland (footballer, born 1941)" label="John Rowland (footballer, born 1941)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21460680" start="500" end="521" title="John Cambrian Rowland" label="John Cambrian Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260094" start="551" end="566" title="John T. Rowland" label="John T. Rowland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="601" end="618" title="John Rowland (MP)" label="John Rowland (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023761" start="632" end="642" title="Winchelsea (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Winchelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q610132" start="661" end="708" title="John Rowland (Desperate Housewives)" label="John Rowland (&amp;quot;Desperate Housewives&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="846" end="882" title="The Wreck of the Titan: Or, Futility" label="The Wreck of the Titan: Or, Futility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255469" start="925" end="936" title="John Roland" label="John Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11776515" start="989" end="1019" title="John Rowlands (disambiguation)" label="John Rowlands (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490678" wikidata="Q5406939" url="?curid=490678" title="LaToya London">
<text>LaToya Renee London (born December 29, 1978) is an American R&amp;B and soul singer and stage actress who was fourth-place finalist on the third season of &quot;American Idol.&quot; Her debut album, &quot;Love &amp; Life&quot;, was released in September 2005 and spawned a number of moderate R&amp;B chart hits. She has concentrated on stage work, including originating and performing the role of Nettie in the national tour of the Broadway musical &quot;The Color Purple&quot; from 2007 to 2010, for which she won an Ovation Award. She was the lead in the U.S. regional debut of &quot;The Bodyguard,&quot; a musical based on the 1992 film.

==Early life==
London was born in San Francisco, California and raised in Oakland, California, where she had her first public musical performance when, at the age of 7, she sang in her mother&#x27;s wedding. Her interest in singing began when she was just 4 years old, when she frequently sang when attending Allen Temple Baptist church. As a teenager, she sang with the Oakland Youth Chorus from 1993 to 1996. In 1996, she graduated from Skyline High School (the same school actor Tom Hanks and basketball player Gary Payton attended). She also worked as a waitress and a bartender and sang in a Christian rock group. She was also a backup vocalist and did frequent guest vocals for several Bay Area artists. When she began &quot;American Idol&quot;, she was the lead vocalist in a band, All-Star Jukebox, which usually performed at weddings.

==&quot;American Idol&quot;==

London auditioned for the third season of &quot;American Idol&quot; in Los Angeles, California. Although she moved on through each round, she had not been featured prominently in any aired footage and was written off by many fans before the first studio performances. However, as a member of the third group of eight semifinalists, she sang Eric Carmen&#x27;s &quot;All by Myself,&quot; and received a standing ovation from celebrity judges Donna Summer, Randy Jackson and Paula Abdul. Jackson labeled her performance as &quot;brilliant&quot; and &quot;what the search for a superstar is all about,&quot; Abdul called her &quot;unbelievable&quot; and praised her &quot;quiet confidence,&quot; and Simon Cowell said she was &quot;the best of the group&quot; and that it was a &quot;superb, outstanding performance.&quot; She was voted through to the final 12 contestants with 32.3 percent of audience votes, the largest percentage for every week of the semifinals.

In the following nine weeks, London had several high points on &quot;American Idol&quot;. Cowell called her performance of Chaka Khan&#x27;s &quot;Ain&#x27;t Nobody&quot; &quot;amazing&quot; and &quot;awesome.&quot; Abdul said that she reminded her of &quot;a young Gladys Knight&quot; after she performed the Garth Brooks song &quot;Ain&#x27;t Goin&#x27; Down (&#x27;Til the Sun Comes Up),&quot; Nickolas Ashford of famed soul duo Ashford &amp; Simpson called her performance of &quot;Ooo Baby Baby&quot; by Smokey Robinson as &quot;beautiful&quot; and full of &quot;sex appeal,&quot; Film director Quentin Tarantino called her a &quot;powerhouse&quot; after her performance of &quot;Somewhere&quot; from the musical &quot;West Side Story&quot;, and Cowell announced her as &quot;the best singer in the competition&quot; after she sang &quot;All the Time&quot; by Barry Manilow and gave her &quot;a ten out of ten&quot; for her performance of &quot;Don&#x27;t Rain on My Parade,&quot; which also garnered standing ovations from Abdul and Jackson.

London was central to one of the first controversies of the show. On April 21, 2004, the night after the final seven contestants performed Barry Manilow songs, London, Jennifer Hudson, and eventual winner Fantasia Barrino ended up in the bottom three with the least viewer votes. Together, these three had been dubbed &quot;The Three Divas&quot; for their critically acclaimed performances. London had the highest vote totals out of the three, and Hudson was ultimately eliminated. Because all three of the singers were African American and the frontrunners of the competition, music icon Elton John deemed the voting as &quot;racist,&quot; igniting a flurry of news and speculation over the validity of the voting system. John complained at a promotional news conference that, &quot;The three people I was really impressed with, and they just happened to be black, young female singers, and they all seem to be landing in the bottom three.&quot;

London&#x27;s second controversy occurred on May 11, 2004, when the final four contestants each performed two disco songs. Simon Cowell, who previously endorsed her as the best singer in the competition, suggested that his only complaint with London was that after ten weeks he still did not know anything at all about her. Cowell also suggested that contestant Jasmine Trias would almost certainly be voted off the next day. However, on May 12, London became the ninth of the 12 finalists to be eliminated, finishing in fourth place, with Barrino also landing in the bottom two. London&#x27;s farewell song was &quot;Don&#x27;t Rain on My Parade.&quot;

===Performances===
The songs London sang on the show follow:

==Post-&quot;Idol&quot;==

Immediately after being eliminated from the series, London was featured in the Norman Lear-helmed Declare Yourself voting campaign by famed photographer David LaChapelle, alongside music stars like Christina Aguilera and André 3000. Her appearance on &quot;Idol&quot; host Ryan Seacrest&#x27;s daily television talk show was one of its highest-rated episodes, and Oakland Mayor Jerry Brown officially declared May 4 to be LaToya London Day; one month later, she officially received the key to the city. Her rendition of Harold Melvin &amp; the Blue Notes &quot;If You Don&#x27;t Know Me by Now&quot; on the top-selling compilation disc, &quot;American Idol Season 3: Greatest Soul Classics&quot;, was praised as one of the album&#x27;s best. She was also heavily featured on the group track, &quot;Ain&#x27;t No Mountain High Enough.&quot;

In the summer of 2004, London performed with the other top 10 finalists in &quot;American Idol&quot; season three international tour, which crossed the United States and also visited China and Singapore. She had a guest co-hosting gig on the national entertainment news show, &quot;Access Hollywood&quot;, and she has performed for such events and galas as the Richmond/Ermet AIDS Foundation, 100 Black Men of America, and the Clear Channel holiday party. London has also performed the national anthem for numerous National Football League games, including the 2005 Super Bowl NFL Commissioner pre-game party. She has shared the stage with such icons and superstars as Elton John, Whoopi Goldberg, Barry Manilow, Gladys Knight, Nancy Wilson, Chaka Khan, Rachelle Ferrell, Goapele, and Burt Bacharach.

In November 2004, it was announced that London had been signed to jazz recording label Peak Records, an imprint of Concord Records, the final label of jazz legend Ray Charles before his death. Her first single, &quot;Appreciate,&quot; which featured a guest rap from Black Thought of the Hip-Hop group The Roots, hit the airwaves in July, and a music video of that song followed. The CD single, &quot;Appreciate/Every Part of Me/All By Myself&quot; reached number eight on the Billboard Singles Sales Chart. The single sold 8,500 units.

===2005–2006: &quot;Love &amp; Life&quot;===
Her debut studio album, &quot;Love &amp; Life&quot;, was released on September 20, 2005. A mix of R&amp;B, soul, jazz, and hip-hop, &quot;Love &amp; Life&quot; featured songwriting by London, along with songs by well-known producers such as David Foster and Narada Michael Walden. The &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; called her &quot;impassioned and polished&quot; with &quot;sumptuous, wondrously elastic mezzo pipes,&quot; &quot;People&quot; magazine called it one of the best post-&quot;American Idol&quot; albums, and Apple Computer&#x27;s iTunes named it one of the best albums of 2005, and her song &quot;Non A What&#x27;cha Do&quot; as one of the best individual recordings of the year. &quot;Love &amp; Life&quot; sold 12,546 albums in its first week, landing at number 82 on Billboard Top 200 Albums chart and at number 27 on Billboard Top R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Albums. To date, it has sold approximately 58,000 copies. Additionally, London has sold over 15,000 digital downloads.

London released two follow-up singles, &quot;Every Part of Me&quot; and &quot;State of My Heart&quot; in 2006, the latter of which hit number 40 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary Tracks chart and number five on the radio industry periodical &quot;Friday Morning Quarterback&quot;&#x27;s Adult Contemporary spin chart.

London was also nominated for an award in the R&amp;B category of the 2006 Bay Area Rap Scene (BARS) Awards; however, violence and disruption ended the show early before the award winners were announced. Latoya was competing against R&amp;B star Goapele, among others.

London announced that despite having an initial three-album deal, she had parted ways from Peak Records and Concord Records. She is currently writing songs for her second album and is shopping for a new recording label.

In February 2006, she landed a lead role in Laterras R. Whitfield&#x27;s touring dramatic comedy play &quot;Issues: We All Have &#x27;Em.&quot; She sang a jazz-tinged version of &quot;Hark! Hear the Bells&quot; on the VH1 &quot;Soul Train&quot; Christmas television special, and sang the same song on a special edition of the 40th Anniversary &quot;A Charlie Brown Christmas&quot; album.

In late summer 2006, London made her Los Angeles professional stage debut with a starring role in the retro musical, &quot;Beehive,&quot; at the El Portal Theater in North Hollywood. London and the show earned rave reviews. That same year, the cast was nominated by the Los Angeles Drama Critics Circle for Best Ensemble Performance in their annual awards.

London was featured as a guest vocalist on Paul Taylor&#x27;s new album, &quot;Ladies&#x27; Choice,&quot; released in May 2007.

London played Nettie in &quot;The Color Purple,&quot; which debuted at the Cadillac Palace Theatre for an extended run in Chicago, Illinois. London ended her run in 2010 and received a nomination for an NAACP Theatre Award in 2008 in the best supporting actress in an equity production category.

===2010–present: Urban Punk ===
London joined with hip-hop artist H2O in 2010 to form the group Urban Punk, producing music that combines Europop melodies with hip-hop rhythms. They have released two tracks, &quot;Around the World&quot; and &quot;Twisted&quot;.

In June 2013, London joined the cast of the Carolina Opry in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.

London has starred in a number of national tours, including &quot;Redemption of a Dogg,&quot; and Tyler Perry&#x27;s &quot;Madea on the Run&quot;, as well as regional productions, including &quot;Silence! The Musical&quot; and as Shug Avery in Celebration Theatre&#x27;s production of &quot;The Color Purple.&quot; She was the lead in the U.S. regional debut of &quot;The Bodyguard,&quot; a musical based on the 1992 film.

==Personal life==
London suffered a setback when she had to pull out of the VH1 Soul Tour with Jaguar Wright and Kindred due to a &quot;family emergency.&quot; Additionally, when &quot;Ebony&quot; magazine named her one of the hottest African American bachelorettes in America in its July 2005 issue, speculation about the state of her marriage sparked off. While she was on &quot;American Idol&quot;, she proudly stated that she was married and had stepchildren. She later confirmed that she and her husband had divorced.

==Politics and endorsements==
London posed for a political print advertising campaign by Declare Yourself, encouraging voter registration among youth for the 2008 United States presidential election. In the ads by photographer David LaChapelle, London has a nail through her upper and lower lips, pinning her mouth shut in a symbolic function. The ads drew national attention.

London also performed &quot;Ain&#x27;t Nobody&quot; in Oakland on Election Day 2008 celebrating Barack Obama&#x27;s historic victory.

==Discography==
===Albums===
===Singles===
* &quot;Appreciate/Every Part of Me/All By Myself&quot; (August 2005)
* &quot;Every Part of Me&quot;
* &quot;State Of My Heart&quot; Number 40 Hot AC Tracks

===Guest contributions===

* &quot;If U Buyin&#x27;&quot; (with C-Bo) (1999)
* &quot;I Know You Want Me&quot; (with H2O from &quot;The Mixtape Vol. 1&quot;) (2004)
* &quot;I Want to Show You&quot; (with H2O from &quot;The Mixtape Vol. 1&quot;) (2004)
* &quot;Konfessions&quot; (with H2O from &quot;The Mixtape Vol. 1&quot;) (2004)
* With Okolo on &quot;The &quot;Real&quot; Diamond N Tha Rough&quot;) (2005)
* &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27;&quot; (with Golden Sol), from &quot;The Golden Sol EP&quot;) (August 2005)
* &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27;&quot; (with Golden Sol from &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP&quot;) (August 2006)
* &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27; (DJ Solomon&#x27;s Baltimore House Mix)&quot; (with Golden Sol from &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP&quot;) (August 2006)
* &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27; (Ean&#x27;s Disco Re-Rub)&quot; (with Golden Sol from &quot;Keeps Me Movin&#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP&quot;) (August 2006)
* &quot;Hold Up (Wait a Minute)&quot; (with John Payne from &quot;The Journey&quot;) (October 2006)
* &quot;Send My Baby Back&quot; (with Donnie Williams and Park Place from &quot;Just Like Magic&quot;) (March 2007)
* &quot;Funky Times&quot; (with Donnie Williams and Park Place from &quot;Just Like Magic&quot;) (March 2007)
* &quot;Just Like Magic&quot; (with Donnie Williams and Park Place from &quot;Just Like Magic&quot;) (March 2007)
* &quot;I Want To Be Loved (By You)&quot; (with Paul Taylor from &quot;Ladies&#x27; Choice (Paul Taylor album)&quot;) (March 2007)
* &quot;ahh means ahh&quot; (with aj from &quot;Worldwide&quot;) (March 2007)

==Awards and nominations==
Ovation Awards
*2012: Won the award for Featured Actress in a Musical for her role as Shug Avery in the Celebration Theatre production of &quot;The Color Purple: The Musical&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* The Official Homepage at Peak Records
* Interview at britishhiphop.co.uk, June 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5406939" start="0" end="19" title="LaToya London" label="LaToya Renee London"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="51" end="58" title="United States" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="60" end="67" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="72" end="76" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187148" start="139" end="151" title="American Idol (season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="161" end="174" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690208" start="205" end="220" title="Love &amp;amp; Life (LaToya London album)" label="Love &amp;amp; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="292" end="299" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="432" end="440" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726834" start="455" end="471" title="The Color Purple (musical)" label="The Color Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113265" start="518" end="531" title="Ovation Awards" label="Ovation Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719011" start="586" end="599" title="The Bodyguard (musical)" label="The Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q725946" start="630" end="639" title="The Bodyguard (1992 film)" label="1992 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="676" end="701" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="716" end="735" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537910" start="1081" end="1100" title="Skyline High School (Oakland, California)" label="Skyline High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="1124" end="1133" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q309872" start="1156" end="1167" title="Gary Payton" label="Gary Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q753520" start="1239" end="1253" title="Christian rock" label="Christian rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="1334" end="1342" title="Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1589" end="1612" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q437551" start="1859" end="1870" title="Eric Carmen" label="Eric Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320274" start="1884" end="1897" title="All by Myself" label="All by Myself"/>
<link wikidata="Q337521" start="1973" end="1986" title="Randy Jackson" label="Randy Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="1991" end="2002" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q162629" start="2215" end="2227" title="Simon Cowell" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="2606" end="2616" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108220143" start="2630" end="2647" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="2793" end="2805" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697210" start="2817" end="2872" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Down (&amp;#x27;Til the Sun Comes Up)" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Down (&amp;#x27;Til the Sun Comes Up)"/>
<link wikidata="Q725246" start="2880" end="2896" title="Nickolas Ashford" label="Nickolas Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q725246" start="2915" end="2936" title="Ashford &amp;amp; Simpson" label="Ashford &amp;amp; Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801222" start="2969" end="2982" title="Ooo Baby Baby" label="Ooo Baby Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q310332" start="2992" end="3007" title="Smokey Robinson" label="Smokey Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="3083" end="3100" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="3207" end="3222" title="West Side Story (musical)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="3348" end="3361" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473480" start="3433" end="3461" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Rain on My Parade" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Rain on My Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="3671" end="3684" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q192410" start="3700" end="3715" title="Jennifer Hudson" label="Jennifer Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q232288" start="3737" end="3753" title="Fantasia Barrino" label="Fantasia Barrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="4052" end="4068" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="4121" end="4131" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="4590" end="4595" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366" start="4596" end="4600" title="song" label="song"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543260" start="4842" end="4855" title="Jasmine Trias" label="Jasmine Trias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270283" start="5303" end="5314" title="Norman Lear" label="Norman Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954949" start="5322" end="5338" title="Declare Yourself" label="Declare Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="5377" end="5393" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41594" start="5422" end="5440" title="Christina Aguilera" label="Christina Aguilera"/>
<link wikidata="Q448837" start="5445" end="5455" title="André 3000" label="André 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q299266" start="5497" end="5510" title="Ryan Seacrest" label="Ryan Seacrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="5602" end="5613" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585918" start="5744" end="5778" title="Harold Melvin &amp;amp; the Blue Notes" label="Harold Melvin &amp;amp; the Blue Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969724" start="5785" end="5817" title="If You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Me by Now" label="If You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Me by Now"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5867" end="5913" title="American Idol Season 3: Greatest Soul Classics" label="American Idol Season 3: Greatest Soul Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828126" start="6022" end="6056" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Mountain High Enough" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t No Mountain High Enough"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6258" end="6267" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200690" start="6347" end="6363" title="Access Hollywood" label="Access Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970437" start="6458" end="6482" title="100 Black Men of America" label="100 Black Men of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q477993" start="6492" end="6505" title="Clear Channel Communications" label="Clear Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6580" end="6604" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="6631" end="6641" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="6734" end="6744" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="6746" end="6761" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q302762" start="6763" end="6776" title="Barry Manilow" label="Barry Manilow"/>
<link wikidata="Q235952" start="6778" end="6791" title="Gladys Knight" label="Gladys Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q467690" start="6793" end="6805" title="Nancy Wilson (jazz singer)" label="Nancy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q229498" start="6807" end="6817" title="Chaka Khan" label="Chaka Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q470130" start="6819" end="6835" title="Rachelle Ferrell" label="Rachelle Ferrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109564" start="6837" end="6844" title="Goapele" label="Goapele"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="6850" end="6864" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q195137" start="6954" end="6966" title="Peak Records" label="Peak Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124061" start="6982" end="6997" title="Concord Records" label="Concord Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="7030" end="7041" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q880598" start="7134" end="7147" title="Black Thought" label="Black Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="7169" end="7178" title="The Roots" label="The Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690208" start="7480" end="7495" title="Love &amp;amp; Life (LaToya London album)" label="Love &amp;amp; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q77112" start="7691" end="7703" title="David Foster" label="David Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q542681" start="7708" end="7729" title="Narada Michael Walden" label="Narada Michael Walden"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="7741" end="7764" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="7885" end="7891" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="7976" end="7990" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="7998" end="8004" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426654" start="8688" end="8714" title="Friday Morning Quarterback" label="Friday Morning Quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="8993" end="9000" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109564" start="9006" end="9013" title="Goapele" label="Goapele"/>
<link wikidata="Q195137" start="9121" end="9133" title="Peak Records" label="Peak Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124061" start="9138" end="9153" title="Concord Records" label="Concord Records"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9295" end="9316" title="Laterras R. Whitfield" label="Laterras R. Whitfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="9469" end="9472" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q195732" start="9479" end="9489" title="Soul Train" label="Soul Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393337" start="9600" end="9625" title="A Charlie Brown Christmas" label="A Charlie Brown Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="9806" end="9821" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles, California" label="North Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726834" start="10157" end="10173" title="The Color Purple (musical)" label="The Color Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="10249" end="10266" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952103" start="10330" end="10349" title="NAACP Theatre Awards" label="NAACP Theatre Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899986" start="10520" end="10530" title="Urban Punk" label="Urban Punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044871" start="10731" end="10744" title="Carolina Opry" label="Carolina Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q839805" start="10748" end="10776" title="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina" label="Myrtle Beach, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q686301" start="10877" end="10888" title="Tyler Perry" label="Tyler Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514344" start="10975" end="10995" title="Silence! The Musical" label="Silence! The Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057642" start="11023" end="11042" title="Celebration Theatre" label="Celebration Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726834" start="11070" end="11086" title="The Color Purple (musical)" label="The Color Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719011" start="11147" end="11160" title="The Bodyguard (musical)" label="The Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q725946" start="11191" end="11200" title="The Bodyguard (1992 film)" label="1992 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q370839" start="11298" end="11311" title="Jaguar Wright" label="Jaguar Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410655" start="11316" end="11323" title="Kindred the Family Soul" label="Kindred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280017" start="11388" end="11393" title="Ebony (magazine)" label="Ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="11438" end="11454" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954949" start="11816" end="11832" title="Declare Yourself" label="Declare Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="11885" end="11925" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="11954" end="11970" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108220143" start="12133" end="12150" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="12201" end="12213" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772878" start="12505" end="12509" title="C-Bo" label="C-Bo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12572" end="12590" title="The Mixtape Vol. 1" label="The Mixtape Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12659" end="12677" title="The Mixtape Vol. 1" label="The Mixtape Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12739" end="12757" title="The Mixtape Vol. 1" label="The Mixtape Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548368" start="12779" end="12784" title="Okolo" label="Okolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12794" end="12834" title="The &amp;quot;Real&amp;quot; Diamond N Tha Rough" label="The &amp;quot;Real&amp;quot; Diamond N Tha Rough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12890" end="12900" title="Golden Sol" label="Golden Sol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12914" end="12931" title="The Golden Sol EP" label="The Golden Sol EP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12994" end="13004" title="Golden Sol" label="Golden Sol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13016" end="13065" title="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP" label="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13168" end="13178" title="Golden Sol" label="Golden Sol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13190" end="13239" title="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP" label="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13328" end="13338" title="Golden Sol" label="Golden Sol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13350" end="13399" title="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP" label="Keeps Me Movin&amp;#x27; (Featuring Latoya London) EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701371" start="13465" end="13475" title="John Payne (singer)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13487" end="13498" title="The Journey (John Payne album)" label="The Journey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13559" end="13589" title="Donnie Williams and Park Place" label="Donnie Williams and Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13601" end="13616" title="Just Like Magic (Donnie Williams album}" label="Just Like Magic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13669" end="13699" title="Donnie Williams and Park Place" label="Donnie Williams and Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13711" end="13726" title="Just Like Magic (Donnie Williams album}" label="Just Like Magic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13783" end="13813" title="Donnie Williams and Park Place" label="Donnie Williams and Park Place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13825" end="13840" title="Just Like Magic (Donnie Williams album}" label="Just Like Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153936" start="13909" end="13920" title="Paul Taylor (saxophonist)" label="Paul Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13932" end="13971" title="Ladies&amp;#x27; Choice (Paul Taylor album)" label="Ladies&amp;#x27; Choice (Paul Taylor album)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14026" end="14028" title="aj (musician)" label="aj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14040" end="14049" title="Worldwide (AJ album)" label="Worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113265" start="14098" end="14112" title="Ovation Awards" label="Ovation Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490681" wikidata="Q6351314" url="?curid=490681" title="Council for New England">
<text>The Council for New England was a 17th-century English joint stock company to which James I of England awarded a royal charter, with the purpose of expanding his realm over parts of North America by establishing colonial settlements. 

The Council was established in November of 1620, and was disbanded (although with no apparent changes in land titles) in 1635. It provided for the establishment of the Plymouth Colony, the Province of New Hampshire, the Massachusetts Bay Colony, the New Haven Colony, and the Province of Maine. 

Sir Ferdinand Gorges was a major promoter of English colonization of New England, and was a key figure in establishment and operations of the Council.

==Founding==
Some of the persons involved had previously received a charter in 1606 as the Plymouth Company and had founded the short-lived Popham Colony within the territory of northern Virginia (actually in present-day Maine in the United States). The company had fallen into disuse following the abandonment of the 1607 colony. 

The Council was re-established, with support from Gorges, after (1) Captain John Smith had completed a thorough survey of the Atlantic side of New England (and named it such), (2) Richard Vines over-wintered in 1616, off the Maine coast and discovered that a plague was decimating Native Americans and (3) a friendly English speaking local Native American had been placed in the most likely colonization spot.

In the new 1620 charter granted by James I, the company was given rights of settlement in the area now designated as New England, which was the land previously part of the Virginia Colony north of the 40th parallel, and extending to the 48th parallel. 

==1620 Charter==
The Charter of 1620 mentions the wish of certain settlers for English colonization of all land between degrees 34 and 45, but instead provides for colonization between degrees 40 and 48. The colonial plantation was to found settlements and commerce for Christian peoples and establish trade and commerce between these new colonies and the colonies of George Somers and Thomas Gates (Virginia Colony). 

These new colonies were to be managed by Gentry from Plymouth, Exeter, and Bristol. These members of the Council were to have, in perpetuity for them and their descendants, rights and privileges extended for the governance and management of trade of the colony.

Individuals listed as beneficiaries of the charter include:
* Ludovic Stewart, 2nd Duke of Lennox
* George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham
* William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke
* Thomas Howard, 14th Earl of Arundel
* William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling
* James Hamilton, 2nd Marquess of Hamilton
* Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton
* Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick
* John Ramsay, 1st Earl of Holderness
* Edward la Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche
* Edmund Sheffield, 1st Baron Sheffield
* Baron Gorges of Dundalk
* Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset
* Robert Mansell
* Edward Zouch
* Dudley Digges
* Thomas Roe
* Ferdinando Gorges
* Francis Popham
* John Brooke, 1st Baron Cobham
* Richard Hawkins
* Allen Apsley
* Sir Warwick Hale
* Sir Richard Catchmay
* Sir John Bourchier
* Nathaniel Rich
* Edward Giles
* Giles Mompesson
* Thomas Wroth
* Matthew Sutcliffe
* Robert Heath
* John Drake
* Raleigh Gilbert
* George Chudley
* Thomas Hamon
* John Argall

The Council would have full legal rights of governance and administration over the colonial plantation. The members of the Council would elect a President to oversee administrative affairs.

In 1622, the Plymouth Council issued a land grant to John Mason which ultimately evolved into the Province of New Hampshire.

===1635 revocation===
With the establishment of the Plymouth Colony, Massachusetts Bay Colony, Province of New Hampshire, Saybrook Colony, and New Haven Colony, the council was disbanded by royal charter.

==References==
==External links==
*1620 Charter of New England from the Avalon Project
*1635 Surrender of the New England Charter from the Avalon Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6351314" start="4" end="27" title="Council for New England" label="Council for New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="47" end="54" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q134161" start="55" end="74" title="joint stock company" label="joint stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="84" end="102" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="113" end="126" title="royal charter#United Kingdom" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250464" start="162" end="167" title="realm" label="realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="182" end="195" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="404" end="419" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="425" end="450" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="Province of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="456" end="480" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q847131" start="486" end="502" title="New Haven Colony" label="New Haven Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620150" start="512" end="529" title="Province of Maine" label="Province of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443946" start="533" end="553" title="Sir Ferdinand Gorges" label="Sir Ferdinand Gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q917078" start="776" end="792" title="Plymouth Company" label="Plymouth Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003171" start="825" end="838" title="Popham Colony" label="Popham Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="872" end="880" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="906" end="911" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="919" end="932" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q228024" start="1086" end="1104" title="John Smith (explorer)" label="Captain John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329673" start="1198" end="1211" title="Richard Vines (colonist)" label="Richard Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1464" end="1471" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1546" end="1557" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186266" start="1630" end="1643" title="40th parallel north" label="40th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256527" start="1666" end="1679" title="48th parallel north" label="48th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760644" start="2051" end="2064" title="George Somers" label="George Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990626" start="2069" end="2081" title="Thomas Gates (governor)" label="Thomas Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="2083" end="2098" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="2144" end="2150" title="Landed gentry" label="Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="2156" end="2164" title="Plymouth, England" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="2166" end="2172" title="Exeter, England" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="2178" end="2185" title="Bristol, England" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q335979" start="2428" end="2463" title="Ludovic Stewart, 2nd Duke of Lennox" label="Ludovic Stewart, 2nd Duke of Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q313817" start="2466" end="2505" title="George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q335358" start="2508" end="2545" title="William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke" label="William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q166517" start="2548" end="2583" title="Thomas Howard, 14th Earl of Arundel" label="Thomas Howard, 14th Earl of Arundel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019920" start="2586" end="2625" title="William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling" label="William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q335611" start="2628" end="2668" title="James Hamilton, 2nd Marquess of Hamilton" label="James Hamilton, 2nd Marquess of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q743492" start="2671" end="2713" title="Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton" label="Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q741503" start="2716" end="2748" title="Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick" label="Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254146" start="2751" end="2786" title="John Ramsay, 1st Earl of Holderness" label="John Ramsay, 1st Earl of Holderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346053" start="2789" end="2824" title="Edward la Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche" label="Edward la Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339822" start="2827" end="2864" title="Edmund Sheffield, 1st Baron Sheffield" label="Edmund Sheffield, 1st Baron Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862408" start="2867" end="2890" title="Baron Gorges of Dundalk" label="Baron Gorges of Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336096" start="2893" end="2926" title="Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset" label="Robert Carr, 1st Earl of Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347323" start="2929" end="2943" title="Robert Mansell" label="Robert Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65645595" start="2946" end="2958" title="Edward Zouch" label="Edward Zouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040900" start="2961" end="2974" title="Dudley Digges" label="Dudley Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q983131" start="2977" end="2987" title="Thomas Roe" label="Thomas Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443946" start="2990" end="3007" title="Ferdinando Gorges" label="Ferdinando Gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482220" start="3010" end="3024" title="Francis Popham (1573–1644)" label="Francis Popham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223342" start="3027" end="3056" title="John Brooke, 1st Baron Cobham" label="John Brooke, 1st Baron Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q523616" start="3059" end="3074" title="Richard Hawkins" label="Richard Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q404730" start="3077" end="3089" title="Allen Apsley (administrator)" label="Allen Apsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969823" start="3155" end="3169" title="Nathaniel Rich (merchant adventurer)" label="Nathaniel Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343110" start="3172" end="3184" title="Edward Giles" label="Edward Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561693" start="3187" end="3202" title="Giles Mompesson" label="Giles Mompesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795339" start="3205" end="3217" title="Thomas Wroth (politician, 17th century)" label="Thomas Wroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791287" start="3220" end="3237" title="Matthew Sutcliffe" label="Matthew Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345359" start="3240" end="3252" title="Robert Heath" label="Robert Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230085" start="3255" end="3265" title="John Drake (died 1628)" label="John Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247061" start="3575" end="3585" title="John Mason (governor)" label="John Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="3620" end="3645" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="Province of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="3700" end="3715" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="3717" end="3741" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617382" start="3743" end="3768" title="Province of New Hampshire" label="Province of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228499" start="3770" end="3785" title="Saybrook Colony" label="Saybrook Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q847131" start="3791" end="3807" title="New Haven Colony" label="New Haven Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827597" start="3926" end="3940" title="Avalon Project" label="Avalon Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490682" wikidata="Q867172" url="?curid=490682" title="Cyanoacetylene">
<text>Cyanoacetylene is an organic compound with the formula or . It is the simplest cyanopolyyne. Cyanoacetylene has been detected by spectroscopic methods in interstellar clouds, in the coma of comet Hale–Bopp and in the atmosphere of Saturn&#x27;s moon Titan, where it sometimes forms expansive fog-like clouds.

Cyanoacetylene is one of the molecules that was produced in the Miller–Urey experiment.

==See also==
*Dicyanoacetylene, N≡C−C≡C−C≡N
*Diacetylene, H−C≡C−C≡C−H
*Cyanogen, N≡C−C≡N
*Hydrocyanic acid, H−C≡N
*Polyyne, R−(C≡C)&quot;n&quot;−R

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q867172" start="0" end="14" title="Cyanoacetylene" label="Cyanoacetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="21" end="37" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q786520" start="79" end="91" title="cyanopolyyne" label="cyanopolyyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="129" end="150" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054444" start="154" end="172" title="interstellar cloud" label="interstellar cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q259854" start="182" end="186" title="Coma (cometary)" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q69854" start="190" end="205" title="comet Hale–Bopp" label="comet Hale–Bopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="231" end="237" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="250" end="255" title="titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208625" start="374" end="396" title="Miller–Urey experiment" label="Miller–Urey experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q903293" start="413" end="429" title="Dicyanoacetylene" label="Dicyanoacetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q422802" start="444" end="455" title="Diacetylene" label="Diacetylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q421724" start="470" end="478" title="Cyanogen" label="Cyanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="489" end="505" title="Hydrocyanic acid" label="Hydrocyanic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419235" start="514" end="521" title="Polyyne" label="Polyyne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490685" wikidata="Q1436737" url="?curid=490685" title="Renal clearance ratio">
<text>The renal clearance ratio or fractional excretion is a relative measure of the speed at which a constituent of urine passes through the kidneys. It is defined by following equation:

:formula_1
* X is the analyte substance
* Cx is the renal plasma clearance of X
* Cin is the renal plasma clearance of inulin.

Creatinine is sometimes used instead of inulin as the reference substance; for example, the calcium-creatinine clearance ratio is used in an attempt to distinguish between different causes of a high plasma calcium concentration. It is easier to use creatinine rather than inulin as the comparitor as creatinine is produced by the body, whereas inulin has to be intravenously infused.

==See also==
* Clearance (pharmacology)
* Kt/V

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1436737" start="4" end="25" title="Renal clearance ratio" label="renal clearance ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436737" start="29" end="49" title="Renal clearance ratio" label="fractional excretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="111" end="116" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="136" end="142" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282401" start="205" end="212" title="analyte" label="analyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="235" end="257" title="renal plasma clearance" label="renal plasma clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="302" end="308" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="311" end="321" title="Creatinine" label="Creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163287" start="711" end="735" title="Clearance (pharmacology)" label="Clearance (pharmacology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29403" start="738" end="742" title="Kt/V" label="Kt/V"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490687" wikidata="Q2899248" url="?curid=490687" title="Bertha Knight Landes">
<text>Bertha Ethel Knight Landes (October 19, 1868 – November 29, 1943) was the first female mayor of a major American city, serving as mayor of Seattle, Washington from 1926 to 1928. After years of civic activism, primarily with women&#x27;s organizations, she was elected to the Seattle City Council in 1922 and became council president in 1924.

==Early years ==
Landes was born in Ware, Massachusetts to Charles Sanford Knight and Cordelia Cutter. Her father, a veteran of the Union Army, moved the family to Worcester in 1873. She attended Worcester&#x27;s Dix Street School and Classical High School, from which she received her diploma. At the age of 19 she moved to Bloomington, Indiana, to live with her older sister Jessie Knight, whose husband David Starr Jordan had become the president of Indiana University Bloomington. Bertha enrolled as a student at the university in the fall of 1888. She received a degree in history and political science in 1891, after which she returned to Worcester.

After three years of teaching at her alma mater, the Classical High School in Worcester, Massachusetts, she married geologist Henry Landes on January 2, 1894. Knight and Landes had met as students at Indiana University. The couple had three children, one of whom was adopted. Landes moved to Seattle in 1895 when her husband Henry became a geology professor at the fledgling University of Washington, with the help of a favorable recommendation from Jordan. Henry would go on to become dean of the College of Sciences in 1912, the university&#x27;s first.

==Civic activism==
In Seattle, Landes was active in women&#x27;s organizations, including the Women&#x27;s University Club, the Rainier Club, and the Women&#x27;s Auxiliary of University Congregational Church. She was a member of the influential Women&#x27;s Century Club, for which she served as the head of social services (1916-17) and then president (1918-1920). She was president of the Washington State chapter of the League of Women Voters.

From 1920-22 Bertha served as president of the Seattle Federation of Women&#x27;s Clubs, which by 1923 included 245 member clubs representing thousands of women. With the Federation, in 1921 she orchestrated a weeklong Women&#x27;s Educational Exhibit for Washington Manufacturers. Staffed by more than 1,000 club women and showcasing the technological innovations of 130 manufacturers, it bolstered the spirits of the business community during a period of severe recession, symbolizing for the state&#x27;s business community the emergence of Seattle as a sophisticated, modern metropolis. One such manufacturer wrote to Landes after the exhibit expressing hope &quot;that someday you will be rewarded by seeing greater prosperity in Seattle, and that you will then feel fully repaid for the untiring efforts you have put forth.&quot; 

That year, Landes was appointed by the city mayor to serve on a commission studying unemployment, the only woman on the five-member commission.

In 1922, Landes organized &quot;The Women&#x27;s Civic League&quot; (renamed the &quot;Women&#x27;s City Club&quot; in 1923). The purpose of the club was to educate women about local, state, national and world politics, and in cooperation with other organizations, to work towards securing the welfare of the city and improving civic conditions. Within a year it had more than 500 members.

==Political career==
Landes and Kathryn Miracle were the first women to serve on the Seattle City Council; both were elected in 1922. Landes became council president after her reelection in 1924. She became acting mayor in 1924 when Mayor Edwin J. &quot;Doc&quot; Brown left town in June to attend the 1924 Democratic National Convention. Angry at what she saw as police corruption and lawless activity, Landes fired Police Chief William B. Severyns. She began her own law and order campaign, closing down illegal activities throughout the city, including lotteries, punchboards and speakeasies. Upon his return, Brown reinstated the police chief.

When Brown ran for another two-year term in 1926, Landes ran against him, on the platform that &quot;municipal housecleaning&quot; was needed in the Seattle government. Landes easily won the election in March, by more than 6,000 votes.

During her term, she advocated municipal ownership of utilities such as Seattle City Light and street railways. She also fought hard against bootleggers and reckless drivers, and strictly enforced regulations for dance halls and cabarets. The Civic Auditorium, later renovated as the Seattle Opera House, is one of her accomplishments. She appointed qualified professionals to head city departments, improve public transportation and parks, and put the city&#x27;s finances in order.

Landes ran for a second term in 1928. Although endorsed by newspapers, the Central Labor Council, the Prohibition Party, and women&#x27;s organizations, Landes was easily defeated by Frank Edwards, a political unknown, by a vote of 59,000 to 40,000, in a record turnout.

==Later years==
Landes became the first woman to serve as Moderator of Washington&#x27;s Conference of Congregational and Christian Churches and was also elected national president of the Soroptimists, a professional women&#x27;s organization. She wrote many articles for national publications, often urging women to enter politics, their &quot;natural sphere.&quot;

During the 1930s, Landes was chair of the Sewing Room Work for the Women&#x27;s Division of the Mayor&#x27;s Commission for Improved Employment. She oversaw 673 women who sewed garments for women and children to &quot;help improve the unemployment situation.&quot;

From 1933 to 1941, Landes traveled extensively. In 1933, she and her husband began to lead student groups, sponsored by the University of Washington, to the Far East. The couple also took groups of schoolteachers from across the United States to sites in Alaska, Yellowstone and Glacier National Park, among others. Henry contracted bronchitis on a trip to China in June 1936, which developed into pneumonia, leading to his death in Seattle on August 23, 1936, at the age of 68. 

At the time of Henry&#x27;s loss, Bertha wrote that he was &quot;pleased and willing to have me try my wings&quot; and that he was her &quot;tower of strength in times of stress, and made many sacrifices without complaint that I might give my time and strength to my civic service.&quot; She added, &quot;Life was to be lived to the fullest, always on a partnership basis and a definite sharing of different special interests. It was so lived for 40 years until the summons came for one of us, and now I have to face life and its problems alone.&quot;

Following his death, Bertha agreed to lead the tour alone in 1937. She continued her travels in 1938 aboard the ship &quot;SS Monterey&quot;, with stops in Honolulu, Pago Pago, Auckland, Sydney, and Melbourne.

During the late 1930s, Bertha began to reduce her level of civic activism. She gave fewer public speeches, focusing instead on smaller appearances and on lending endorsements and assistance to community causes such as Seattle&#x27;s Women&#x27;s City Club Chorus, as well as fundraising for groups like the League of Women Voters. Her health began to decline. In her private life she turned away from the traditional religious practices of the Congregational Church, of which she and Henry had been members since the late 1890s, joining instead the Unity School of Christianity.

Bertha continued to live independently at the Wilsonian Hotel in Seattle&#x27;s University District until 1941, when she moved to Pacific Palisades, California, in hopes that the warmer climate would improve her health.

==Death and burial==
She died at her son&#x27;s home in Ann Arbor, Michigan on November 29, 1943, at the age of 75. Her ashes were interred at Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park in Seattle.

==Legacy==
Today, the largest meeting room at Seattle City Hall is named in her honor. The tunnel boring machine used to construct the Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel under downtown Seattle was nicknamed &quot;Bertha&quot; after her.

A wing of Read Residence Hall at Indiana_University_Bloomington is named for her.

Marie Dressler plays a character based on her in the film Politics set in the fictional Lake City.

==References==

==Further reading==
*Mildred Tanner Andrews, &quot;Woman&#x27;s Place: A Guide to Seattle and King County History&quot; (Seattle: Gemil Press, 1994), p. 132-134
*Richard C. Berner, &quot;Seattle 1921-1940: From Boom to Bust&quot; (Seattle: Charles Press, 1992)
*Sandra Haarsager, &quot;Bertha Knight Landes: Big-City Mayor&quot; (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994)
*Doris H. Pieroth, &quot;Bertha Knight Landes: The Woman Who Was Mayor,&quot; in &quot;Women in Pacific Northwest History: an Anthology&quot;, ed. by Karen J. Blair (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1988), 83-106.

==External links==

*American National Biography Online at www.anb.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2899248" start="0" end="26" title="Bertha Knight Landes" label="Bertha Ethel Knight Landes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32945293" start="130" end="158" title="list of mayors of Seattle" label="mayor of Seattle, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442079" start="275" end="295" title="Seattle City Council" label="Seattle City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414325" start="379" end="398" title="Ware, Massachusetts" label="Ware, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q290343" start="749" end="767" title="David Starr Jordan" label="David Starr Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="796" end="826" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="1078" end="1102" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="1292" end="1299" title="Seattle, Washington" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="1375" end="1399" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369894" start="1981" end="2003" title="League of Women Voters" label="League of Women Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442079" start="3465" end="3485" title="Seattle City Council" label="Seattle City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847560" start="3619" end="3649" title="Edwin J. Brown" label="Edwin J. &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152781" start="3682" end="3717" title="1924 Democratic National Convention" label="1924 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442080" start="4338" end="4356" title="Seattle City Light" label="Seattle City Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705574" start="4550" end="4569" title="Seattle Opera House" label="Seattle Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q515856" start="4853" end="4870" title="Prohibition Party" label="Prohibition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q130219992" start="4934" end="4947" title="Frank E. Edwards" label="Frank Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546600" start="5211" end="5223" title="Soroptimists" label="Soroptimists"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="5920" end="5931" title="Yellowstone" label="Yellowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q373567" start="5936" end="5957" title="Glacier National Park (U.S.)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="7346" end="7367" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062042" start="7451" end="7479" title="Unity School of Christianity" label="Unity School of Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370207" start="7612" end="7641" title="Pacific Palisades, California" label="Pacific Palisades, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="7759" end="7778" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417254" start="7846" end="7878" title="Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park" label="Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262435" start="7938" end="7955" title="Seattle City Hall" label="Seattle City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974131" start="7979" end="8004" title="Big Bertha (tunnel boring machine)" label="The tunnel boring machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708670" start="8027" end="8065" title="Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel" label="Alaskan Way Viaduct replacement tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q745358" start="8072" end="8088" title="downtown Seattle" label="downtown Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q253282" start="8217" end="8231" title="Marie Dressler" label="Marie Dressler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835823" start="8275" end="8283" title="Politics_(1931_film)" label="Politics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490689" wikidata="Q956844" url="?curid=490689" title="Tairō">
<text>Tairō (, &quot;great elder&quot;) was a high-ranking official position in the Tokugawa shogunate government of Japan, roughly comparable to the office of prime minister. The &quot;tairō&quot; presided over the governing &quot;rōjū&quot; council in the event of an emergency. A &quot;tairō&quot; was nominated from among the &quot;fudai daimyōs&quot;, who worked closely with the Tokugawa traditionally. Generally, the office holder was the shogunate&#x27;s chief policymaker, and provided Japan with a capable temporary leader in the absence of a &quot;shōgun&quot;, or in the event that the &quot;shōgun&quot; was incapacitated.

== List of &quot;tairō&quot; ==

== See also ==
* The Five Tairō

==Notes==
==References==
* Cullen, Louis M. (2003). &quot;A History of Japan, 1582-1941: Internal and External Worlds.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ; ; OCLC 442929163
* Sansom, George Bailey. (1963). &quot;A History of Japan: 1615-1867.&quot; Stanford: Stanford University Press. OCLC 36820228</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="78" end="96" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="111" end="116" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="154" end="168" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196812" start="226" end="230" title="rōjū" label="rōjū"/>
<link wikidata="Q643640" start="330" end="342" title="fudai daimyō" label="fudai daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="553" end="559" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154511" start="685" end="695" title="Council of Five Elders" label="Five Tairō"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="833" end="859" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q349345" start="882" end="904" title="George Bailey Sansom" label="Sansom, George Bailey."/>
<link wikidata="Q1479937" start="966" end="991" title="Stanford University Press" label="Stanford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490690" wikidata="Q2914731" url="?curid=490690" title="Distal convoluted tubule">
<text>The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) is a portion of kidney nephron between the loop of Henle and the collecting tubule.

== Physiology ==
It is partly responsible for the regulation of potassium, sodium, calcium, and pH. 

On its apical surface (lumen side), cells of the DCT have a thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter and are permeable to Ca, via the TRPV5 channel. On the basolateral surface (peritubular capillary side) there is an ATP-dependent Na/K antiporter pump, a secondary active Na/Ca transporter, and an ATP dependent Ca transporter. The basolateral ATP dependent Na/K pump produces the gradient for Na to be absorbed from the apical surface via the Na/Cl symporter, and for Ca to be reclaimed into the blood by the Na/Ca basolateral antiporter.

* It regulates pH by absorbing bicarbonate and secreting protons (H+) into the filtrate, or by absorbing protons and secreting bicarbonate into the filtrate.
* Sodium and potassium levels are controlled by secreting K+ and absorbing Na+. Sodium absorption by the distal tubule is mediated by the hormone aldosterone. Aldosterone increases sodium reabsorption. Sodium and chloride (salt) reabsorption is also mediated by a group of kinases called WNK kinases. There are 4 different WNK kinases, , , , and .
* It also participates in calcium regulation by reabsorbing Ca2+ in response to parathyroid hormone. PTH effect is mediated through phosphorylation of regulatory proteins and enhancing the synthesis of all transporters within the distal convoluted tubule.
* Arginine vasopressin receptor 2 is also expressed in the DCT.

==Clinical significance==
Thiazide diuretics inhibit Na+/Cl− reabsorption from the DCT by blocking the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter.

By inhibiting the transporter, thiazide diuretics increase the gradient potential for Na. This increases the activity of the basolateral Na/Ca antiport and causes the increase in calcium reclamation associated with thiazide diuretics.

== Histology == 
The DCT is lined with simple cuboidal cells, the distal convoluted tubule cells, that are shorter than those of the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). The lumen appears larger in the PCT than the DCT lumen because the PCT has a brush border (microvilli). DCT can be recognized by its numerous mitochondria (even though it is not as much as PCT), basal enfoldings and lateral membrane interdigitations with neighboring cells.

The point where DCT contacts the cortical thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle is called macula densa. It has tightly packed columnar cells which display reversed polarity and may monitor the osmolarity of blood.

Histologically, cells of the DCT can be differentiated from cells of the proximal convoluted tubule:

==Additional images==
== See also ==
List of distinct cell types in the adult human body

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2914731" start="4" end="28" title="Distal convoluted tubule" label="distal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914731" start="30" end="33" title="Distal convoluted tubule" label="DCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="51" end="57" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q58184" start="58" end="65" title="nephron" label="nephron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813955" start="78" end="91" title="loop of Henle" label="loop of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q452419" start="100" end="117" title="collecting tubule" label="collecting tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="184" end="193" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="195" end="201" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="203" end="210" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="216" end="218" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="229" end="235" title="Apical membrane" label="apical"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905340" start="282" end="320" title="thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter" label="thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q866317" start="329" end="338" title="Semipermeable membrane" label="permeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q15327773" start="354" end="359" title="TRPV5" label="TRPV5"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="376" end="387" title="basolateral" label="basolateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853339" start="456" end="466" title="antiporter" label="antiporter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="518" end="531" title="ATP dependent" label="ATP dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q285307" start="670" end="679" title="symporter" label="symporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="792" end="803" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="818" end="824" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="866" end="872" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="888" end="899" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="1057" end="1064" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="1065" end="1076" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="1293" end="1300" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890035" start="1525" end="1556" title="Arginine vasopressin receptor 2" label="Arginine vasopressin receptor 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q665843" start="1614" end="1622" title="Thiazide" label="Thiazide"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="1623" end="1631" title="diuretic" label="diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14905340" start="1691" end="1729" title="thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter" label="thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916078" start="2101" end="2127" title="proximal convoluted tubule" label="proximal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="2277" end="2289" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307492" start="2443" end="2451" title="Renal cortex" label="cortical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813955" start="2480" end="2493" title="loop of Henle" label="loop of Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883079" start="2504" end="2516" title="macula densa" label="macula densa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="2629" end="2643" title="Histology" label="Histologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916078" start="2702" end="2728" title="proximal convoluted tubule" label="proximal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662727" start="2768" end="2819" title="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body" label="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490693" wikidata="Q409939" url="?curid=490693" title="U.S. Route 59">
<text>U.S. Route 59 (US 59) is a north–south U.S. highway (though it was signed east–west in parts of Texas). A latecomer to the U.S. Highway System, US 59 is now a border-to-border route, part of the NAFTA Corridor Highway System. It parallels US 75 for nearly its entire route, never much more than away, until it veers southwest in Houston, Texas. Its number is out of place since US 59 is either concurrent with or entirely west of US 71. US 59 also goes into St Joseph seeing I-229 and I-29. The highway&#x27;s northern terminus is north of Lancaster, Minnesota, at the Lancaster–Tolstoi Border Crossing on the Canadian border, where it continues as Manitoba Highway 59. Its southern terminus is at the Mexican border in Laredo, Texas, where it continues as Mexican Federal Highway 85D.

==Route description==

===Texas===

US 59 in the state of Texas is named the Lloyd Bentsen Highway, after Lloyd Bentsen, former U.S. senator from Texas. In northern Houston, US 59, co-signed with I-69, is the Eastex Freeway (from Downtown Houston to the Liberty–Montgomery county line). To the south, which is also co-signed with I-69, it is the Southwest Freeway (from Rosenberg to Downtown Houston), which is one of the busiest sections of freeway in the United States with a vehicle count, as of 2006, over 330,000 vehicles per day just outside the Loop.

US 59 (overlaped by US 71) actually straddles the border between Texas and Arkansas north of I-30 near Texarkana, with the east side of the highway on the Arkansas side and the west side of the highway on the Texas side. In the past, both highways remained on the border past I-30 as State Line Avenue to Downtown Texarkana; today, only US 71 does so. Nearly 90% of this route is designated to become part of I-69 in the future. Currently, speed limits are allowed on US 59 in Duval County and portions of northern Polk County.

From the southwestern suburbs of Houston to Downtown Houston, US 59 is commonly referred to as the &quot;Southwest Freeway&quot;, sometimes derisively as the &quot;Southwest&#x27;s Best Freeway.&quot; Supporting 371,000 vehicles per day, it is one of the busiest freeways in the United States. US 59 is known as the &quot;Eastex Freeway&quot; in the north/northeast part of the Houston region. At the Mexican border, it ends at the World Trade International Bridge in Laredo, Texas. In Laredo, US 59 is co-signed with both I-69W and Loop 20, and has an intersection of I-35 which ends at the Juarez-Lincoln International Bridge. After crossing the bridge into Mexico, I-35 continues as Mexican Federal Highway 85 in Nuevo Laredo, which then runs through Mexico and Central America and ends in Panama at the Panama Canal.

===Arkansas===
In Arkansas, US 59 is concurrent with US 71 from I-30 at Texarkana to Acorn, and with US 270 from Acorn to the Oklahoma state line. The Third Loop was to be extended on I-49 from its original northern end to US 71 at the Texas state line opened on May 15, 2013, and was extended to State Line Road, where it intersects with US 59 and US 71 in Texas.

===Oklahoma===
US 59 and US 412 are co-signed for in Delaware County, Oklahoma.

US 59 is co-signed with US 270 from the Arkansas state line to Heavener and US 271 from Poteau to west of Spiro. It is also co-signed with US 64 in Sallisaw.

===Kansas===

US 59 enters the state just south of Chetopa and runs nearly directly north across the state. It runs concurrently with US 169 starting about south of Garnett and diverges north again immediately south of Garnett. The intersection immediately south of Garnett used to be a braided intersection with stop and yield signs. It was identified as a high-crash location in 2001, and was rebuilt as a roundabout that opened in April 2006. The Kansas Department of Transportation is rebuilding or planning to rebuild several other rural intersections as roundabouts for increased safety. Until 2012, US 59 passed through Ottawa, Kansas, and had to be shut down or detoured every time the Marais Des Cygnes floodwall gates were closed across the highway. The highway now bypasses around Ottawa, running concurrently with I-35 for and using that highway&#x27;s bridges over the Marias Des Cygnes. US 59 passes through Lawrence. The street name of US 59 in Lawrence is Iowa Street, then 6th Street as it joins US 40 and jogs east to cross the Kansas River near downtown. North of the U.S. 40 and 59 Bridges, it splits with US 40 as it joins US 24 briefly and jogs back west before resuming a northerly course. It continues north to Nortonville, then northeast to Atchison, where it crosses the Missouri River over the Amelia Earhart Bridge.

US 59 has been rebuilt and rerouted just to the east between Lawrence and Ottawa as a divided highway, as the former road was one of the most dangerous stretches of highway in the state. The project began in mid-2007, and was completed and opened to the public on October 17, 2012.

===Missouri===
In Missouri, US 59 roughly follows the Missouri River in the northwest corner of the state, from its entrance at Winthrop. In St. Joseph, the highway is paired with I-229 through downtown. US 59 departs from I-229 as Saint Joseph Avenue, joining with US 71 at I-29. The two highways then separate in Savannah. US 59 then follows I-29 very closely until turning northward at Craig. It exits the state north of Tarkio. This section of US 59 is immortalized in the Brewer and Shipley song &quot;Tarkio Road&quot;.

===Iowa===

In Iowa, US 59 is a main north–south artery in the western part of the state. It enters Iowa south of Shenandoah and joins I-80 at Avoca. It passes through the county seats of Harlan, Denison, Cherokee, and Primghar. Except for small stretches of expressway near Avoca, Denison, and Holstein, the entire length of US 59 in Iowa is an undivided two-lane road. US 59 exits the state near Hawkeye Point, the highest point in the state of Iowa.

===Minnesota===
US 59 enters Minnesota south of Worthington, just east of Bigelow. It passes through rural western Minnesota for its entire length in the state. Some cities along the way include Slayton, Marshall, Clarkfield, Montevideo, and Morris. US 59 overlaps I-94/US 52 in the Fergus Falls area. North of Fergus Falls, US 59 passes through Pelican Rapids, Detroit Lakes, and Thief River Falls before ending at the Lancaster–Tolstoi border crossing on the Canadian border. US 59 runs for about through Minnesota.

The Minnesota section of US 59 is legally defined as all or part of Routes 265, 16, 17, 88, 66, 144, 3, 30, and 174 in Minnesota Statutes §§ 161.115(19), (75), and (196) and 161.114(2).

==History==
In 1934, a coalition of government officials from Missouri, Iowa, and Minnesota agreed to sign the current US 59 as Highway 73 in an attempt to extend US 73 north from Atchison, Kansas. However, the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) approved the route as US 59, instead.

The part in Missouri was defined in 1922 as Route 52 from Kansas to St. Joseph, Route 1 from St. Joseph to Tarkio, and Route 61 from Tarkio to Iowa. Route 61 became Route 9 in 1926, and Route 52 became part of Route 4 in 1927, and this portion became Route 18 in 1932, before being removed in favor of US 59 in the 1930s.

===Historic termini===
Before the 1950s, US 59 headed northwest to US 75 at Noyes, crossed the Red River of the North at St. Vincent, and terminated at US 81 in Pembina, North Dakota. A new highway and border crossing were built north of Lancaster on the present alignment in 1950. The former segment of US 59 between Lancaster and US 75 became CR 6, and the extremely short segment between US 75 and US 81 became MN 171 and ND 59. ND 59 still exists in Pembina from the state line to I-29.

From 1934 to 1935, the US 59 designation referred to a route across southeastern Minnesota, from Lake City, Minnesota, to the Iowa state line just short of Chester, Iowa. That entire route is now part of US 63, and nowhere close to the present US 59, established in 1935.

In 1933, much of the present US 59 and the entirety of US 96 in Texas were originally proposed to be part of US 71. Under this plan, discussed at a meeting of the United States Good Roads Association in Beaumont, US 71 was to be diverted out of Louisiana altogether and instead rerouted from the Texarkana area southward through East Texas.

==Future==
A large portion of US 59 is proposed to become part of the future extension of I-69, I-69W and I-369 through Texas, allowing the current alignment and right-of-way to be upgraded without the need for government environmental studies or extensive eminent domain proceedings.

==Major intersections==
;Texas
: World Trade International Bridge at the Mexican border
: in Laredo. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in Laredo
: in George West
: east of George West
: in Beeville
: in Goliad
: southwest of Victoria. I-69/US 59 will travel concurrently to Houston. US 59/US 77 travels concurrently to south-southwest of Victoria.
: in Victoria
: in Houston
: in Houston
: in Houston
: in Houston. I-69/US 59 will travel concurrently to Tenaha.
: in Livingston
: in Corrigan
: in Lufkin. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in Redfield
: in Timpson. The highways travel concurrently to Tenaha.
: in Tenaha. I-369/US 59 will travel concurrently to Texarkana.
: in Carthage. The highways travel concurrently to north of Carthage.
: in Marshall
: in Marshall
: in Texarkana. I-369/US 59 travels concurrently to I-30.
: in Texarkana
: in Texarkana
: in Texarkana. I-30/US 59 travels concurrently to the Arkansas state line.
;Arkansas
: in Texarkana. US 59/US 71 travels concurrently to Acorn.
;Texas
: north of Texarkana
;Arkansas
: in Lockesburg. The highways travel concurrently to De Queen.
: in Saline Township. The highways travel concurrently to De Queen.
: in Wickes
: in Acorn. US 59/US 270 travels concurrently to Heavener, Oklahoma.
;Oklahoma
: west-northwest of Page
: in Poteau. The highways travel concurrently to west of Spiro.
: in Sallisaw
: in Sallisaw. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in Westville
: in West Siloam Springs. The highways travel concurrently to Kansas.
: east-northeast of Afton. US 59/US 60 travels concurrently for approximately . US 59/US 69 travels concurrently to north of Dotyville.
: east-northeast of Afton
;Kansas
: in Chetopa. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in Oswego. The highways travel concurrently to the Mount Pleasant–Fairview township line.
: in Parsons
: in Moran
: in Welda Township. The highways travel concurrently to Washington Township.
: in Ottawa. The highways travel concurrently to Ottawa Township.
: in Willow Springs Township
: in Lawrence. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in Lawrence
: in Lawrence. US 24/US 59 travels concurrently to Williamstown.
: in Shannon Township. The highways travel concurrently to Atchison.
;Missouri
: in St. Joseph. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: in St. Joseph
: in Jefferson Township
: in Nodaway Township
: in Jackson Township. The highways travel concurrently to Nodaway Township.
: in Hickory Township
: in Hickory Township
: in Union Township
: in Tarkio Township. The highways travel concurrently to Tarkio.
;Iowa
: in Indian Creek Township
: in Belknap Township. The highways travel concurrently to Oakland.
: in Avoca
: in Denison. The highways travel concurrently through the city.
: on the Logan–Griggs township line. The highways travel concurrently to Holstein.
: on the Franklin–Lincoln township line. The highways travel concurrently to Sanborn.
;Minnesota
: in Worthington
: in Custer Township
: in Camp Release Township. The highways travel concurrently to Montevideo.
: in Moyer Township
: on the Buse–Dane Prairie township line. The highways travel concurrently to Fergus Falls Township.
: in Detroit Lakes
: in Knute Township
: at the Canadian border on the Richardville–St. Joseph township line
==See also==

* U.S. Route 159
* U.S. Route 259

==References==
==External links==
*Endpoints of US 59</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="0" end="13" title="U.S. Route 59" label="U.S. Route 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q409939" start="15" end="20" title="U.S. Route 59" label="US 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="39" end="51" title="United States Numbered Highway System" label="U.S. highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="96" end="101" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q800361" start="195" end="224" title="NAFTA superhighway" label="NAFTA Corridor Highway System"/>
<link wikidata="Q410377" start="239" end="244" title="U.S. Route 75" label="US 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="329" end="343" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q410321" start="430" end="435" title="U.S. Route 71" label="US 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919987" start="540" end="560" title="Lancaster, Minnesota" label="Lancaster, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233441" start="569" end="602" title="Lancaster–Tolstoi Border Crossing" label="Lancaster–Tolstoi Border Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="610" end="625" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canadian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q13622634" start="649" end="668" title="Manitoba Highway 59" label="Manitoba Highway 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="702" end="716" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="720" end="733" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825912" start="757" end="784" title="Mexican Federal Highway 85D" label="Mexican Federal Highway 85D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="845" end="850" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q455401" start="893" end="906" title="Lloyd Bentsen" label="Lloyd Bentsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="952" end="959" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q94624" start="983" end="987" title="Interstate 69" label="I-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="1017" end="1033" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q26719" start="1041" end="1048" title="Liberty County, Texas" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q26756" start="1049" end="1059" title="Montgomery County, Texas" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q637444" start="1157" end="1166" title="Rosenberg, Texas" label="Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="1335" end="1343" title="Interstate 610 (Texas)" label="the Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159092" start="1353" end="1360" title="Concurrency (road)" label="overlap"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1439" end="1443" title="Interstate 30#Texas" label="I-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707354" start="1449" end="1458" title="Texarkana metropolitan area" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603417" start="1630" end="1647" title="State Line Avenue" label="State Line Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037" start="1823" end="1835" title="Duval County, Texas" label="Duval County"/>
<link wikidata="Q113375" start="1861" end="1872" title="Polk County, Texas" label="Polk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="2138" end="2146" title="Controlled-access highway" label="freeways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036352" start="2307" end="2339" title="World Trade International Bridge" label="World Trade International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513798" start="2398" end="2403" title="Interstate 69W" label="I-69W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505742" start="2408" end="2415" title="Texas State Highway Loop 20" label="Loop 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445457" start="2444" end="2448" title="Interstate 35 in Texas" label="I-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496608" start="2467" end="2502" title="Juarez-Lincoln International Bridge" label="Juarez-Lincoln International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2535" end="2541" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879383" start="2561" end="2587" title="Mexican Federal Highway 85" label="Mexican Federal Highway 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q328846" start="2591" end="2603" title="Nuevo Laredo" label="Nuevo Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2640" end="2655" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="2668" end="2674" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="2682" end="2694" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2715" end="2723" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q410321" start="2750" end="2755" title="U.S. Route 71" label="US 71"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2761" end="2765" title="Interstate 30#Arkansas" label="I-30"/>
<link wikidata="Q79438" start="2769" end="2778" title="Texarkana, Arkansas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674536" start="2782" end="2787" title="Acorn, Arkansas" label="Acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175016" start="2798" end="2804" title="U.S. Route 270" label="US 270"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="2823" end="2831" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q94313" start="2881" end="2885" title="Interstate 49" label="I-49"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175090" start="3088" end="3094" title="U.S. Route 412 in Oklahoma" label="US 412"/>
<link wikidata="Q484752" start="3116" end="3141" title="Delaware County, Oklahoma" label="Delaware County, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175016" start="3168" end="3174" title="U.S. Route 270" label="US 270"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055138" start="3207" end="3215" title="Heavener, Oklahoma" label="Heavener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175033" start="3220" end="3226" title="U.S. Route 271" label="US 271"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002488" start="3232" end="3238" title="Poteau, Oklahoma" label="Poteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968037" start="3250" end="3255" title="Spiro, Oklahoma" label="Spiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q410000" start="3283" end="3288" title="U.S. Route 64" label="US 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984962" start="3292" end="3300" title="Sallisaw, Oklahoma" label="Sallisaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202542" start="3354" end="3361" title="Chetopa, Kansas" label="Chetopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480815" start="3437" end="3443" title="U.S. Route 169" label="US 169"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925104" start="3468" end="3475" title="Garnett, Kansas" label="Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892251" start="3997" end="4014" title="Marais des Cygnes River" label="Marais Des Cygnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460082" start="4015" end="4024" title="flood wall" label="floodwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="4225" end="4233" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q409496" start="4316" end="4321" title="U.S. Route 40" label="US 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367638" start="4349" end="4361" title="Kansas River" label="Kansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863026" start="4390" end="4412" title="U.S. 40 and 59 Bridges" label="U.S. 40 and 59 Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q408147" start="4447" end="4452" title="U.S. Route 24" label="US 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353960" start="4538" end="4549" title="Nortonville, Kansas" label="Nortonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q753949" start="4569" end="4577" title="Atchison, Kansas" label="Atchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="4600" end="4614" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742251" start="4624" end="4645" title="Amelia Earhart Bridge" label="Amelia Earhart Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913965" start="4722" end="4728" title="Ottawa, Kansas" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="4949" end="4957" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="4985" end="4999" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q27984065" start="5059" end="5067" title="Winthrop, Missouri" label="Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="5072" end="5082" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450039" start="5111" end="5116" title="Interstate 229 (Missouri)" label="I-229"/>
<link wikidata="Q410321" start="5197" end="5202" title="U.S. Route 71" label="US 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q94015" start="5206" end="5210" title="Interstate 29" label="I-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q966006" start="5246" end="5254" title="Savannah, Missouri" label="Savannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q964685" start="5320" end="5325" title="Craig, Missouri" label="Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q777750" start="5355" end="5361" title="Tarkio, Missouri" label="Tarkio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="5473" end="5477" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q993475" start="5572" end="5582" title="Shenandoah, Iowa" label="Shenandoah"/>
<link wikidata="Q94873" start="5593" end="5597" title="Interstate 80" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914591" start="5601" end="5606" title="Avoca, Iowa" label="Avoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901253" start="5646" end="5652" title="Harlan, Iowa" label="Harlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q986171" start="5654" end="5661" title="Denison, Iowa" label="Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q595297" start="5663" end="5671" title="Cherokee, Iowa" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q646487" start="5677" end="5685" title="Primghar, Iowa" label="Primghar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="5717" end="5727" title="Limited-access road" label="expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914591" start="5733" end="5738" title="Avoca, Iowa" label="Avoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q994828" start="5753" end="5761" title="Holstein, Iowa" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591692" start="5856" end="5869" title="Hawkeye Point" label="Hawkeye Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="5941" end="5950" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q988914" start="5960" end="5971" title="Worthington, Minnesota" label="Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083933" start="5986" end="5993" title="Bigelow, Minnesota" label="Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131404" start="6107" end="6114" title="Slayton, Minnesota" label="Slayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986475" start="6116" end="6124" title="Marshall, Minnesota" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207409" start="6126" end="6136" title="Clarkfield, Minnesota" label="Clarkfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q986302" start="6138" end="6148" title="Montevideo, Minnesota" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924160" start="6154" end="6160" title="Morris, Minnesota" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q94965" start="6177" end="6181" title="Interstate 94" label="I-94"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817591" start="6182" end="6187" title="U.S. Route 52 in Minnesota" label="US 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975464" start="6195" end="6207" title="Fergus Falls, Minnesota" label="Fergus Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q662958" start="6258" end="6272" title="Pelican Rapids, Minnesota" label="Pelican Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898538" start="6274" end="6287" title="Detroit Lakes, Minnesota" label="Detroit Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q636832" start="6293" end="6310" title="Thief River Falls, Minnesota" label="Thief River Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q410354" start="6781" end="6786" title="U.S. Route 73" label="US 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q753949" start="6798" end="6814" title="Atchison, Kansas" label="Atchison, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q463415" start="6829" end="6876" title="American Association of State Highway Officials" label="American Association of State Highway Officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485141" start="7004" end="7011" title="Missouri Route 1 (1922)" label="Route 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395580" start="7134" end="7141" title="Missouri Route 4 (1922)" label="Route 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q410377" start="7314" end="7319" title="U.S. Route 75" label="US 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875055" start="7323" end="7328" title="Noyes, Minnesota" label="Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="7342" end="7364" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249535" start="7368" end="7379" title="St. Vincent, Minnesota" label="St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q410661" start="7399" end="7404" title="U.S. Route 81" label="US 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087860" start="7408" end="7429" title="Pembina, North Dakota" label="Pembina, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484710" start="7661" end="7667" title="Minnesota State Highway 171" label="MN 171"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589101" start="7672" end="7677" title="North Dakota Highway 59" label="ND 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q986636" start="7836" end="7856" title="Lake City, Minnesota" label="Lake City, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="7865" end="7869" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934191" start="7895" end="7908" title="Chester, Iowa" label="Chester, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q409985" start="7943" end="7948" title="U.S. Route 63" label="US 63"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="8215" end="8223" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707354" start="8308" end="8317" title="Texarkana" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13521936" start="8460" end="8465" title="Interstate 369 (Texas)" label="I-369"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808147" start="8611" end="8625" title="eminent domain in the United States" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036352" start="8673" end="8705" title="World Trade International Bridge" label="World Trade International Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="8713" end="8727" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexican border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="8733" end="8739" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q979419" start="8809" end="8820" title="George West, Texas" label="George West"/>
<link wikidata="Q814163" start="8848" end="8856" title="Beeville, Texas" label="Beeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q982494" start="8862" end="8868" title="Goliad, Texas" label="Goliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q784496" start="8884" end="8892" title="Victoria, Texas" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="8933" end="8940" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q969628" start="9113" end="9119" title="Tenaha, Texas" label="Tenaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q976199" start="9126" end="9136" title="Livingston, Texas" label="Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q928824" start="9142" end="9150" title="Corrigan, Texas" label="Corrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q975590" start="9156" end="9162" title="Lufkin, Texas" label="Lufkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103313" start="9220" end="9228" title="Redfield, Texas" label="Redfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q981484" start="9234" end="9241" title="Timpson, Texas" label="Timpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q844020" start="9340" end="9349" title="Texarkana, Texas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q976381" start="9356" end="9364" title="Carthage, Texas" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q52996" start="9426" end="9434" title="Marshall, Texas" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="9592" end="9600" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79438" start="9628" end="9637" title="Texarkana, Arkansas" label="Texarkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674536" start="9675" end="9680" title="Acorn, Arkansas" label="Acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529985" start="9725" end="9735" title="Lockesburg, Arkansas" label="Lockesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79410" start="9773" end="9781" title="De Queen, Arkansas" label="De Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793161" start="9856" end="9862" title="Wickes, Arkansas" label="Wickes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055138" start="9912" end="9930" title="Heavener, Oklahoma" label="Heavener, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124207" start="9962" end="9966" title="Page, Oklahoma" label="Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002488" start="9972" end="9978" title="Poteau, Oklahoma" label="Poteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968037" start="10024" end="10029" title="Spiro, Oklahoma" label="Spiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984962" start="10036" end="10044" title="Sallisaw, Oklahoma" label="Sallisaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166633" start="10116" end="10125" title="Westville, Oklahoma" label="Westville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287705" start="10131" end="10150" title="West Siloam Springs, Oklahoma" label="West Siloam Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517521" start="10188" end="10194" title="Kansas, Oklahoma" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q616197" start="10216" end="10221" title="Afton, Oklahoma" label="Afton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313507" start="10321" end="10330" title="Dotyville, Oklahoma" label="Dotyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202542" start="10371" end="10378" title="Chetopa, Kansas" label="Chetopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233677" start="10436" end="10442" title="Oswego, Kansas" label="Oswego"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094222" start="10528" end="10535" title="Parsons, Kansas" label="Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q600237" start="10541" end="10546" title="Moran, Kansas" label="Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980867" start="10552" end="10566" title="Welda Township, Anderson County, Kansas" label="Welda Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972354" start="10604" end="10623" title="Washington Township, Anderson County, Kansas" label="Washington Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913965" start="10630" end="10636" title="Ottawa, Kansas" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473964" start="10674" end="10689" title="Ottawa Township, Franklin County, Kansas" label="Ottawa Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998598" start="10696" end="10719" title="Willow Springs Township, Douglas County, Kansas" label="Willow Springs Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="10725" end="10733" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021288" start="10851" end="10863" title="Williamstown, Kansas" label="Williamstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488975" start="10870" end="10886" title="Shannon Township, Atchison County, Kansas" label="Shannon Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q753949" start="10924" end="10932" title="Atchison, Kansas" label="Atchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="10949" end="10959" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175608" start="11033" end="11051" title="Jefferson Township, Andrew County, Missouri" label="Jefferson Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649422" start="11057" end="11073" title="Nodaway Township, Andrew County, Missouri" label="Nodaway Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117439" start="11079" end="11095" title="Jackson Township, Andrew County, Missouri" label="Jackson Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q9042876" start="11133" end="11149" title="Nodaway Township, Holt County, Missouri" label="Nodaway Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686285" start="11220" end="11235" title="Tarkio Township, Atchison County, Missouri" label="Tarkio Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q777750" start="11273" end="11279" title="Tarkio, Missouri" label="Tarkio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9040391" start="11292" end="11313" title="Indian Creek Township, Mills County, Iowa" label="Indian Creek Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q10738937" start="11319" end="11335" title="Belknap Township, Pottawattamie County, Iowa" label="Belknap Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q998663" start="11373" end="11380" title="Oakland, Iowa" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914591" start="11387" end="11392" title="Avoca, Iowa" label="Avoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q986171" start="11398" end="11405" title="Denison, Iowa" label="Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q994828" start="11531" end="11539" title="Holstein, Iowa" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019130" start="11550" end="11558" title="Franklin Township, O&amp;#x27;Brien County, Iowa" label="Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925787" start="11618" end="11625" title="Sanborn, Iowa" label="Sanborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q988914" start="11643" end="11654" title="Worthington, Minnesota" label="Worthington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900314" start="11660" end="11675" title="Custer Township, Lyon County, Minnesota" label="Custer Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899874" start="11681" end="11702" title="Camp Release Township, Lac qui Parle County, Minnesota" label="Camp Release Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q986302" start="11740" end="11750" title="Montevideo, Minnesota" label="Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909749" start="11757" end="11771" title="Moyer Township, Swift County, Minnesota" label="Moyer Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898058" start="11781" end="11785" title="Buse Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota" label="Buse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898614" start="11786" end="11798" title="Dane Prairie Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota" label="Dane Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898477" start="11850" end="11871" title="Fergus Falls Township, Otter Tail County, Minnesota" label="Fergus Falls Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898538" start="11878" end="11891" title="Detroit Lakes, Minnesota" label="Detroit Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906664" start="11897" end="11911" title="Knute Township, Polk County, Minnesota" label="Knute Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="11921" end="11936" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canadian border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911824" start="11944" end="11956" title="Richardville Township, Kittson County, Minnesota" label="Richardville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1912481" start="11957" end="11967" title="St. Joseph Township, Kittson County, Minnesota" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395745" start="11998" end="12012" title="U.S. Route 159" label="U.S. Route 159"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174983" start="12015" end="12029" title="U.S. Route 259" label="U.S. Route 259"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490695" wikidata="Q3182316" url="?curid=490695" title="John Proctor (Salem witch trials)">
<text>John Proctor (9 October 1631 – 19 August 1692) was a landowner in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. He and his wife Elizabeth were tried and convicted of witchcraft as part of the Salem Witch Trials, whereupon he was hanged.

==Early life==
Proctor was born in Suffolk, England, to John Proctor (1594–1672) and Martha Harper (1607–1667). When he was just three years old, his parents brought their family to America. They sailed from London on 12 April 1635 on a ship called the &quot;Susan and Ellen&quot;.

Upon arrival, they settled in the Chebacco area of Ipswich, Massachusetts. The elder Proctor owned many properties and was considered one of the wealthiest residents of Ipswich. He had two shares in Plum Island in 1664. He also held various offices within the colony.

==Adult life==
Proctor was a good businessman, comfortable working with people from all levels of society. Around 1653, Proctor married Martha. They had four children: John (1653–1658), Martha (1655–1658), Mary (1656/57–1657/58) and Benjamin (1659–1720). Many people have given Martha the surname of Giddon or Giddens, but no sources have been located to verify the accuracy of this information. 

Martha died in childbirth on 13 June 1659. Her death registry reads &quot;Martha, wife of John Procter, died the 13 June 1659&quot;; Benjamin Proctor was the only surviving child from this marriage.

On 1 December 1662, Proctor married Elizabeth Thorndike (1641–1672), daughter of John Thorndike, founder of Ipswich, Massachusetts. They had seven children: Elizabeth (1663–1736) married in 1681 to Thomas Very; Martha (1665–?); Martha married Nathaniel Gowing; Mary (1667–1668); John (1668–1748); Mary (1669–?); Thorndike (1672–1759), married in 1697 to Hannah Felton, widow of Samuel Endicott, the grandson of John Endicott, the first Governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony and daughter of Nathaniel Felton and Mary Skelton.

In 1666, Proctor moved to Salem and leased a 700-acre estate called Groton farm (also known as Downing Farm) in Salem Farms, the section of Salem Township just to the south of Salem Village. The farm was leased from Emmanuel Downing, brother-in-law to John Winthrop. In 1668, Proctor received his first license to operate a tavern here and the license was renewed annually. The Inn was located on Ipswich Road about a mile south of the Salem Village line. Elizabeth (Thorndike) Proctor died on 30 August 1672 shortly after she gave birth to their seventh child, Thorndike Proctor. Proctor&#x27;s father also died in 1672 and he inherited 1/3 of the estate in Ipswich. His brothers Benjamin and Joseph inherited the other 2/3 of the estate. Each portion was valued at £1,200.

On 1 April 1674, Proctor married Elizabeth Bassett (1651–?), daughter of William and Sarah (Burt) Bassett of Lynn, Massachusetts. They had seven children: William (1674/5 – after 1695); Sarah (1677–1751); Samuel (1685–1765); Elisha (1687–1688); Abigail (1689 – after 1695); Joseph (before 1691 – ?); John (1693–1745).

Elizabeth and some of the older children ran the tavern while Proctor and his eldest son, Benjamin, tended to their extensive farm properties in Salem and Ipswich. If customers in the tavern had insufficient funds, Elizabeth insisted they pay with pawned goods.

Giles Corey became easily frustrated with his neighbors. At one point, he filed a lawsuit against Proctor who had suggested that Corey was responsible for setting the Proctor house on fire. Later, one of Proctor&#x27;s sons confessed.

== Accusations and trial ==
Initial accusations were aimed at Proctor&#x27;s third wife, Elizabeth (Bassett). When he began to defend her and vocally express his disbelief in the accusers, fingers were then pointed at him as well. Although Abigail Williams was John Proctor&#x27;s chief accuser, he was also named by Mary Walcott, who stated he tried to choke her, and by his former servant Mary Warren on 21 April. Warren told magistrates that Proctor had beaten her for putting up a prayer bill before forcing her to touch the Devil&#x27;s Book. Further allegations of an increasingly salacious nature followed. Proctor continued to challenge the veracity of spectral evidence and the validity of the Court of Oyer and Terminer, which led to a petition signed by 32 neighbors in his favor. The signatories stated that Proctor had lived a &quot;Christian life in his family and was ever ready to help such as they stood in need&quot;.

The Proctors were tried on 5 August 1692, found guilty, and sentenced to death by hanging. While Proctor and his wife were still in jail, the sheriff seized all of their household belongings. The cattle were sold cheaply, slaughtered, or shipped to the West Indies. The beer barrels at the tavern were emptied. Their children were left with no means of support. Proctor was hanged on 19 August 1692. Elizabeth, who was then pregnant, was given a reprieve until she gave birth, which came after the trials ended.

===Accusations against other Proctor family members===

In 1692, one hundred and forty-one complaints were filed. Of those, twelve were against relatives or extended members of the Proctor family. John Proctor, Elizabeth Proctor, and Rebecca Nurse were convicted, and John and Rebecca were executed.

#John Proctor, husband of Elizabeth Bassett aka Elizabeth Proctor and the father of Benjamin, William, and Sarah Proctor.
#Elizabeth Bassett Proctor, third wife of John Proctor and mother of William Proctor.
#Benjamin Proctor, son of John Proctor and his first wife Martha.
#William Proctor, son of John Proctor and his third wife, Elizabeth.
#Mary Bassett DeRich, the sister of Elizabeth Proctor.

Extended family:
#Thomas Farrar Sr., father-in-law of Elizabeth (Hood) Farrar, sister of Sarah Hood aka Sarah Bassett
#Elizabeth Hutchinson, wife of Isaac Hart whose daughter, Deborah Hart, was married to Benjamin Proctor, brother of John Proctor.
#Elizabeth Proctor, daughter of John Proctor and Elizabeth Thorndike Proctor, married Thomas Very in 1681. His sister, Elizabeth Very was the second wife of John Nurse, the eldest son of Francis and Rebecca (née Towne) Nurse.
#Rebecca Nurse, sister of Mary Eastey and Sarah Cloyce.
#Mary Eastey, sister of Rebecca Nurse and Sarah Cloyce.
#Sarah Cloyce, sister of Rebecca Nurse and Mary Eastey.
#Esther Elwell (née Dutch), aka Hester Elwell, was wed to Samuel Elwell, brother of Thomas Elwell; sister-in-law to Sarah Bassett Elwell, another of Elizabeth Bassett Proctor&#x27;s sisters.
Family Tree:



===Related accuser===
One other family member was drawn into the Trials, joining the accusers: 16-year-old John DeRich, son of the imprisoned Bassett, and her husband, Michel DeRich, who had recently died.

== Aftermath ==
In January 1693, while still in jail, Elizabeth Bassett Proctor gave birth to a son, whom she named John. Elizabeth and her son remained in jail until May 1693, when a general release freed all of those prisoners who remained jailed. Unfortunately, even though the general belief was that innocent people had been wrongly convicted, Elizabeth had been convicted and was considered guilty. In the eyes of the law, she was considered a &quot;dead woman&quot; and could not claim any of her husband&#x27;s estate. Elizabeth petitioned the court for a reversal of attainder to restore her legal rights. No action was taken for seven years.

In June 1696, Elizabeth filed an appeal to contest her husband&#x27;s will. She testified in court that &quot;in that sad time of darkness before my said husband was executed it is evident somebody had contrived a will and brought it to him to sign, wherein his whole estate is disposed of.&quot; The will had already been probated and assets distributed and she stated that her step-children &quot;will not suffer me to have one penny of the estate, neither upon the account of my husband&#x27;s contract with me before marriage nor yet upon the account of the dower which, as I humbly conceive, doth belong or ought to belong to me by law, for they say that I am dead in the law&quot;.

On 22 September 1696, Elizabeth remarried to Daniel Richards. On 19 April 1697, the probate court ordered Elizabeth&#x27;s step-children to return to her the dowry as she was &quot;&quot;now restored to benefit of law.&quot;

On 2 March 1703, twenty-one spouses and children of those condemned, as well as three women who were convicted but not executed, including Elizabeth, filed petitions before any action was taken on Elizabeth&#x27;s appeal for reversal of attainder. They requested that &quot;something may be publicly done to take off infamy from the names&quot;. Two more petitions were filed in June 1703. These included requests from eleven ministers to reconsider the convictions and restore the good names of the citizens. The Massachusetts House of Representatives finally passed a bill disallowing spectral evidence. However, they only gave a reversal of attainder for those who had filed petitions.

In 1705, another petition was filed requesting a more equitable settlement for those wrongly accused. In May 1709, 22 people who had been convicted of witchcraft, or whose parents had been convicted of witchcraft, presented the General Court with a petition to take action on the 1705 proposal demanding both a reversal of attainder and compensation for financial losses. In May 1710, the legislature appointed a committee to hear the petitions. After many delays, on 17 October 1711, the General Court passed a bill reversing the judgment against the people listed in the 1709 petition and Governor Joseph Dudley signed the bill into law. There were still an additional seven people who had been convicted but had not signed the petition. There was no reversal of attainder for them. The bill read as follows:

The 22 people in the 1709 petition were awarded the sum of £578-12-0 to be divided among the survivors and relatives of those accused. However, reversal of attainder and monies were only awarded to the accused and their heirs who had asked for it. £150 were awarded to &quot;&quot;John Proctor and wife&quot;, but Elizabeth&#x27;s name was not specifically mentioned. Thorndike Proctor received money for his family&#x27;s suffering. His older brother Benjamin objected as he had been the one responsible for taking care of his siblings during this time. The court took no action, leaving it up to the family to determine how to divide the funds. Most of the accounts were settled within a year. The award to the Proctor family was $1500, much more money from the Massachusetts General Court than most families of accused witches, a possible indicator of the wealth of the families involved. 

Thorndike Proctor purchased the Groton Farm from the Downing family of London, England, following the hanging of his father. The farm was renamed Downing Farm. Thorndike subsequently sold nearly half of Downing Farm to his half-brother Benjamin. Eight generations of Proctors resided on the Downing farm, until 1851. 

By 1957, not all the condemned had been exonerated. Descendants of those falsely accused demanded the General Court clear the names of their family members. In 1957, an act was passed pronouncing the innocence of those accused, however, it only listed Ann Pudeator by name and the others as &quot;certain other persons&quot;, still not including all names of those convicted. They also included a resolution prohibiting further lawsuits based on old court proceedings.

In 1992, the Danvers Tercentennial Committee persuaded the Massachusetts House of Representatives to issue a resolution honoring &quot;the courage and steadfastness of these condemned persons who adhered to truth when the legal, clerical, and political institutions failed them&quot;. While the document did list the names of all those not previously granted reversal of attainder, it only noted that these individuals were &quot;worthy of remembrance and commemoration&quot;.

After concerted efforts by a Salem schoolteacher named Paula Keene, and Representatives J. Michael Ruane and Paul Tirone et al, a proclamation of innocence for all the victims was finally signed by Governor Jane Swift on 31 October 2001. More than 300 years after the witch trials, all of its victims were finally exonerated of their supposed guilt.

==&quot;The Crucible&quot;==
In &quot;The Crucible&quot; by Arthur Miller, a 1953 fictionalized version of the trials portrayed as a theatrical play, John Proctor is cast as the main character whose story is centered around his powerful and unrivaled position in the society and consequential wrongfully-convicted fate. However, the story line of the play diverges from his actual history in numerous ways, including:

# Proctor is portrayed as being in his thirties and Abigail Williams is seventeen years old, while the real John Proctor and Abigail Williams were about sixty and eleven or twelve years old, respectively, at the time of the witch trials.
# Proctor is revealed to have had an affair with Abigail Williams but he has a hatred to Reverend Samuel Parris because he is entirely materialistic. He hates him so much he does not attend church for many months. When they are discovered, Elizabeth Proctor discharges Abigail from the Proctor household and as a result, Abigail accuses Elizabeth Proctor of witchcraft as retaliation, as well as to get her out of the picture so she and John can further pursue their &quot;relationship&quot;. In reality, Elizabeth Proctor was initially named by Ann Putnam on 6 March, alleging that Proctor&#x27;s specter attacked the girl. She was accused by Abigail on 14 March, and further accusations were made by Mercy Lewis.
# Miller has Mary Warren accusing Proctor of afflicting her but this followed his initial accusation by Abigail in early April 1692. There is no historical evidence to suggest that Abigail even knew John Proctor before she accused him of witchcraft.

In the 1957 screen adaptation of Miller&#x27;s piece, Proctor was depicted by Yves Montand. In the 1996 film based on the play, Proctor was played by Daniel Day-Lewis.

== Citations ==
== Cited references ==
* Felton, Cyrus (1886) &quot;A Genealogical History of the Felton Family: Descendants of Lieutenant Nathaniel Felton Who Came to Salem Massachusetts in 1633; with Few Supplements and Appendices of the Names of Some of the Ancestors and Families that have Intermarried with them; An Index Alphabetically Arranged of the Felton Families and an Index of Other Names than Felton&quot;, Pratt Brothers Printers and Publishers, Marlborough 
* Foulds, Diane E. (2010), &quot;Death in Salem, The Private Lives Behind the 1692 Witch Hunt&quot;, Globe Pequot Press, Guilford, CT, 
* Hall, David D. &quot;Witch-Hunting in Seventeenth-Century New England: A Documentary History 1638–1693&quot;, Second Edition; Duke University Press; Boston, Mass., USA; 2005, pp. 185–189. 
* Hill, Frances (2000). &quot;The Salem Witch Trials Reader&quot;, Da Capo Press, Boston, Massachusetts, 
* Nevins, Winfield S. (1916), &quot;Witchcraft in Salem Village in 1692, Together with a Review of the Opinions of Modern Writers and Psychologists in Regard to the Outbreak of the Evil in America&quot;, fifth edition with preface of striking interest, Salem Press Company, Salem, Massachusetts Witchcraft in Salem Village in 1692: Together with a Review of the Opinions of Modern Writers and Psychologists in Regard to Outbreak of the Evil in America
* Proctor, A. Carlton (1979 &amp; 1982), &quot;Proctor Genealogy ca 1562 to 1982, Descendants of Evan and Mary Proctor, St. Albans, Hertfordshire, England; Robert and Jane (Hildreth) Proctor, Concord-Chelmsford, Massachusetts, USA; John and Martha Proctor, Yorkshire, England and Many of their Related Families&quot;, 
* Roach, Marilynne K. (2002), &quot;The Salem Witch Trials, A Day-By-Day Chronicle of a Community Under Siege&quot;, p. 587, New York: Cooper Square Press. 
* Robinson, Enders A. (1991). &quot;The Devil Discovered: Salem Witchcraft, 1692&quot;, Hippocrene Books, New York, 

== General sources ==
* Boyer, Paul, and Stephen Nissenbaum, ed. &quot;The Salem witchcraft papers: verbatim transcripts of the legal documents of the Salem witchcraft outbreak of 1692&quot; volume 1, compiled and transcribed by the Works Progress Administration, under the supervision of Archie N. Frost; edited and with an introduction and index by Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum; Electronic Text Center, University of Virginia Library; Essex County Archives, Salem—Witchcraft
* Boyer, Paul. &quot;Salem Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft&quot;
* Hanson, J. W. (1848). &quot;The History of the Town of Danvers, from its Earliest Settlement to 1848&quot;, published by the author, printed at the Courier Office, Danvers, Massachusetts
* Hill, Frances. &quot;A Delusion of Satan: The Full Story of the Salem Witch Trials&quot;
* Jackson, Shirley. &quot;The Witchcraft of Salem Village&quot;
* Miller, Arthur (1953). &quot;The Crucible&quot;
* Robotti, Francis Diane. &quot;Chronicles of Old Salem, A History in Miniature&quot;
* Smith, Sarah Saunders (1897). &quot;The Founders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, A Careful Research of the Earliest Records of Many of the Foremost Settlers of the New England Colony: Compiled From The Earliest Church and State Records, and Valuable Private Papers Retained by Descendants for Many Generations&quot;, Press of the Sun Printing Company, Pittsfield Massachusetts.
* Starkey, Marion L. (1949). &quot;The Devil in Massachusetts: A Modern Enquiry Into the Salem Witch Trials&quot;, Anchor Books / Doubleday Books, New York
* Starkey, Marion Lena. &quot;The Visionary Girls: Witchcraft in Salem Village&quot;
* Taylor, Betsy (2003). &quot;Documents Shed New Light On Witchcraft Trials&quot;, &quot;The Salem News&quot;, Danvers, Massachusetts
* Trask, Richard B. &quot;The Devil Hath Been Raised: A Documentary History of the Salem Village Witchcraft Outbreak of March 1692&quot;
* Famous American Trials: Salem Witchcraft Trials 1692: John Proctor—University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Upham, Charles W. &quot;Salem Witchcraft; With an Account of Salem Village and a History of Opinions on Witchcraft and Kindred Subjects&quot;
* Upham, William P. (1904). &quot;House of John Proctor, Witchcraft Martyr, 1692&quot;, Press of C. H. Shephard, Peabody, Massachusetts
* Winwar, Frances (1938). &quot;Puritan City: The Story of Salem&quot;, Robert M. McBride &amp; Company, New York.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3182316" start="0" end="12" title="John Proctor (Salem witch trials)" label="John Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="70" end="94" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="112" end="121" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="150" end="160" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="176" end="194" title="Salem Witch Trials" label="Salem Witch Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="257" end="264" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="430" end="436" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282019" start="539" end="547" title="Chebacco Parish" label="Chebacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="556" end="578" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260724" start="1453" end="1467" title="John Thorndike (settler)" label="John Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="1480" end="1502" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699971" start="1783" end="1796" title="John Endicott" label="John Endicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="1820" end="1844" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q92429263" start="1861" end="1877" title="Nathaniel Felton" label="Nathaniel Felton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066487" start="2073" end="2086" title="Danvers, Massachusetts" label="Salem Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q720766" start="2149" end="2162" title="John Winthrop" label="John Winthrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="2706" end="2723" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q49188" start="2782" end="2801" title="Lynn, Massachusetts" label="Lynn, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354988" start="3255" end="3266" title="Giles Corey" label="Giles Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="3580" end="3599" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth (Bassett)"/>
<link wikidata="Q289694" start="3731" end="3747" title="Abigail Williams (Salem witch trials)" label="Abigail Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850511" start="3808" end="3820" title="Mary Walcott" label="Mary Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780925" start="3882" end="3893" title="Mary Warren (Salem witch trials)" label="Mary Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575189" start="4152" end="4169" title="spectral evidence" label="spectral evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116266" start="4203" end="4220" title="Oyer and Terminer" label="Oyer and Terminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175111" start="4501" end="4517" title="Hanging" label="death by hanging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="5152" end="5169" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421721" start="5175" end="5188" title="Rebecca Nurse" label="Rebecca Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="5290" end="5307" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="5365" end="5390" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth Bassett Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421721" start="6076" end="6113" title="Rebecca Nurse" label="Francis and Rebecca (née Towne) Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421721" start="6116" end="6129" title="Rebecca Nurse" label="Rebecca Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779377" start="6141" end="6152" title="Mary Eastey" label="Mary Eastey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422195" start="6157" end="6169" title="Sarah Cloyce" label="Sarah Cloyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779377" start="6172" end="6183" title="Mary Eastey" label="Mary Eastey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421721" start="6195" end="6208" title="Rebecca Nurse" label="Rebecca Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422195" start="6213" end="6225" title="Sarah Cloyce" label="Sarah Cloyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422195" start="6228" end="6240" title="Sarah Cloyce" label="Sarah Cloyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421721" start="6252" end="6265" title="Rebecca Nurse" label="Rebecca Nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779377" start="6270" end="6281" title="Mary Eastey" label="Mary Eastey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363384" start="6432" end="6457" title="Elizabeth Proctor" label="Elizabeth Bassett Proctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="7273" end="7282" title="attainder" label="attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="8779" end="8817" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="9106" end="9116" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q697279" start="9204" end="9212" title="petition" label="petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120352" start="9555" end="9568" title="Joseph Dudley" label="Joseph Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766630" start="11232" end="11244" title="Ann Pudeator" label="Ann Pudeator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106544" start="12016" end="12032" title="J. Michael Ruane" label="J. Michael Ruane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154025" start="12037" end="12048" title="Paul Tirone" label="Paul Tirone"/>
<link wikidata="Q449745" start="12135" end="12145" title="Jane Swift" label="Jane Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183443" start="12317" end="12329" title="The Crucible" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="12339" end="12352" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379" start="12412" end="12427" title="Play (theatre)" label="theatrical play"/>
<link wikidata="Q289694" start="12750" end="12766" title="Abigail Williams (Salem witch trials)" label="Abigail Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850415" start="13482" end="13492" title="Ann Putnam" label="Ann Putnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13534" end="13541" title="Ghost#Terminology" label="specter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818772" start="13638" end="13649" title="Mercy Lewis" label="Mercy Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780925" start="13664" end="13675" title="Mary Warren (Salem witch trials)" label="Mary Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q876259" start="13909" end="13954" title="The Crucible (1957 film)" label="1957 screen adaptation of Miller&amp;#x27;s piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q106057" start="13980" end="13992" title="Yves Montand" label="Yves Montand"/>
<link wikidata="Q596984" start="14001" end="14028" title="The Crucible (1996 film)" label="1996 film based on the play"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="14052" end="14068" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490702" wikidata="Q6705590" url="?curid=490702" title="Luther Jordan">
<text>Luther Henry Jordan, Jr. (1 June 1950 – 23 April 2002) was a Democratic politician from North Carolina and a senior member of the North Carolina General Assembly.

Jordan was born in New York City and moved to North Carolina as a child. He graduated from New Hanover High School in 1969 and received training in mortuary science at Gupton Jones College. He ran a funeral home business in Wilmington, North Carolina and served on the Wilmington City Council for 15 years. Jordan was elected to the North Carolina Senate in 1993 and served in that body until his death in 2002. Jordan earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree from Shaw University in 1997, at the age of 46. From 1999 to 2002, he served as the Senate Democratic majority whip.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6705590" start="0" end="24" title="Luther Jordan" label="Luther Henry Jordan, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="61" end="71" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="88" end="102" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="130" end="161" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="North Carolina General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="183" end="196" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708089" start="255" end="278" title="New Hanover High School" label="New Hanover High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915002" start="312" end="328" title="mortuary science" label="mortuary science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="332" end="352" title="Gupton Jones College" label="Gupton Jones College"/>
<link wikidata="Q659400" start="388" end="414" title="Wilmington, North Carolina" label="Wilmington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="497" end="518" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443493" start="620" end="635" title="Shaw University" label="Shaw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="706" end="716" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490703" wikidata="Q185699" url="?curid=490703" title="ADH">
<text>ADH may refer to:

==Aviation==
* Ada Municipal Airport, Oklahoma, US
* Air One, an Italian airline
* IATA airport code for Aldan Airport in Sakha Republic, Russia

==Science==
* Adipic acid dihydrazide, a chemical compound
* Alcohol dehydrogenase, an enzyme
* Antidiuretic hormone or vasopressin
* Atypical ductal hyperplasia, a lesion of the breast

==Sports==
* Aalborg DH, a Danish handball club

== Transportation ==
* Andheri railway station, Mumbai, India

== Other uses ==
* Adhola dialect of Southern Luo, spoken in Uganda</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185699" start="0" end="3" title="ADH" label="ADH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678286" start="34" end="55" title="Ada Municipal Airport" label="Ada Municipal Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407697" start="72" end="79" title="Air One" label="Air One"/>
<link wikidata="Q631156" start="124" end="137" title="Aldan Airport" label="Aldan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682936" start="179" end="202" title="Adipic acid dihydrazide" label="Adipic acid dihydrazide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410754" start="226" end="247" title="Alcohol dehydrogenase" label="Alcohol dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q21124841" start="261" end="281" title="Antidiuretic hormone" label="Antidiuretic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818889" start="299" end="326" title="Atypical ductal hyperplasia" label="Atypical ductal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928991" start="365" end="375" title="Aalborg DH" label="Aalborg DH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754334" start="424" end="447" title="Andheri railway station" label="Andheri railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971400" start="483" end="497" title="Adhola dialect" label="Adhola dialect"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490711" wikidata="Q716940" url="?curid=490711" title="Ii Naosuke">
<text>was a &quot;daimyō&quot; (feudal lord) of Hikone (1850–1860) and also &quot;Tairō&quot; of the Tokugawa shogunate, Japan, a position he held from April 23, 1858, until his death, when he was assassinated in the Sakuradamon Incident on March 24, 1860. He is most famous for signing the Harris Treaty with the United States, granting access to ports for trade to American merchants and seamen and extraterritoriality to American citizens. He was also an enthusiastic and accomplished practitioner of the Japanese tea ceremony, in the &quot;Sekishūryū&quot; style, and his writings include at least two works on the tea ceremony.

Under Ii Naosuke&#x27;s guidance, the Tokugawa shogunate navigated past a particularly difficult conflict over the succession to the ailing and childless Tokugawa Iesada. Ii Naosuke managed to coerce the Tokugawa shogunate to the last brief resurgence of its power and position in Japanese society before the start of the Meiji period. Ii was assassinated in the Sakuradamon incident by a group of 17 Mito and 1 Satsuma samurai on March 24, 1860.

== Early life ==
Ii Naosuke was born on November 29, 1815, as the 14th son of Ii Naonaka, the &quot;daimyō&quot; of Hikone by his concubine. The Ii clan is a prestigious lineage with Naomasa, one of the Four Heavenly Kings of the Tokugawa, as its revitalizing founder. However, since Naosuke was the 14th son, he was not in line for a prominent position and was sent early in life to a Buddhist temple, where he lived on a small stipend from his family. Fortunately for Ii, even though he was sent to the monastery, his 13 elder brothers were either adopted into other families who needed an heir, or died before they succeeded their father. Accordingly, when his father died in 1850, Ii was called back from the monastery and became the &quot;daimyō&quot; of Hikone, a &quot;fudai&quot; domain, and took the family name of Ii. As the &quot;daimyō&quot; of Hikone, Ii was one of the &quot;daimyōs&quot; who were eligible for a position in the bakufu, the council of the &quot;shōgun&quot;″s advisors. His childhood name was Tetsunosuke (鉄之介).

Ii became involved in national politics, rapidly rising to lead a coalition of &quot;daimyōs&quot;. In 1853 Ii put forward a proposal concerning the Japanese negotiations with U.S. Commodore Matthew C. Perry during Perry&#x27;s mission to open Japan to the outside world. Realizing that Japan was faced with immediate military danger Ii argued that Japan should use their relationship with the Dutch to allow them to buy enough time to develop armed forces, which could resist invasion. Ii recommended that only the port of Nagasaki be opened for trade with foreigners Ii, like Hotta Masayoshi, refused to remain silent while shogunal advisor Abe Masahiro appeased the anti-foreign party. Ii led the &quot;fudai daimyōs&quot; in their effort to bring about the downfall of Abe Masahiro and replace him with Hotta Masayoshi. This alienated many reformist &quot;daimyōs&quot;, leading them to strengthen their association with the Imperial court.

==Family==
* Father: Ii Naonaka (1766–1831)
* Mother: Otomi no Kata (1785–1819)
* Foster father: Ii Naoaki (1794–1850)
* Wife: Masako (1834–1885)
* Concubines:
** Senda Shizue
** Nishimura Sato
* Children:
** Ii Naonori by Nishimura Sato
** daughter
** Son
** Chiyoko (1846–1927) married Matsudaira Yoritoshi
** Ii Naotomo (1849–1887) by Masako
** Ii Naoyasu (1851–1935) by Nishimura Sato
** daughter
** son
** Manchiyo
** daughter
** son
** Michiyo
** daughter
** Ii Naoyuki (1858–1927) by Masako
** Tokiko married Aoyama Yukiyoshi

== &quot;Tairō&quot; ==
In 1858 after Hotta Masayoshi&#x27;s disastrous attempt to obtain the emperor&#x27;s approval for the Harris treaty the Tokugawa &quot;shōgun&quot; Tokugawa Iesada chose Ii Naosuke to be the &quot;Tairō&quot; (Great Elder); a decision influenced by the Kii Party. The position of Tairō, a post traditionally held by members of the Ii family, was rarely filled; in fact there had only been three Tairō between 1700 and Ii Naosuke&#x27;s rise to power 158 years later. Ii&#x27;s promotion to the post of Tairō annoyed many of the &quot;shinpan daimyōs&quot; (&quot;daimyōs&quot; related to the &quot;shōgun&quot;, they were unable to be members of the bakufu, but in the event of the &quot;shōgun&quot; dying heirless the next &quot;shōgun&quot; would be chosen from one of the &quot;shinpan&quot; families) including Tokugawa Nariaki. As the Tairō Ii Naosuke had both prestige and power second only to the &quot;shōgun&quot;; Ii also enjoyed the full backing of the &quot;fudai daimyōs&quot;. An intelligent and capable politician Ii Naosuke was determined to restore the power of the bakufu in Japanese policy making, both in a domestic and a foreign role.

Ii Naosuke regarded the Harris treaty, which Hotta Masayoshi had negotiated with the American envoy Townsend Harris as in Japan&#x27;s best interests. In accordance with the protocol he asked the three house lords of the &quot;gosankyō&quot; for their views in writing. However Ii faced a problem in the form of an obstructionist policy from members of the Hitotsubashi faction led by Hitotsubashi Keiki&#x27;s father Tokugawa Nariaki.

Ii was unwilling to sign the Harris treaty without approval from Emperor Kōmei in Kyoto. However the &quot;daimyōs&quot; of the Hitotsubashi faction were preventing him from presenting the treaty to the emperor by withholding their approval. At this time Harris started putting pressure on the shogunal officials to sign the treaty. Ii decided not to risk aggravating the Americans and on July 29, 1858, encouraged by the full backing of the bakufu officials, Ii ordered the Harris treaty to be signed. Soon after this Ii negotiated a number of similar unequal treaties with the Dutch, the Russians, the British and the French. Bakufu critics considered the treaties signed by Ii Naosuke to have seriously compromised Japan&#x27;s sovereignty, and recovery of this power became the basis of a large part of the policies formed during the Meiji period.

Due to the frail health of the &quot;shōgun&quot; Tokugawa Iesada, the members of the Hitotsubashi faction wanted to force Ii to support Hitotsubashi Keiki as the heir to the ailing &quot;shōgun&quot;. Hitotsubashi Keiki was the reformist candidate, supported by the reformist faction, headed by his father Tokugawa Nariaki; his supporters pointed to his experience and skill in handling policy decisions. Ii was aware that Japan needed strong leadership, but unlike the reformist &quot;daimyōs&quot;, Ii was not prepared to accept strong leadership from outside the traditional forms of government. The bakufu, led by Ii, wanted the 12-year-old &quot;daimyō&quot; of Kii, Tokugawa Yoshitomi, to ascend to the position of &quot;shōgun&quot;. The bakufu supported such a young candidate because they felt that it would be easier for them to influence and control a young and inexperienced &quot;shōgun&quot;.

To end meddling in bakufu affairs, shortly after he signed the Harris treaty Ii settled the matter of the shogunal succession by claiming that the shogunal succession was a matter for the Tokugawa house alone and neither the &quot;shinpan daimyōs&quot; or the Emperor had the right to interfere. As head councilor of the Tokugawa house Ii was now free to influence the decision in favor of whichever candidate he preferred without any interference. In this way Ii was able to ignore the &quot;daimyōs&quot; who supported Hitotsubashi Keiki, the reformist candidate for the office of &quot;shōgun&quot; and crowned the &quot;fudai daimyō&quot;″s candidate, Tokugawa Yoshitomi who changed his name to Tokugawa Iemochi, as the 14th Tokugawa &quot;shōgun&quot;.

Ii&#x27;s decision made him very unpopular with Imperial loyalists, especially with the Mito samurai. Towards the end of 1858 the reformists went to the emperor with the hopes of restraining Ii. In response to the attempt by Tokugawa Nariaki and his supporters to denounce him in the emperor&#x27;s court Ii had a shogunal decree passed which allowed him to conduct the Ansei Purge. During the rest of 1858 and into 1859 Naosuke purged over 100 officials from the bakufu, the imperial court and the lands of various &quot;daimyōs&quot;. Eight of the officials who were purged were executed; the remainder were forced into retirement. During the Ansei purge Ii Naosuke was able to force Hitotsubashi Keiki&#x27;s supporters to retire and place Hitotsubashi and his family under house arrest. Ii Naosuke was also able to remove officials who had expressed unhappiness with his handling of the Harris treaty and the shogunal succession from public life.

== Kōbu gattai and the Kazunomiya marriage ==
In early 1859 Ii Naosuke&#x27;s agent in the Imperial Court, Nagano Shuzen, approached him with the idea of &quot;kōbu gattai&quot;. &quot;Kōbu gattai&quot; was a policy binding Kyoto and Edo closer together to shore up the failing shogunate with the prestige of the imperial court. This policy was to be carried out by means of a marriage between the &quot;shōgun&quot; and the Emperor&#x27;s younger sister, Princess Kazunomiya. Naosuke broached the topic to the Imperial court through his Envoy Manabe Akibuke. Manabe was tasked with gauging the measure of acceptability for the proposed marriage between Shogun Iemochi and Princess Kazunomiya. Prominent court official Konoe Tadahiro responded favorably to the proposal, insinuating a marriage between the shogun and Princess Kazunomiya was possible if her present engagement failed. However, in March 1859 Konoe was forced to retire from the court by Naosuke&#x27;s Ansei purge, and the idea of &quot;kōbu gattai&quot; faded into the background until 1861, after the death of Ii Naosuke. In 1861 due to the further deteriorating status of the shogunate the marriage between Tokugawa Iemochi and Princess Kazunomiya finally took place, though their marriage was cut short by Iemochi&#x27;s death in 1866.

== Death and consequences ==

Although Ii&#x27;s Ansei purge was very effective in silencing the officials and his high ranking opponents, it did not have the same effect on lower-ranking samurai. Ii Naosuke&#x27;s 20-month dictatorial reign as &quot;tairō&quot; came to an abrupt end in the third month of &quot;Ansei&quot; 7 (March 24, 1860).

In the Sakuradamon incident, Ii was attacked by a band of 17 young samurai loyalists from the Mito Province and cut down just in front of one of the gates of the &quot;shōgun&quot;″s Edo castle entering to meet with the &quot;shōgun&quot;. The assassination of Ii Naosuke, who was seen as the symbol of the bakufu&#x27;s power and authority, was construed as crushing any hopes for the resurrection of the shogunate&#x27;s power. His assassins additionally left a note accusing him of building heretical Buddhist temples in Japan; this in fact referred to his allowing Christianity to return to the region, building on earlier Japanese heresiological discourse.

The death of Tairō Ii Naosuke started a wave of loyalist terrorism across Japan, the poet Tsunada Tadayuki even wrote a poem praising Ii&#x27;s assassins. Soon attempts were being made on the lives of other members of the bakufu and their informants. The wave of popular dissent also turned against officials with a connection to Ii Naosuke, no matter how distant it was. Shimada Sakon, retainer of the Kujō, (one of the Sekke families; the 5 regent houses, and among the most powerful in the court), Imperial regent, was killed by dissidents for supporting the Harris treaty and helping Ii&#x27;s confidant, Nagano Shuzen, expose members of the court who were targeted during the Ansei purge.

The &quot;shōgun&quot; and the Bakufu were astounded and taken completely off-guard by the death of Ii Naosuke. They didn&#x27;t even announce his death until several months after the assassination took place. Instead, during this time the &quot;shōgun&quot; and the bakufu first pretended that Ii was still alive and rendering service to the &quot;shōgun&quot;. Then they faked an illness and had him render his resignation to the &quot;shōgun&quot; before announcing his death. In this way Ii continued to serve the &quot;shōgun&quot;, even after death. Ii&#x27;s assassins were later granted a general amnesty by the bakufu, a precedent later used by Yamagata Aritomo, a key member of the Meiji restoration and a main architect of the military and political foundations of early modern Japan and Japanese militarism, to show that any action can be forgiven if it is performed for the betterment of the emperor.

Accounts of the dramatic event were sent via ship across the Pacific to San Francisco and then sped by Pony Express across the American West. On June 12, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Japan&#x27;s first diplomatic mission to the West received the news about what had happened in Edo.

== Legacy ==

After his death, Ii Naosuke was quickly both vilified and defended. Even his enemies would admit that, along with Tokugawa Nariaki, Ii was one of the most important political figures of the late Edo period of Japanese history. Due to the often-tyrannical means Ii used to maintain his power, he was the subject of extremely negative press and was portrayed as a villain in much of the literature from his time, for example in the poems of Tsunada Tadayuki. Historians such as Miyauchi and Beasley consider that Ii was nonetheless a patriot who carried out all of his acts in the belief that they were for the good of Japan and the Emperor. They base this theory upon Ii&#x27;s 1853 proposal concerning the Japanese negotiations with Commodore Perry, where Ii realized that Japan could not stand up to the Western powers and therefore suggested a policy of placation while the Japanese built up their armed forces (which was the policy chosen by the Meiji government). Ii&#x27;s successors could not overturn his policy decisions, and his attitude towards the foreigners became the cornerstone of Japanese policy well into the Meiji period.

After Ii Naosuke&#x27;s death, the Ii family was disgraced for many years; recently, however, Ii&#x27;s actions have been looked at in a more favorable light and Ii Naosuke has taken his place as one of the most important political figures of Japanese history. On October 7, 2009, Ii Naotake, a family descendant of Naosuke, attended a memorial ceremony with the people of Fukui in reconciliation over the execution of Hashimoto Sanai in the Ansei Purge.
Ii is buried in the temple of Gōtoku-ji, in Setagaya, Tokyo.

== References ==
* Benneville, James Seguin de. (1910). &quot;Saitō Mussashi-bō Benkei&quot;. (Tales of the Wars of the Gempei). Yokohama.
* Kusunoki Sei&#x27;ichirō 楠木誠一郎 (1991). &quot;Nihon shi omoshiro suiri: Nazo no satsujin jiken wo oe&quot; 日本史おもしろ推理: 謎の殺人事件を追え. Tokyo: Futami bunko 二見文庫.
* Matsuoka Hideo 松岡英夫 (2001). &quot;Ansei no Taigoku: Ii Naosuke to Nagano Shuzen&quot; 安政の大獄: 井伊直弼と長野主膳. Tokyo: Chūōkōron-shinsha 中央公論新社.
* Mori Yoshikazu 母利美和 (2006). &quot;Ii Naosuke&quot; 井伊直弼. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan 吉川弘文館.
* Nakamura Katsumaro, Akimoto Shunkichi (1909). &quot;Lord Ii Naosuké and New Japan&quot;. Yokohama: Japan Times.
* Osaragi Jirō 大佛次郎 (1967–1974). &quot;Tennō no seiki&quot; 天皇の世紀. Tokyo: Asahi Shinbunsha 朝日新聞社.
* Shimada Saburō 島田三郎 (1888). &quot;Kaikoku shimatsu: Ii Kamon no Kami Naosuke den&quot; 開國始末: 井伊掃部頭直弼傳. Tokyo: Yoronsha 輿論社.
*Tanimura Reiko 谷村玲子 (2001). &quot;Ii Naosuke, shūyō toshite no chanoyu&quot; 井伊直弼, 修養としての茶の湯. Tokyo: Sōbunsha 創文社.
* Tsuzuki, Chushichi. (2000). &quot;The Pursuit of Power in Modern Japan, 1825–1995.&quot; Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

==External links==
* National Diet Library: photograph of Sakurada-mon (1902)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="12" end="18" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q386635" start="42" end="48" title="Hikone" label="Hikone"/>
<link wikidata="Q956844" start="76" end="81" title="Tairō" label="Tairō"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="95" end="113" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46603" start="211" end="231" title="Sakuradamon Incident (1860)" label="Sakuradamon Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194699" start="285" end="298" title="Treaty of Amity and Commerce (United States–Japan)" label="Harris Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="308" end="321" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="395" end="414" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="502" end="523" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="Japanese tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432729" start="532" end="554" title="Schools of Japanese tea" label="&amp;quot;Sekishūryū&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q336383" start="782" end="797" title="Tokugawa Iesada" label="Tokugawa Iesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="950" end="962" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q46603" start="991" end="1011" title="Sakuradamon incident (1860)" label="Sakuradamon incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146904" start="1029" end="1033" title="Mito domain" label="Mito"/>
<link wikidata="Q676187" start="1040" end="1047" title="Satsuma Domain" label="Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1176" end="1182" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243336" start="1221" end="1228" title="Ii clan" label="Ii clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334437" start="1259" end="1266" title="Ii Naomasa" label="Naomasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040806" start="1279" end="1314" title="Shitennō (Tokugawa clan)" label="Four Heavenly Kings of the Tokugawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1462" end="1470" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61982" start="1820" end="1826" title="daimyō" label="daimyō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2019" end="2025" title="Shōgun#Shogunate" label="bakufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="2311" end="2327" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="2644" end="2652" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070088" start="2763" end="2775" title="Abe Masahiro" label="Abe Masahiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q910241" start="2927" end="2942" title="Hotta Masayoshi" label="Hotta Masayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270239" start="3275" end="3285" title="Ii Naonori" label="Ii Naonori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387880" start="3354" end="3374" title="Matsudaira Yoritoshi" label="Matsudaira Yoritoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q336383" start="3772" end="3787" title="Tokugawa Iesada" label="Tokugawa Iesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q956844" start="3821" end="3826" title="Tairō" label="Tairō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331112" start="4158" end="4165" title="shinpan" label="shinpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q610626" start="4882" end="4897" title="Townsend Harris" label="Townsend Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143633" start="5009" end="5017" title="gosankyō" label="gosankyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q287657" start="5167" end="5185" title="Hitotsubashi Keiki" label="Hitotsubashi Keiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323770" start="5200" end="5216" title="Tokugawa Nariaki" label="Tokugawa Nariaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q299179" start="5284" end="5297" title="Emperor Kōmei" label="Emperor Kōmei"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="5301" end="5306" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q336383" start="6122" end="6137" title="Tokugawa Iesada" label="Tokugawa Iesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q348466" start="6745" end="6763" title="Tokugawa Yoshitomi" label="Tokugawa Yoshitomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q569487" start="8110" end="8121" title="Ansei Purge" label="Ansei Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189374" start="8852" end="8863" title="kōbu gattai" label="kōbu gattai"/>
<link wikidata="Q907048" start="9148" end="9167" title="Kazu-no-Miya Chikako" label="Princess Kazunomiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q46603" start="10351" end="10371" title="Sakuradamon incident (1860)" label="Sakuradamon incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="10848" end="10856" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="10913" end="10925" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365310" start="10980" end="10994" title="Heresiology" label="heresiological"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11097" end="11113" title="Tsunada Tadayuki" label="Tsunada Tadayuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q297636" start="12356" end="12372" title="Yamagata Aritomo" label="Yamagata Aritomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="12720" end="12732" title="Pony Express" label="Pony Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158166" start="12816" end="12865" title="Japanese Embassy to the United States (1860)" label="Japan&amp;#x27;s first diplomatic mission to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q569487" start="14514" end="14525" title="Ansei Purge" label="Ansei Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634381" start="14557" end="14566" title="Gōtoku-ji" label="Gōtoku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q231645" start="14571" end="14586" title="Setagaya, Tokyo" label="Setagaya, Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="15668" end="15691" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490721" wikidata="Q6128162" url="?curid=490721" title="James A. Kelly">
<text>James Andrew Kelly (born September 15, 1936) is an American foreign policy advisor who served as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs from 2001 to 2005.

== Education ==
Raised in Atlanta, Georgia, Kelly attended Georgia Tech for one year before receiving an appointment to the United States Naval Academy. In 1959, he earned a Bachelor of Science from the Naval Academy. Kelly later earned an MBA from the Harvard Business School in 1968. He graduated from the National War College in 1977.

== Career ==
Kelly served in the United States Navy from 1959 to 1982, concluding his active duty as a Captain in the Navy Supply Corps. From June 1983 to March 1986, Kelly worked at the Pentagon as deputy assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs (East Asia and Pacific). Kelly served special assistant for national security affairs to President Ronald Reagan, and as senior director for Asian affairs on the United States National Security Council from March 1986 to March 1989. From 1989 to 1994, Kelly was president of EAP Associates, Inc., of Honolulu, which provided international business consulting services with an Asia and Pacific focus to private clients.

From 1994 to 2001, Kelly was president of Pacific Forum International, which has analyzed and led dialogue on Asia–Pacific political, security, and economic/business issues since 1975. He has served as a senior adviser and distinguished alumni at CSIS. In 2002, Kelly worked as an envoy to North Korea.

From 2001 to 2005, Kelly served as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs. President George W. Bush nominated Kelly on April 3, 2001. He was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on April 26, 2001 and sworn in on May 1, 2001.

In 2020, Kelly, along with over 130 other former Republican national security officials, signed a statement that asserted that President Trump was unfit to serve another term, and &quot;To that end, we are firmly convinced that it is in the best interest of our nation that Vice President Joe Biden be elected as the next President of the United States, and we will vote for him.&quot;

Kelly currently serves as Chairman of the Board of the Directors of Pacific Forum International.

==References==

==External links==
*CSIS biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6128162" start="0" end="18" title="James A. Kelly" label="James Andrew Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477295" start="97" end="160" title="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="207" end="214" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="216" end="223" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="240" end="252" title="Georgia Tech" label="Georgia Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q559549" start="305" end="332" title="United States Naval Academy" label="United States Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="434" end="457" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q137269" start="489" end="509" title="National War College" label="National War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="553" end="571" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982687" start="638" end="655" title="Navy Supply Corps" label="Navy Supply Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="707" end="715" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="891" end="904" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851756" start="954" end="993" title="United States National Security Council" label="United States National Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122457" start="1254" end="1281" title="Pacific Forum International" label="Pacific Forum International"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="1502" end="1513" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477295" start="1551" end="1614" title="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs" label="Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="1626" end="1640" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1699" end="1710" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="1886" end="1901" title="President Trump" label="President Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122457" start="2214" end="2241" title="Pacific Forum International" label="Pacific Forum International"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490722" wikidata="Q5081232" url="?curid=490722" title="Charles Newell Carter">
<text>Charles Newell Carter Jr. (born May 9, 1967) is a Democratic politician from North Carolina who served two terms in the North Carolina General Assembly.

Carter was born in Asheville, North Carolina and graduated from Asheville School. He earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in international studies and history from Oglethorpe University, after which he taught in the public schools of Buncombe County. In 1996, he ran unsuccessfully for the North Carolina Senate in the 28th Senate District. In 1998 and 2000, Carter was elected to the Senate, and he served through 2002.

More recently, he opened several Port City Java cafes in the Asheville area. In May, 2007, Charles Carter broke away from the Port City Java corporation and created a locally owned chain of cafes known as Mountain Java. Mountain Java is now closed.

Carter also serves on the advisory board of the North Carolina DonorsChoose organization.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5081232" start="0" end="25" title="Charles Newell Carter" label="Charles Newell Carter Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="50" end="60" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="77" end="91" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="120" end="151" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="North Carolina General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="173" end="198" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804923" start="218" end="234" title="Asheville School" label="Asheville School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400868" start="313" end="334" title="Oglethorpe University" label="Oglethorpe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q504360" start="383" end="398" title="Buncombe County, North Carolina" label="Buncombe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="439" end="460" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230543" start="604" end="618" title="Port City Java" label="Port City Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296810" start="884" end="896" title="DonorsChoose" label="DonorsChoose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490725" wikidata="Q1063902" url="?curid=490725" title="Charles Carter">
<text>Charles, Charlie, or Chuck Carter may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
*Charles Joseph Carter (1874–1936), American stage magician
*Charles Thomas Carter (c. 1735–1804), Irish composer and organist
*Charlton Heston (J. Charles Carter, 1923–2008), American film actor, known in private life as Charles or Chuck Carter
*Chuck Carter (born 1957), video game and film artist

==Politics and law==
*Charles Carter (of Cleve) (1707–1764), Virginia planter and politician
*Charles Carter (of Ludlow) (1732–1796), son of Charles Carter (of Cleve), Virginia planter and politician
*Charles Carter (Alaska politician) (1870–1961), Alaskan politician, mayor of Juneau
*Charles Carter (New Zealand politician) (1822–1896), philanthropist, contractor, and politician
*Charles Bonham-Carter (1876–1955), British Army officer and Governor of Malta
*Charles D. Carter (1868–1929), U.S. Representative from Oklahoma
*Charles Hill Carter (1732–1806), Virginia planter (at Shirley and Coromotan) and politician
*Charles Newell Carter (born 1967), American politician from North Carolina
*Charles Samuel Carter (1878–1968), Virginia banker and Democratic party leader, chair of State Commission on Conservation and Development
*Charles Carter (Bahamian journalist) (1943–2021), Bahamian journalist and politician

==Sports==
*Charles B. Carter (1880–1927), American football player, lawyer and politician
*Kid Carter (Charles Carter, fl. 1903–1906), American baseball player
*Charlie Carter (born 1971), Irish hurler
*Charlie Carter (cricketer) (born 1947), English cricketer
*Charlie Carter (footballer) (born 1996), English footballer

==Others==
*Charles Frederick Carter (1919–2002), English economist and university administrator
*Charles Henry Carter (1828–1914), English Baptist missionary to Ceylon
*Charles Howard Carter (1927–1990), American professor of history
*Charles John Carter (died 1851), English architect and surveyor </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063902" start="0" end="7" title="Charles Carter" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063902" start="9" end="16" title="Charles Carter" label="Charlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063902" start="21" end="33" title="Charles Carter" label="Chuck Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079601" start="76" end="97" title="Charles Joseph Carter" label="Charles Joseph Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528949" start="136" end="157" title="Charles Thomas Carter" label="Charles Thomas Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="203" end="218" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763923" start="322" end="334" title="Chuck Carter" label="Chuck Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922113" start="398" end="423" title="Charles Carter (of Cleve)" label="Charles Carter (of Cleve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104017199" start="470" end="496" title="Charles Carter (of Ludlow)" label="Charles Carter (of Ludlow)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083172" start="577" end="611" title="Charles Carter (Alaska politician)" label="Charles Carter (Alaska politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082164" start="662" end="701" title="Charles Carter (New Zealand politician)" label="Charles Carter (New Zealand politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063761" start="759" end="780" title="Charles Bonham-Carter" label="Charles Bonham-Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064019" start="838" end="855" title="Charles D. Carter" label="Charles D. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75580929" start="904" end="923" title="Charles Hill Carter" label="Charles Hill Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081232" start="997" end="1018" title="Charles Newell Carter" label="Charles Newell Carter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1073" end="1094" title="Charles Samuel Carter" label="Charles Samuel Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q119954402" start="1212" end="1248" title="Charles Carter (Bahamian journalist)" label="Charles Carter (Bahamian journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075283" start="1310" end="1327" title="Charles B. Carter" label="Charles B. Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202892" start="1390" end="1400" title="Kid Carter" label="Kid Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084655" start="1460" end="1474" title="Charlie Carter" label="Charlie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084657" start="1502" end="1528" title="Charlie Carter (cricketer)" label="Charlie Carter (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q66689199" start="1561" end="1588" title="Charlie Carter (footballer)" label="Charlie Carter (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077837" start="1634" end="1658" title="Charles Frederick Carter" label="Charles Frederick Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078915" start="1720" end="1740" title="Charles Henry Carter" label="Charles Henry Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21597807" start="1792" end="1813" title="Charles Howard Carter" label="Charles Howard Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q66747527" start="1858" end="1877" title="Charles John Carter" label="Charles John Carter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490728" wikidata="Q410173" url="?curid=490728" title="James Kelly">
<text>James, Jimmy or Jim Kelly may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
*James E. Kelly (artist) (1855–1933), American sculptor and illustrator
*James F. Kelly, American actor
*James Kelly (artist) (1913–2003), American painter
*James Martin Kelly (born 1954), American actor and writer
*James Patrick Kelly (born 1951), American writer
*Jim Kelly (martial artist) (1946–2013), karate champion and film actor
*Jim Kelly (author) (born 1957), British crime writer and journalist
*Jimmy Kelly (singer) (born 1971), Irish-American singer and musician
*James Kelly, member of Irish metal group Altar of Plagues
*James Kelly (fiddler) (born 1957), Irish fiddler, member of folk group Patrick Street

==Crime and law==
*James Kelly (pirate) (died 1701), English pirate
*James Kelly (crimper), 19th-century American criminal
*James McGirr Kelly (1928–2005), U.S. federal judge
*James Kelly (Irish Army officer) (1929–2003), cleared of attempting to import arms for the IRA in 1970
*James Kelly (murderer) (1860–1929), English murderer and Jack the Ripper suspect
*Jimmy Kelly (saloon keeper) (fl. 1900–1914), organizer and underworld figure in New York

==Politics==

===United States===
*James Kelly (U.S. representative) (1760–1819), for the Federalist Party, Pennsylvania, 1805–1809
*James K. Kelly (1819–1903), U.S. senator for Oregon (1871–1877)
*James C. Kelly (1857-1947), American politician and farmer from Minnesota
*James W. Kelly Jr. (1908–1990), mayor of East Orange, New Jersey
*James H. Kelly (1919–1984), American politician
*James A. Kelly Jr. (1926–2013), member of Massachusetts House of Representatives and Senate
*James A. Kelly (born 1936), Assistant U.S. Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 2001–2005
*James B. Kelly III (born 1941), Pennsylvania politician
*James M. Kelly (Boston politician) (1940–2007), Boston City Council member
*James Paul Kelly (1911–1972), American politician, Missouri state senator
*Jim Kelly (Kansas politician) (born 1947), member of the Kansas House of Representatives
*James M. Kelly (Maryland politician) (born 1960), American politician in Maryland

===Other politics===
*James Whyte Kelly (1855–1938), New Zealand politician
*James Kelly (Fianna Fáil politician), Irish Fianna Fáil politician
*James Kelly (Repeal Association politician) (1808–1875), Irish Repeal Association politician
*James Kelly (Scottish politician) (born 1963), member of the Scottish Parliament
*James Kelly, MP for the Irish constituency of Limerick City, 1844–1847
*James Francis Kelly, Ontario MPP for Muskoka—Ontario, 1934–1945

==Sports==

===Association football===
*James Kelly (footballer, born 1865) (1865–1932), Scottish football player (Renton FC, Celtic FC, national team) and administrator
*James Kelly (Lincoln City footballer) (fl. 1892–93), Scottish footballer (Lincoln City FC)
*James Kelly (American soccer) (c. 1920s), U.S. soccer player
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1907) (1907–1984), English professional footballer
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1911) (1911–1970), Irish international footballer
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1931) (1931–2003), English footballer active in the 1950s and 1960s
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1933) (1933–2020), Scottish footballer active in the 1950s
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1954), Northern Irish footballer active in England and North America in the 1970s and 1980s
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1957), English footballer for Manchester United and NASL teams
*Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1973), English footballer for Wrexham and Wolverhampton Wanderers
*Jimmy Kelly (Northern Ireland footballer) (fl. 1920s), Northern Irish footballer

===American football===
*Jim Kelly (born 1960), American football Hall of Fame quarterback 
*Jimmy Kelly (American football) (1892–1964), American NFL player
*Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1942) (1942–2022), American football player
*Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1951), American football player

===Other sports===
*Jim Kelly (baseball) (1884–1961), American
*Jimmy Kelly (Mooncoin hurler) (1884–1966), Irish hurler
*Jimmy Kelly (Carrickshock hurler) (1916–1985), Irish hurler
*Jim Kelly (coach) (1893–1972), American basketball, football, and track and field coach
*Jim Kelly (Australian cricketer) (1867–1938), wicket-keeper
*Jim Kelly (New Zealand cricketer) (1928–1995), Wellington representative cricketer in 1951
*Jim Kelly (boxer) (1912–?), Northern Irish boxer of the 1920s, &#x27;30s and &#x27;40s
*Jimmy Kelly (boxer, born 1992), Irish boxer
*Jim Kelly (martial artist) (1946–2013), karate champion and film star
*James Kelly (Australian footballer) (born 1983), Australian rules footballer
*Jim Kelly (sportscaster), American sportscaster
*James Kelly (basketball) (born 1993), American basketball player

==Other==
*James Kelly (Australian explorer) (1791–1859), Australian mariner and explorer
*James Kelly (journalist) (1809–1895), founder of &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;
*James Kelly (bishop) (1832–1907), Anglican bishop of Newfoundland and Scotland
*James Kelly (priest) (1877–1939), New Zealand Catholic priest and editor
*James W. Kelly (1913–1989), U.S. Navy admiral
*James Kelly (historian) (born 1959), professor of Irish history
*James M. Kelly (astronaut) (born 1964), NASA astronaut on Space Shuttle missions
*James Graves Kelly (1843–1923), officer in the British Indian Army
*James Gordon Kelly (1929–2020), professor of psychology
*James Johnson Kelly (1928–2018), Tuskegee Airman
*James P. Kelly, CEO of United Parcel Service, 1997–2001
*Jim Kelly, managing editor of &quot;Time&quot; magazine (2001–2005)

==See also==
*James Kelley (disambiguation)
*James Edward Kelly (disambiguation)
*James Fitzmaurice-Kelly (1858–1923), British writer on Spanish literature
*Jim Kelly Peak, a mountain in British Columbia, Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410173" start="0" end="5" title="James Kelly" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q410173" start="7" end="12" title="James Kelly" label="Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q410173" start="16" end="25" title="James Kelly" label="Jim Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133122" start="68" end="91" title="James E. Kelly (artist)" label="James E. Kelly (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239036" start="140" end="154" title="James F. Kelly" label="James F. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015873" start="172" end="192" title="James Kelly (artist)" label="James Kelly (artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186316" start="224" end="242" title="James Martin Kelly" label="James Martin Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q373836" start="283" end="302" title="James Patrick Kelly" label="James Patrick Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q714870" start="333" end="359" title="Jim Kelly (martial artist)" label="Jim Kelly (martial artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689130" start="405" end="423" title="Jim Kelly (author)" label="Jim Kelly (author)"/>
<link wikidata="Q169516" start="474" end="494" title="Jimmy Kelly (singer)" label="Jimmy Kelly (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736180" start="585" end="601" title="Altar of Plagues" label="Altar of Plagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686738" start="603" end="624" title="James Kelly (fiddler)" label="James Kelly (fiddler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4219123" start="709" end="729" title="James Kelly (pirate)" label="James Kelly (pirate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137189" start="759" end="780" title="James Kelly (crimper)" label="James Kelly (crimper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139334" start="814" end="832" title="James McGirr Kelly" label="James McGirr Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137181" start="866" end="898" title="James Kelly (Irish Army officer)" label="James Kelly (Irish Army officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925784" start="970" end="992" title="James Kelly (murderer)" label="James Kelly (murderer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200537" start="1052" end="1079" title="Jimmy Kelly (saloon keeper)" label="Jimmy Kelly (saloon keeper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137187" start="1177" end="1210" title="James Kelly (U.S. representative)" label="James Kelly (U.S. representative)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633652" start="1275" end="1289" title="James K. Kelly" label="James K. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q111227065" start="1340" end="1354" title="James C. Kelly" label="James C. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917891" start="1415" end="1433" title="James W. Kelly Jr." label="James W. Kelly Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q50946022" start="1481" end="1495" title="James H. Kelly" label="James H. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993148" start="1530" end="1548" title="James A. Kelly Jr." label="James A. Kelly Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6128162" start="1623" end="1637" title="James A. Kelly" label="James A. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129126" start="1732" end="1750" title="James B. Kelly III" label="James B. Kelly III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138474" start="1789" end="1823" title="James M. Kelly (Boston politician)" label="James M. Kelly (Boston politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105812181" start="1865" end="1881" title="James Paul Kelly" label="James Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730702" start="1940" end="1969" title="Jim Kelly (Kansas politician)" label="Jim Kelly (Kansas politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138479" start="2030" end="2066" title="James M. Kelly (Maryland politician)" label="James M. Kelly (Maryland politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145484" start="2135" end="2152" title="James Whyte Kelly" label="James Whyte Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137178" start="2190" end="2226" title="James Kelly (Fianna Fáil politician)" label="James Kelly (Fianna Fáil politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26477874" start="2258" end="2301" title="James Kelly (Repeal Association politician)" label="James Kelly (Repeal Association politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519985" start="2352" end="2385" title="James Kelly (Scottish politician)" label="James Kelly (Scottish politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549245" start="2480" end="2493" title="Limerick City (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Limerick City"/>
<link wikidata="Q122826852" start="2506" end="2525" title="James Francis Kelly" label="James Francis Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161198" start="2611" end="2646" title="James Kelly (footballer, born 1865)" label="James Kelly (footballer, born 1865)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973833" start="2742" end="2779" title="James Kelly (Lincoln City footballer)" label="James Kelly (Lincoln City footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137195" start="2834" end="2863" title="James Kelly (American soccer)" label="James Kelly (American soccer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922668" start="2896" end="2931" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1907)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1907)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200525" start="2978" end="3013" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1911)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1911)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200526" start="3059" end="3094" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1931)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1931)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200527" start="3158" end="3193" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1933)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1933)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200529" start="3248" end="3283" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1954)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1954)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200531" start="3371" end="3406" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1957)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1957)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200533" start="3465" end="3500" title="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1973)" label="Jimmy Kelly (footballer, born 1973)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200523" start="3562" end="3603" title="Jimmy Kelly (Northern Ireland footballer)" label="Jimmy Kelly (Northern Ireland footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q127819" start="3669" end="3678" title="Jim Kelly" label="Jim Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479284" start="3737" end="3768" title="Jimmy Kelly (American football)" label="Jimmy Kelly (American football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881189" start="3803" end="3835" title="Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1942)" label="Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1942)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879510" start="3875" end="3907" title="Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1951)" label="Jim Kelly (tight end, born 1951)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196064" start="3955" end="3975" title="Jim Kelly (baseball)" label="Jim Kelly (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200535" start="3999" end="4028" title="Jimmy Kelly (Mooncoin hurler)" label="Jimmy Kelly (Mooncoin hurler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285477" start="4056" end="4089" title="Jimmy Kelly (Carrickshock hurler)" label="Jimmy Kelly (Carrickshock hurler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196068" start="4117" end="4134" title="Jim Kelly (coach)" label="Jim Kelly (coach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196070" start="4206" end="4238" title="Jim Kelly (Australian cricketer)" label="Jim Kelly (Australian cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845946" start="4267" end="4300" title="Jim Kelly (New Zealand cricketer)" label="Jim Kelly (New Zealand cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16079058" start="4359" end="4376" title="Jim Kelly (boxer)" label="Jim Kelly (boxer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112725066" start="4447" end="4477" title="Jimmy Kelly (boxer, born 1992)" label="Jimmy Kelly (boxer, born 1992)"/>
<link wikidata="Q714870" start="4492" end="4518" title="Jim Kelly (martial artist)" label="Jim Kelly (martial artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137177" start="4563" end="4598" title="James Kelly (Australian footballer)" label="James Kelly (Australian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107173" start="4641" end="4665" title="Jim Kelly (sportscaster)" label="Jim Kelly (sportscaster)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283756" start="4690" end="4714" title="James Kelly (basketball)" label="James Kelly (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137180" start="4767" end="4800" title="James Kelly (Australian explorer)" label="James Kelly (Australian explorer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137191" start="4847" end="4871" title="James Kelly (journalist)" label="James Kelly (journalist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137185" start="4925" end="4945" title="James Kelly (bishop)" label="James Kelly (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16022891" start="5005" end="5025" title="James Kelly (priest)" label="James Kelly (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23614876" start="5079" end="5093" title="James W. Kelly" label="James W. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137190" start="5126" end="5149" title="James Kelly (historian)" label="James Kelly (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083" start="5191" end="5217" title="James M. Kelly (astronaut)" label="James M. Kelly (astronaut)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43038887" start="5273" end="5291" title="James Graves Kelly" label="James Graves Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q100013138" start="5341" end="5359" title="James Gordon Kelly" label="James Gordon Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q98183199" start="5398" end="5417" title="James Johnson Kelly" label="James Johnson Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q155026" start="5471" end="5492" title="United Parcel Service" label="United Parcel Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5541" end="5545" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137174" start="5588" end="5617" title="James Kelley (disambiguation)" label="James Kelley (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133356" start="5619" end="5654" title="James Edward Kelly (disambiguation)" label="James Edward Kelly (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q935119" start="5656" end="5679" title="James Fitzmaurice-Kelly" label="James Fitzmaurice-Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196073" start="5731" end="5745" title="Jim Kelly Peak" label="Jim Kelly Peak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490730" wikidata="Q4532311" url="?curid=490730" title="Vargas Era">
<text>The Vargas Era (Portuguese: &quot;Era Vargas&quot;; ) is the period in the history of Brazil between 1930 and 1946 when the country was governed by president Getúlio Vargas. The period from 1930 to 1937 is known as the Second Brazilian Republic, and the other part of Vargas Era, from 1937 until 1946 is known as the Third Brazilian Republic (or &quot;Estado Novo&quot;).

The Brazilian Revolution of 1930 marked the end of the First Brazilian Republic. The coup deposed President Washington Luís and blocked swearing-in of president-elect Júlio Prestes on the grounds that the election had been rigged by his supporters. The 1891 Constitution was abrogated, the National Congress dissolved, then the provisional military junta ceded power to Vargas. Federal intervention in state governments increased and the political landscape was altered by suppressing the traditional oligarchies of São Paulo and Minas Gerais states.

The Vargas Era comprises three successive phases:
*the period of the Provisional Government (1930–1934), when Vargas governed by decree as Head of the Provisional Government instituted by the revolution, pending the adoption of a new Constitution.
*the period of the Brazilian Constitution of 1934, when a new Constitution was drafted and approved by the Constituent Assembly of 1933–1934 and Vargas, elected by the Constituent Assembly under the transitional provisions of the Constitution, governed as president alongside a democratically elected legislature.
*the Estado Novo period (1937–1946) began when, in order to stay in power, Vargas imposed a new dictatorial Constitution in a coup d&#x27;état and shut down the Legislature to rule Brazil as a dictator.

The deposition of Getúlio Vargas and the Estado Novo regime in 1945 led to the subsequent re-democratization of Brazil with the adoption of a new Constitution in 1946, marking the end of the Vargas Era and the beginning of the Fourth Brazilian Republic.

==Downfall of the Old Republic==
The &quot;tenente&quot; rebellions did not significantly impact the bourgeois social reformers in Brazil. However, the entrenched ruling paulista coffee oligarchy proved vulnerable to the economic upheaval of 1929, leading to significant consequences.

Brazil&#x27;s vulnerability to the Great Depression had its roots in the heavy dependence of its economy on foreign markets and loans. Despite some industrial development in São Paulo, coffee and other agricultural exports were still the mainstay of the economy.

Days after the U.S. stock market crash on 29 October 1929, coffee quotations immediately fell 30% to 60%. and continued to fall. Between 1929 and 1931, coffee prices fell from 22.5 cents a pound to 8 cents per pound. As world trade contracted, the coffee exporters suffered a vast drop in foreign exchange earnings.

The Great Depression possibly had a more dramatic effect on Brazil than on the United States. The collapse of Brazil&#x27;s valorization (price support) program, a safety net in times of economic crisis, was strongly intertwined with the collapse of the central government, and its base of support in the landed oligarchy. The coffee planters had grown dangerously dependent on government valorization. In the aftermath of the recession following World War I, the government was not short of the cash needed to bail out the coffee industry. But between 1929 and 1930, world demand for Brazil&#x27;s primary products had fallen far too drastically to maintain government revenues. By the end of 1930, Brazil&#x27;s gold reserves had been depleted, pushing its exchange rate down to a new low. The program for warehoused coffee collapsed altogether.

The government of president Washington Luís faced a deepening balance-of-payments crisis and the coffee growers were stuck with an unsaleable harvest. Since power ultimately rested on a patronage system, wide-scale defections in the delicate balance of regional interests left the regime of Washington Luís vulnerable. Government policies designed to favor foreign interests further exacerbated the crisis, leaving the regime alienated from almost every segment of society.

Following the Wall Street panic, the government attempted to please foreign creditors by maintaining convertibility according to the money principles preached by the foreign bankers and economists who set the terms for Brazil&#x27;s relations with the world economy, despite lacking any support from a single major sector in Brazilian society.

Despite capital flight, Washington Luís clung to a hard money policy, guaranteeing the convertibility of the Brazilian currency into gold or British sterling. Once the gold and sterling reserves were exhausted amid the collapse of the valorization program, the government was finally forced to suspend convertibility of the currency. Foreign credit had now evaporated.

==Rise of Getúlio Vargas ==

A populist governor of Brazil&#x27;s southernmost Rio Grande do Sul state, Vargas was a cattle rancher with a doctorate in law and the 1930 presidential candidate of the Liberal Alliance. Vargas was a member of the gaucho-landed oligarchy and had risen through the system of patronage and clientelism, but had a fresh vision of how Brazilian politics could be shaped to support national development. He came from a region with a positivist and populist tradition and was an economic nationalist who favored industrial development and liberal reforms. Vargas built up political networks and was attuned to the interests of the rising urban classes. In his early years, Vargas even relied on the support of the &quot;tenentes&quot; of the 1922 rebellion.

Vargas understood that with the breakdown of direct relations between workers and owners in the growing factories of Brazil, workers could become the basis for a new form of political power – populism. Using such insights, he gradually established such mastery over the Brazilian political world that, upon achieving power, he stayed in power for 15 years. During this time, as the stranglehold of the agricultural elites eased, new urban industrial leaders acquired more influence nationally, and the middle class began to show strength.
Aside from the Great Depression and the emergence of the Brazilian bourgeoisie, Brazil&#x27;s historic dynamic of interregional politics was a significant factor encouraging the alliance that Getúlio Vargas forged during the Revolution of 1930 between the new urban sectors and the landowners hostile to the government in states other than São Paulo.

Along with the urban bourgeois groups, northeastern sugar barons were left with a legacy of longstanding grievances against the &quot;paulista&quot; coffee oligarchs of the south. Northeastern landowners opposed Washington Luís&#x27; 1930 discontinuance of the drought relief projects of his predecessor. The decay of established sugar oligarchies of the northeast had begun dramatically with the severe drought of 1877. The rapid growth of coffee-producing São Paulo state started at the same time. After the abolition of slavery in 1888, Brazil saw a mass exodus of emancipated slaves and other peasants from the northeast to the southeast of the country, ensuring a steady supply of cheap labor for the coffee planters.

Under the Old Republic, the politics of &quot;café com leite&quot; (&quot;coffee with milk)&quot; rested on the domination of the republic&#x27;s politics by the southeastern states of São Paulo and Minas Gerais, which were Brazil&#x27;s largest states in terms of population and economy.

Given the grievances with ruling regime in the northeast and Rio Grande do Sul, Getúlio Vargas chose João Pessoa of the northeastern state of Paraíba as his vice-presidential candidate in the 1930 presidential election. With the understanding that the dominance of the landowners in the rural areas was to continue under Liberal Alliance government, the Northeastern oligarchies were thus integrated into the Vargas alliance in a subordinate status via a new political party, the Social Democratic Party (PSD).

As a candidate in 1930, Vargas utilized populist rhetoric to promote middle-class concerns, thus opposing the primacy (but not the legitimacy) of the paulista coffee oligarchy and the landed elites, who had little interest in protecting and promoting industry.

However, behind the façade of Vargas&#x27; populism lay the intricate nature of his coalition – ever-changing from this point onward. Consequently, these locally dominant regional groups – the gaúchos of Rio Grande do Sul and the sugar barons of the northeast – themselves ushered the new urban groups into the forefront of Brazilian political life in a revolution from above, tilting the balance of the central government in favor of the Liberal Alliance.

==Second Brazilian Republic==
Vargas&#x27; tenuous coalition lacked a coherent program, beyond a broad vision of &quot;modernization&quot;, but little that was more definitive. Balancing such conflicting ideological constituencies, regionalisms, and economic interests in a vast, diverse, and socio-economically varied nation would, thus, not only explain the sole constant factor that marked Vargas&#x27; long career—abrupt shifts in alliances and ideologies, but also his eventual dictatorship, similar to European fascism.

Between 1930 and 1934, Vargas tried to reconcile the radically diverging interests of his supporters with social reformism. His policies collectively approximate those of fascist Italy under Benito Mussolini, with an increased reliance on populism. Reflecting the influence of the &quot;tenentes&quot;, he even advocated a program of social welfare and reform similar to the New Deal in the United States, prompting U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt to proudly refer to him as &quot;one of two people who invented the New Deal.&quot;

Vargas sought to bring Brazil out of the Great Depression through statist-interventionist policies and satisfied the demands of the rapidly growing urban bourgeois groups, voiced by the new (to Brazil) mass ideologies of populism and nationalism. Like Roosevelt, his first steps focused on economic stimulus, a program with which all factions could agree.

Favoring a interventionist policy of tax breaks, lowered duties, and import quotas to expand the domestic industrial base, Vargas linked his pro-middle class policies to nationalism, advocating heavy tariffs to &quot;perfect our manufacturers to the point where it will become unpatriotic to feed or clothe ourselves with imported goods!&quot;

Vargas sought to mediate disputes between labor and capital. For instance, the provisional president quelled a paulista female workers&#x27; strike by co-opting much of their platform and requiring their &quot;factory commissions&quot; to use government mediation in the future.

With the northeastern oligarchies now incorporated into the ruling coalition, the government focused on restructuring agriculture. To placate friendly agrarian oligarchs, the modernizing state not only left the impoverished domains of the rural oligarchs untouched, but also helped the sugar barons cement their control over rural Brazil. The peasantry, to the surprise of many accustomed to overlooking Brazil&#x27;s peripheral regions, was not that servile. Banditry was common but so were messianism, anarchic uprisings, and tax evasion, all of which were already common practice before 1930. The state crushed a wave of banditry in the northeast known as &quot;cangaço&quot;, marking the reversal of the drastic but gradual decline of the northeastern &quot;latifundios&quot; from the 1870s to the 1930 revolution. At the expense of the indigent peasantry—85 percent of the workforce—not only did Vargas renege on his promises of land reforms, he denied agricultural workers in general the working class&#x27; gains in labor regulations. Likely to the detriment of that region&#x27;s long-term economic development, Vargas&#x27; static conservatism on rural matters arguably exacerbated the disparities between the impoverished, semi-feudal northeast and the dynamic, urbanized southeast to this day.

Opposition arose among the powerful paulista coffee oligarchs to this unprecedented interventionism, as well as to the increased centralization of the government, its increasingly populist and fascist stance, its protectionist and/mercantilist policies (protecting politically favored producers at the expense of consumers) and the increasing dictatorial Vargas himself.

The appeasement of landed interests, traditionally dominant forces in Brazil, required a realignment of Vargas&#x27; coalition, forcing him to turn against its left wing. After mid-1932, the influence of the tenente group over Vargas rapidly waned, although individual moderate tenentes continued to hold important positions in the regime. The ouster of the center-left tenentes from his coalition marked his rightward shift by 1934.

===Towards dictatorship===

By 1934 Vargas developed what Thomas E. Skidmore and Peter H. Smith called &quot;a legal hybrid&quot; between Mussolini&#x27;s Italy and Salazar&#x27;s Estado Novo in Portugal. Vargas copied fascist tactics, and shared their rejection of liberal capitalism. He abandoned the &quot;provisional government&quot; (1930–34) characterized by social reformism that appeared to favor the generally left wing of his revolutionary coalition, the &quot;tenentes&quot;.

A conservative insurgency in 1932 was the key turning point to the right. After the July 1932 Constitutionalist Revolution — a thinly-veiled attempt by the paulista coffee oligarchs to retake the central government — Vargas tried to recover support of the landed elites, including the coffee growers, in order to establish a new alliance of power.

The revolt was caused by Vargas&#x27; appointment of João Alberto, a center-left &quot;tenente&quot; as &quot;interventor&quot; (provisional governor) in place of the elected governor of São Paulo. The paulista elite loathed Alberto, resenting his centralization efforts and alarmed by his economic reforms, such as 5% wage increase and the minor distribution of some land to participants of the revolution. Amid threats of revolt, Vargas replaced João Alberto with a civilian from São Paulo, appointed a conservative paulista banker as his minister of finance, and announced a date for the holding of a constituent assembly. This only emboldened coffee oligarchs who launched a revolt in July 1932, which collapsed after three months of armed combat.

Regardless of the attempted revolution, Vargas was determined to maintain his alliance with the original farmer wing of his coalition and to strengthen his ties with the São Paulo establishment. The result was further concessions, alienating the left wings of his coalition. The essential compromise was failing to honor the promises of land reform made during the campaign of 1930. Vargas also pardoned half the bank debts of the coffee planters, who still had a significant grip on the state&#x27;s electoral machinery, alleviating the crisis stemming from the collapse of the valorization program. To pacify his old paulista adversaries after their failed revolt, he ordered the Bank of Brazil to assume the war bonds issued by the rebel government.

Vargas was also increasingly threatened by pro-communist elements in labor critical of the rural &quot;latifundios&quot; by 1934, who sought an alliance with the country&#x27;s peasant majority by backing land reform. Despite the populist rhetoric of the &quot;father of the poor&quot;, the gaucho Vargas was ushered into power by planter oligarchies of peripheral regions amid a revolution from above, and was thus in no position to meet communist demands, had he desired to do so.

In 1934, armed with a new constitution drafted with extensive influence from European fascist models, Vargas began reining in even moderate trade unions and turning against the &quot;tenentes&quot;. His further concessions to the &quot;latifundios&quot; pushed him toward an alliance with the integralists, Brazil&#x27;s mobilized fascist movement. Following the end of the provisional presidency, Vargas&#x27; regime between 1934 and 1945 was characterized by the co-optation of Brazilian unions through state-run, sham syndicates, and suppression of opposition, particularly leftist opposition.

===Suppression of communist movement===
Aside from these political disputes, long-term trends suggest the atmosphere in São Paulo was conducive to ideological extremism. The rapidly changing and industrializing southeast was conducive to the growth of European-style mass-movements. The Brazilian Communist Party was established in 1922 and the postwar period witnessed the rise of the country&#x27;s first waves of general strikes waged by viable trade unions. The Great Depression intensified their strength.

The Great Depression that ushered Vargas into power also emboldened calls for social reforms. With the Constitutionalist Revolt out of the way, and the mass-mobilization of a potential new enemy, the urban proletariat. Vargas grew more concerned with imposing a paternalistic tutelage over the working class, and both control and co-opt them. Vargas&#x27; backers in both urban and rural Brazil began to view labor, larger and better organized than ut had been directly after the First World War, as an ominous threat.

Vargas could unite the landed elites, however, to stem the communists. With the &quot;cangaço&quot; thoroughly repressed in the northeast, the new bourgeoisie and the landed oligarchs shifted their well-founded fears toward the trade unions and socialist sentiments of the burgeoning urban proletariat. Often composed of immigrants, the proletariat came from the more urbanized southeast, more European in terms of population, culture, ideology, and industrial development). In 1934, Vargas&#x27; delicate alliance with labor disintegrated, and Brazil entered an agitated period. According to Skidmore and Smith, Brazil&#x27;s major cities began to resemble the Nazi-Communist battles in Berlin of 1932–33. By mid-1935 Brazilian politics had been drastically destabilized.

Vargas focused on the two national ideological movements, both committed to European-style mass-mobilization: one pro-communist and the other pro-fascist. The mass-movement intimidating Vargas was the National Liberation Alliance (ANL) launched in 1935, a leftwing popular front of socialists, communists, and other progressives led by the Communist Party and Luís Carlos Prestes, the &quot;knight of hope&quot; of the &quot;tenente&quot; rebellion (though he was not a Marxist at the time). A revolutionary forerunner of Che Guevara, Prestes led the futile Prestes Column through the rural Brazilian interior after the failed 1922 &quot;tenente&quot; rebellion against the coffee oligarchs. This experience, however, left Prestes, who only died in 1990, and some of his comrades skeptical of armed conflict for the rest of his life. Prestes&#x27; well-cultivated skepticism later helped precipitate the 1960s schism between hard-line militant Maoists and orthodox Marxist–Leninism, which persists in Brazilian Communist Party into the 21st century. With center-left &quot;tenentes&quot; out of the coalition and the left crushed, Vargas turned to the only mobilized base of support on the right, elated by the atrocious, fascist-style crackdown against the ANL. As his coalition moved to the right after 1934, Vargas&#x27; ideological character and association with a global ideological orbit remained ambiguous. Integralism, with a rapidly growing membership throughout Brazil by 1935, began filling this ideological void, especially among the approximately one million Brazilians of German descent.

Plínio Salgado, a writer and politician, founded Brazilian Integralist Action in October 1933. He party had Fascist and Nazi symbolism and the Roman salute. The party had all the visible elements of European fascism: a green-shirt-uniformed paramilitary organization, street demonstrations, and aggressive rhetoric directly financed in part by the Italian embassy. The integralists borrowed their propaganda campaigns directly from Nazi materials, including the traditionalist excoriations of Marxism and liberalism, and espousals of fanatical nationalism, Antisemitism and &quot;Christian virtues&quot;. In particular, they drew support from military officers, especially in the navy.

===Economic development===
The strong parallels between the political economy of Vargas and the European police states thus began to appear by 1934, when a new constitution was enacted with direct fascist influence. After 1934, fascist-style programs would serve two important aims: stimulating industrial growth (under the guise of nationalism and autarchy) and suppressing the working class. Passed on July 16, the Vargas government claimed that the corporatist provisions of the constitution of 1934 would unite all classes in mutual interests—the stated purpose of a similar governing document in Fascist Italy. Actually, this propaganda point had somewhat of a basis in reality. In practice, this meant decimating independent organized labor and attracting the &quot;working class&quot; to the corporative state. Of course, the advance of industry and urbanization enlarged and strengthened the ranks of urban laborers, presenting the need to draw them into some sort of alliance committed to the modernization of Brazil. Vargas, and later Juan Perón in neighboring Argentina, emulated Mussolini&#x27;s strategy of consolidating power by means of mediating class disputes under the banner of nationalism.

The constitution established a new Chamber of Deputies that placed government authority over the private economy and established a system of corporatism aimed at industrialization and reducing foreign dependency. These provisions essentially designated corporate representatives according to class and profession, organizing industries into state syndicates, but generally maintained private ownership of Brazilian-owned businesses.

The 1934–37 constitution, and especially the &quot;Estado Novo&quot; afterwards, heightened efforts to centralize authority in Rio de Janeiro and drastically limit provincial autonomy in the traditionally devolved, sprawling nation. This was its more progressive role, seeking to consolidate the 1930 revolution, displacing the institutional power of the paulista coffee oligarchs with a centralist policy that respected local agro-exporting interests, but created the necessary urban economic base for the new urban sectors. The modernizing legacy is firmly evident: state government was to be rationalized and regularized, freed from the grips of &quot;coronelismo&quot;.

The constitution of 1934 thus established a more direct mechanism for the federal executive to control the economy, pursuing a policy of planning and direct investment for the creation of important industrial complexes. State and mixed public-private companies dominated heavy and infrastructure industries, and private Brazilian capital predominated in manufacturing. There was also a significant growth of direct foreign investment in the 1930s as foreign corporations sought to enlarge their share of the internal market and overcome tariff barriers and exchange problems by establishing branch plants in Brazil. The state thus emphasized the basic sectors of the economy, facing the difficult task of forging a viable capital base for future growth in the first place, including mining, oil, steel, electric power, and chemicals.

==Third Brazilian Republic (&quot;Estado Novo&quot;)==
Vargas&#x27; four-year term as president under the 1934 Constitution was due to expire in 1938, and he was barred from re-election. However, on 10 November 1937, Vargas made a national radio address denouncing the existence of a communist plot to overthrow the government, called the &quot;Cohen Plan&quot;. In reality, however, the Cohen Plan was forged by the government with the objective of creating a favourable atmosphere for Vargas to stay in power, perpetuating his rule and assuming dictatorial powers.

The communists had indeed attempted to take over the Government in November 1935, in a botched coup attempt known as the Communist Uprising. In the wake of the failed communist uprising, the congress had already given greater powers to Vargas, and approved the creation of a &quot;National Security Tribunal&quot; (&quot;Tribunal de Segurança Nacional&quot; (TSN)), established by a statute adopted on 11 September 1936.

In his address of 10 November 1937, Vargas, invoking the supposed communist threat, decreed a state of emergency and dissolved the Legislature. He also announced the adoption by presidential &quot;fiat&quot; of a new, severely authoritarian Constitution that effectively placed all governing power in his hands. The 1934 Constitution was thus abolished, and Vargas proclaimed the establishment of a &quot;New State&quot;. The short interval was further evidence that the self-coup had been planned well in advance.

Under this dictatorial regime the powers of the National Security Tribunal were streamlined, and it focused on the prosecution of political dissenters. Also, the powers of the police were greatly enhanced, with the establishment of the &quot;Department of Political and Social Order&quot; (&quot;Departamento de Ordem Política e Social&quot; (DOPS)), a powerful political police and secret service. When created in 1936, the National Security Tribunal was supposed to be a temporary Court, and defendants could file appeals against its judgements to the &quot;Superior Military Court&quot; (&quot;Superior Tribunal Militar&quot;), Brazil&#x27;s Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, which was in turn subordinate to the nation&#x27;s Supreme Court. Thus, communists and other defendants accused of plotting coups were judged by the military court-martial system (with the National Security Tribunal as the trial court of first instance for those cases), and not by the ordinary courts. With the advent of the Estado Novo regime, the National Security Tribunal became a permanent Court, and became autonomous from the rest of the Court system. It gained authority to adjudicate not only cases of communist conspirators and other coup plotters, but it also tried anyone accused of being subversive or dangerous to the Estado Novo regime. Also, several extrajudicial punishments were inflicted by the police itself (especially the DOPS), without trial.

The 1937 Constitution provided for elections to a new Congress, as well as a referendum to confirm Vargas&#x27; actions. However, neither was held — ostensibly due to the dangerous international situation. Instead, under an article of the Constitution that was supposed to be transitional pending new elections, the President assumed legislative as well as executive powers. For all intents and purposes, Vargas ruled for eight years under what amounted to martial law. Also, under the 1937 Constitution, Vargas should have remained President for only six more years (until November 1943); instead, presumably due to the dangerous international situation, he remained in power until his overthrow in 1945.

The Estado Novo dictatorship also greatly curtailed the autonomy of the Judicial branch, and suppressed the autonomy of the Brazilian States, that were governed by federal interventors, who discharged (on a formally temporary basis), the legislative and executive powers.

In December 1937, one month after the Estado Novo coup, Vargas signed a Decree disbanding all political parties, including the fascist &quot;Brazilian Integralist Action&quot; (&quot;Ação Integralista Brasileira&quot; (AIB)). The integralists had until then been supportive of Vargas&#x27; anti-communist measures. On May 11, 1938, the integralists, angered by the closing of the AIB, invaded the Guanabara Palace, attempting to depose Vargas. This episode is known as Integralist Uprising and was unsuccessful.
Between 1937 and 1945, during the Estado Novo, Vargas gave continuity to the formation of structure and professionalism in the State. Vargas oriented the state to intervene in the economy, promoting economic nationalism. The movement towards a &quot;New State&quot; was significant, in that along with the dismissal of Congress and its political parties, he wanted to recognize the indigenous population. He gained great favour in their eyes, and was called the &quot;Father of the Poor&quot;. Besides gaining popularity with them, he provided them with tools to assist them in the improvement of their agrarian lifestyles. He felt that if the country were to progress, the Indians, the very symbol of Brazilianness, should reap the benefits. This was important to establish a unified society. The intention was to form a strong impulse toward industrialization.

In this period, a number of industrial bodies were created:
*The &quot;National Oil Advisor&quot; (&quot;Conselho Nacional do Petróleo (CNP)&quot;)
*The &quot;Administration Department of Public Service&quot; (&quot;Departamento Administrativo do Serviço Público (DASP)&quot;)
*The &quot;National Iron Smelting Company&quot; (&quot;Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN)&quot;)
*The &quot;Rio Doce Valley Company&quot; (&quot;Companhia Vale do Rio Doce&quot;)
*The &quot;São Francisco Hydroelectric Company&quot; (&quot;Companhia Hidro-Elétrica do São Francisco&quot;)
*The &quot;National Motor Plant&quot; (&quot;Fábrica Nacional de Motores (FNM)&quot;)

The Estado Novo had a powerful effect on &quot;Modernist architecture in Brazil&quot; (&quot;Arquitetura modernista no Brasil&quot;), because it provided sufficient authority to implement urban planning on a large scale in Brazil. Although sufficient wealth was not available to complete the plans, they had a powerful, lasting effect on the cities and their organization. One of the best-planned cities in the world, Curitiba, received its first planning during the Estado Novo. One notable urban planner was Alfred Agache.

A series of measures were used to restrain opposition, such as the nomination of Intervenors for the States and censorship of the media, performed by the &quot;Department of Press and Propaganda&quot; (&quot;Departamento de Imprensa e Propaganda&quot; (DIP)). This agency also promoted the ideology of the Estado Novo, designed the official propaganda of the government, and tried to direct public opinion.

In 1943, Vargas promulgated the Consolidation of Labor Laws (CLT), guaranteeing that a job would be stable after ten years of service. It also provided weekly rest, regulated the work of minors and women, regulated night-time work and set a working day to eight hours.

==Tensions with Argentina==

The liberal revolution of 1930 overthrew the oligarchic coffee plantation owners and brought to power an urban middle class and business interests that promoted industrialization and modernization. Aggressive promotion of new industry turned around the economy by 1933. Brazil&#x27;s leaders in the 1920s and 1930s decided that Argentina&#x27;s implicit foreign policy goal was to isolate Portuguese-speaking Brazil from its Spanish-speaking neighbors, thus facilitating the expansion of Argentine economic and political influence in South America. Even worse, was the fear that a more powerful Argentine Army would launch a surprise attack on the weaker Brazilian Army. To counter this threat, President Getúlio Vargas forged closer links with the United States. Meanwhile, Argentina moved in the opposite direction. During World War II, Brazil was a staunch ally of the United States and sent an expeditionary force to Europe. The United States provided over $370 million in Lend-Lease grants, in return for free rent on air bases used to transport American soldiers and supplies across the Atlantic, and naval bases for anti-submarine operations. In sharp contrast, Argentina was officially neutral and at times favored Germany.

==World War II==

With the start of World War II, in 1939, Vargas maintained neutrality until 1941, when an agreement, proposed by Brazilian foreign relations minister Oswaldo Aranha, was formed between American continental nations to align with any American country in the event of an attack by an external power. Due to this agreement, from Pearl Harbor Brazil&#x27;s entering the war became just a matter of time. American policy also financed Brazilian iron ore extraction and steel production and placed military bases along the Brazilian North-Northeast coast, headquartered in Natal. With the conquest of Southeast Asia by Japanese troops, Getúlio signed a treaty, the Washington Accords, in 1942, which provisioned the supply of natural rubber from the Amazon to the Allies, resulting in the second rubber boom and the forced migration of many people from the drought-stricken northeast to the heart of Amazônia. These people were known as &quot;Soldados da Borracha&quot; (&quot;rubber soldiers&quot;).

After the sinking of over 25 Brazilian merchant ships by German and Italian submarines throughout 1942, popular mobilization forced the Brazilian government to abandon its passiveness and declare war on Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in August, 1942. Popular mobilization to make the war declaration effective, with the despatching of Brazilian troops to Europe, continued, but a decision by the Brazilian Government to actually send troops to fight the enemy was only made in January 1943, when Vargas and the U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt met in Natal, where the first official agreement was made to create the Brazilian Expeditionary Force (BEF). In July 1944 the first BEF group was sent to fight in Italy, and, despite being poorly equipped and trained, it accomplished its main missions.

Soon after the war, however, fearing the BEF&#x27;s popularity and possible political use of the allied victory by some BEF members, the then Brazilian government decided to make demobilization effective, with the BEF still in Italy. Returning to Brazil, its members were also subjected to some restrictions. Civilian veterans were forbidden from wearing military decorations or uniforms in public, while military vets were transferred to regions far from great cities or to border garrisons.

The events related to Brazilian participation in the war and the ending of the conflict in 1945 strengthened pressures in favour of redemocratisation. Although there were some concessions by the regime, such as the setting of a date for presidential elections, amnesty for political prisoners, the freedom to organize political parties, and a commitment to choose a new Constitutional convention, Vargas was not able to retain support for the continuation of his presidency and was deposed by the military in a surprise coup launched from his own War Ministry on October 29, 1945.

Once Vargas was deposed, the military summoned his legal deputy, José Linhares, the President of the Supreme Federal Court (Brazil&#x27;s chief justice), to assume the Presidency (the office of vice-president had been abolished, and no legislature had been elected under the 1937 Constitution, so that the President of the Supreme Court was the first person in the line of succession). José Linhares immediately summoned elections for president and for a Constituent Assembly. The elections were held in December, 1945, and José Linhares remained in office only until the inauguration of the Assembly and of the elected President (General Eurico Gaspar Dutra) which took place on January 31, 1946. The inauguration marked the end of the &quot;Estado Novo&quot; and the beginning of the Fourth Brazilian Republic.

== See also ==
*Estado Novo (Portugal)
*Brazilian Integralism
*Second presidency of Getúlio Vargas
*Estado Novo (Brazil)

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* in Portuguese
*Brazil Now.Info &quot;Estado Novo&quot;.
*Garfield, Seth. &quot;The Roots of a Plant That Today Is Brazil: Indians and the Nation-State under the Brazilian Estado Novo&quot; &quot;Journal of Latin American Studies&quot; Vol. 29, No. 3 (Oct., 1997), pp. 747–768</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4532311" start="4" end="14" title="Vargas Era" label="Vargas Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="16" end="26" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q211967" start="75" end="92" title="history of Brazil" label="history of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="158" end="172" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532311" start="219" end="244" title="Vargas Era" label="Second Brazilian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532311" start="317" end="341" title="Vargas Era" label="Third Brazilian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394474" start="352" end="363" title="Estado Novo (Brazil)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634783" start="377" end="405" title="Brazilian Revolution of 1930" label="Brazilian Revolution of 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414171" start="428" end="452" title="República Velha" label="First Brazilian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311225" start="481" end="496" title="Washington Luís" label="Washington Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q373560" start="540" end="553" title="Júlio Prestes" label="Júlio Prestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16143192" start="626" end="643" title="Brazilian Constitution of 1891" label="1891 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502380" start="701" end="727" title="Brazilian military junta of 1930" label="provisional military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="874" end="885" title="Oligarchy" label="oligarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="889" end="898" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="903" end="915" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481000" start="1192" end="1222" title="Brazilian Constitution of 1934" label="Brazilian Constitution of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q18481006" start="1583" end="1607" title="Brazilian Constitution of 1937" label="dictatorial Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543207" start="1613" end="1629" title="1937 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q210542" start="1918" end="1943" title="Fourth Brazilian Republic" label="Fourth Brazilian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420526" start="1983" end="2013" title="Tenente revolts" label="&amp;quot;tenente&amp;quot; rebellions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2267" end="2283" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q13677" start="2511" end="2528" title="New York Stock Exchange" label="U.S. stock market"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="2538" end="2553" title="Black Tuesday" label="29 October 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2892" end="2905" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65311735" start="2937" end="2949" title="valorization" label="valorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3260" end="3271" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="3572" end="3585" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q311225" start="3690" end="3705" title="Washington Luís" label="Washington Luís"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="3848" end="3857" title="patronage" label="patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656849" start="4490" end="4504" title="capital flight" label="capital flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655578" start="4533" end="4550" title="Hard money (policy)" label="hard money policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="4931" end="4948" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838195" start="5051" end="5067" title="Liberal Alliance (Brazil)" label="Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="5325" end="5333" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="5355" end="5375" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355030" start="6923" end="6945" title="Grande Seca" label="severe drought of 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="7049" end="7056" title="slavery in Brazil" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672892" start="7296" end="7310" title="Café com leite politics" label="café com leite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406251" start="7641" end="7652" title="João Pessoa Cavalcânti de Albuquerque" label="João Pessoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38088" start="7682" end="7689" title="Paraíba" label="Paraíba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038751" start="7732" end="7758" title="1930 Brazilian general election" label="1930 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626216" start="8020" end="8043" title="Social Democratic Party (Brazil, 1945–65)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="9289" end="9296" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="9490" end="9506" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="9674" end="9682" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="9715" end="9729" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. President"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="9730" end="9748" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q322294" start="9900" end="9907" title="Statism" label="statist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="9988" end="9997" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="10068" end="10079" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559147" start="10124" end="10141" title="stimulus (economics)" label="economic stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q880363" start="10202" end="10217" title="Interventionism (politics)" label="interventionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="10391" end="10397" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="11276" end="11284" title="Banditry" label="Banditry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033186" start="11481" end="11488" title="cangaço" label="cangaço"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="11578" end="11589" title="latifundium" label="latifundios"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="11750" end="11761" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="12054" end="12060" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="13094" end="13101" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="13109" end="13120" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592295" start="13511" end="13539" title="Constitutionalist Revolution" label="Constitutionalist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311010" start="13819" end="13831" title="João Alberto" label="João Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="14370" end="14390" title="constituent assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q610817" start="15201" end="15215" title="Banco do Brasil" label="Bank of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q617663" start="15230" end="15238" title="war bond" label="war bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="15897" end="15908" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q899306" start="16050" end="16062" title="Brazilian Integralism" label="integralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597196" start="16642" end="16667" title="Brazilian Communist Party" label="Brazilian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10291547" start="16756" end="16786" title="1917–1919 Brazil strike movement" label="first waves of general strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033186" start="17473" end="17480" title="cangaço" label="cangaço"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314903" start="18362" end="18390" title="National Liberation Alliance (Brazil)" label="National Liberation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q742047" start="18521" end="18540" title="Luís Carlos Prestes" label="Luís Carlos Prestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="18631" end="18638" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="18683" end="18694" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112912" start="18719" end="18733" title="Coluna Prestes" label="Prestes Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="19105" end="19112" title="Maoism" label="Maoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797406" start="19764" end="19778" title="Plínio Salgado" label="Plínio Salgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958743" start="19813" end="19841" title="Brazilian Integralist Action" label="Brazilian Integralist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="19884" end="19898" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841184" start="19907" end="19919" title="Roman salute" label="Roman salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="20321" end="20333" title="Antisemitism" label="Antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750688" start="20444" end="20448" title="Brazilian Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="20556" end="20568" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="20800" end="20808" title="Autarky" label="autarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="21496" end="21506" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="21522" end="21531" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21666" end="21678" title="History of the Constitution of Brazil#1934 constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="22223" end="22237" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="22301" end="22309" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997641" start="22751" end="22761" title="coronelism" label="coronelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="23007" end="23031" title="public-private partnership" label="public-private companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="23186" end="23204" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10350289" start="23951" end="23961" title="Cohen Plan" label="Cohen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027494" start="24295" end="24313" title="Communist Uprising of 1935" label="Communist Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24495" end="24525" title=":pt:Tribunal de Segurança Nacional" label="Tribunal de Segurança Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460509" start="25067" end="25076" title="self-coup" label="self-coup"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25408" end="25447" title=":pt:Departamento de Ordem Política e Social" label="Departamento de Ordem Política e Social"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25709" end="25734" title=":pt:Superior Tribunal Militar" label="Superior Tribunal Militar"/>
<link wikidata="Q519138" start="25847" end="25860" title="Supreme Federal Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="27021" end="27032" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958743" start="27685" end="27713" title="Brazilian Integralist Action" label="Brazilian Integralist Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813706" start="27941" end="27957" title="Guanabara Palace" label="Guanabara Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491721" start="28013" end="28033" title="Integralist Uprising" label="Integralist Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q555887" start="28255" end="28275" title="economic nationalism" label="economic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22813507" start="29025" end="29054" title="National Petroleum Council (Brazil)" label="Conselho Nacional do Petróleo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29136" end="29182" title=":pt:Departamento Administrativo do Serviço Público" label="Departamento Administrativo do Serviço Público"/>
<link wikidata="Q400384" start="29252" end="29282" title="Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional" label="Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q583268" start="29344" end="29370" title="Vale S.A." label="Companhia Vale do Rio Doce"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29438" end="29479" title=":pt:Companhia Hidro-Elétrica do São Francisco" label="Companhia Hidro-Elétrica do São Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q144235" start="29532" end="29559" title="Fábrica Nacional de Motores" label="Fábrica Nacional de Motores"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29667" end="29699" title=":pt:Arquitetura modernista no Brasil" label="Arquitetura modernista no Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="29762" end="29776" title="Urban Planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="29992" end="30000" title="Curitiba, Brazil" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240579" start="30084" end="30097" title="Alfred Agache (architect)" label="Alfred Agache"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30308" end="30345" title=":pt:Departamento de Imprensa e Propaganda" label="Departamento de Imprensa e Propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163323" start="30540" end="30567" title="Consolidation of Labor Laws" label="Consolidation of Labor Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="31135" end="31144" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301347" start="31402" end="31416" title="Argentine Army" label="Argentine Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="31462" end="31476" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="31512" end="31526" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31632" end="31644" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291067" start="31705" end="31724" title="Brazilian Expeditionary Force" label="expeditionary force"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="31784" end="31794" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789313" start="31990" end="32008" title="Argentina during World War II" label="officially neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="32076" end="32088" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q566312" start="32208" end="32222" title="Oswaldo Aranha" label="Oswaldo Aranha"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="32383" end="32395" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620" start="32624" end="32629" title="Natal, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998604" start="32716" end="32734" title="Washington Accords (1942)" label="Washington Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="32785" end="32791" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737205" start="32847" end="32858" title="rubber boom" label="rubber boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="32951" end="32959" title="Amazônia" label="Amazônia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576826" start="33028" end="33043" title="rubber soldiers" label="rubber soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="33256" end="33268" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="33273" end="33286" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="33579" end="33604" title="Franklin Delano Roosevelt" label="Franklin Delano Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620" start="33612" end="33617" title="Natal, Rio Grande do Norte" label="Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291067" start="33677" end="33706" title="Brazilian Expeditionary Force" label="Brazilian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q316200" start="35000" end="35013" title="José Linhares" label="José Linhares"/>
<link wikidata="Q296679" start="35574" end="35593" title="Eurico Gaspar Dutra" label="Eurico Gaspar Dutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q210542" start="35721" end="35746" title="Fourth Brazilian Republic" label="Fourth Brazilian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="35765" end="35787" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo (Portugal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899306" start="35789" end="35810" title="Brazilian Integralism" label="Brazilian Integralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q99232274" start="35812" end="35847" title="Second presidency of Getúlio Vargas" label="Second presidency of Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394474" start="35849" end="35869" title="Estado Novo (Brazil)" label="Estado Novo (Brazil)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490732" wikidata="Q5018131" url="?curid=490732" title="Cal Cunningham">
<text>James Calvin Cunningham III (born August 6, 1973) is an American lawyer, politician, and retired military officer. A member of the Democratic Party and a lieutenant colonel in the United States Army Reserve, he served one term as a North Carolina state senator from 2001 to 2003. Having previously run for United States Senate in a 2010 primary, Cunningham was the Democratic nominee for the 2020 U.S. Senate election in North Carolina, narrowly losing to incumbent Republican Thom Tillis.

==Early life and education==
Cunningham was born in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and grew up in Lexington, North Carolina. He attended Vanderbilt University before transferring to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, graduating in 1996 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in political science and philosophy. In the summer of 1993, Cunningham attended American University and interned on Capitol Hill for a subcommittee chaired by Senator Carl Levin.

Cunningham received a Master of Science in public policy and public administration from the London School of Economics and a Juris Doctor from the University of North Carolina School of Law.

==Career==
===U.S. Army Reserve===
In 2002, Cunningham was commissioned in the Army Reserve, Judge Advocate General&#x27;s Corps. He is a graduate of the Officer Basic Course, Airborne School, and the Judge Advocate Officer Advanced Course.

From 2007 to 2008, Cunningham was mobilized as the senior trial counsel for the Multi-National Corps in Iraq. He was lead counsel in the first court-martial since 1968 of a contractor under the Uniform Code of Military Justice. In 2011, Cunningham was assigned to work with a special operations task force in Afghanistan.

===State Senate===
In November 2000, Cunningham was elected to represent the 23rd Senate district of the North Carolina General Assembly, which included parts of Davidson, Rowan, and Iredell Counties. At the time of his election, he was North Carolina’s youngest legislator. After his election, a defeated opponent challenged Cunningham’s eligibility on the basis that he had moved back to the district a few days too late to meet the requirement of having lived there for a full year, but the courts rejected the challenge. Cunningham declined to run for reelection after his district’s territory was split between three Republican-leaning districts.

=== Post-State Senate career ===
Cunningham worked at the Wallace &amp; Graham law firm from 2003 until 2004, when he joined Kilpatrick Townsend.

Since 2003, Cunningham has served as an appointee of the Governor on the Board of Trustees of Davidson County Community College. He also served as an appointee of the Governor on the North Carolina Banking Commission. He is a former vice chair of the Governor&#x27;s Crime Commission.

In 2013, Cunningham joined the environmental services company WasteZero as vice president, government affairs, and general counsel. WasteZero helps support pay-as-you-throw waste reduction systems which municipalities in North Carolina and elsewhere have debated implementing. Cunningham left WasteZero in March 2020, shortly after winning the Democratic nomination, but continues to work for the company as an independent contractor.

==U.S. Senate candidacies==

===2010 primary campaign===

In 2010, Cunningham ran for the U.S. Senate seat held by Richard Burr. Retired NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Wesley Clark endorsed Cunningham, saying that he would be &quot;the first veteran of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan to serve in the U.S. Senate&quot;, as did the state&#x27;s largest organization of teachers, the North Carolina Association of Educators. He finished second in the primary, but since no candidate received 40% of the vote, he advanced to a runoff with the first-place finisher, North Carolina Secretary of State Elaine Marshall, who ultimately won the nomination with 60% of the vote.

===2020 campaign===
Cunningham originally declared his candidacy for lieutenant governor of North Carolina, but he withdrew in June 2019 to run for the United States Senate seat held by Thom Tillis instead. During the primary, a Republican-allied Super PAC spent $3 million on ads attacking Cunningham and supporting left-wing state Senator Erica Smith in order to &quot;amplify fault lines in the Democratic party.&quot; On March 3, 2020, Cunningham won the Democratic primary with 57% of the vote.

Cunningham stated his support of the Affordable Care Act and called for the expansion of Medicaid in North Carolina, as well as a public health insurance option. He stated his opposition to the Green New Deal and his support for significant investment in green jobs and achieving net zero carbon emissions by 2050.

In July 2020, incumbent Republican Thom Tillis claimed Cunningham had been &quot;silent&quot; on the issue of defunding the police, saying, &quot;I assume his silence is consent.&quot; Cunningham had published an op-ed a month earlier stating his opposition to defunding the police, instead advocating police reform, including policies that &quot;counsel de-escalation, prohibit chokeholds, limit no-knock warrants, and specifically address the use of deadly force.&quot;

Cunningham narrowly led Tillis in the polls throughout much of the campaign.

On October 3, the &quot;New York Times&quot; wrote that the race had fallen into &quot;utter mayhem&quot; within a period of a few hours after Tillis tested positive for COVID-19 and Cunningham admitted to exchanging sexual text messages with a woman who was not his wife, damaging an image that leaned heavily on his character and military service. Days later, the woman, Arlene Guzman Todd, stated that she had a consensual physical relationship with Cunningham in 2020. The Army Reserve started an investigation into Cunningham. Jeremy Todd, the husband of the woman who stated that she had had an affair with Cunningham, himself an Army veteran, called on Cunningham to drop out of the Senate race. Asked repeatedly whether he had had other extramarital affairs, Cunningham declined to answer.

Following the disclosure of the texts and his response, Cunningham &quot;assumed a position of complete radio silence, withdrawing from the campaign trail [save] for a last-minute appearance in Charlotte with the rapper Common&quot;. In late October, Cunningham&#x27;s polling lead eroded.

Tillis narrowly defeated Cunningham, 48.7%-46.9%, on Election Day. On November 10, 2020, a week after Election Day, Cunningham called Tillis to concede the race.

==Honors and awards==
For his service in Iraq, Cunningham was awarded the Bronze Star Medal for meritorious service as a lead investigator examining contractors. In 2009, he received the General Douglas MacArthur Award for Leadership.

Cunningham is a recipient of a Jaycees&#x27; Distinguished Service Award.

In 2007, Cunningham was selected for a Marshall Memorial Fellowship.

==Personal life==
Cunningham and his wife, Elizabeth, have two children. As of September 2020, he was an ordained elder in the Presbyterian Church.

In October 2020, it was reported that Cunningham had exchanged sexually suggestive messages with a married woman who was not his wife. Cunningham confirmed the texts were authentic and apologized for his behavior. The woman, Arlene Guzman Todd, stated that she had a consensual physical relationship with Cunningham in 2020. The Army Reserve started an investigation into Cunningham.

==Electoral history==
==References==
==External links==
*Cunningham Law
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5018131" start="0" end="27" title="Cal Cunningham" label="James Calvin Cunningham III"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="131" end="147" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036662" start="180" end="206" title="United States Army Reserve" label="United States Army Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="232" end="260" title="North Carolina Senate" label="North Carolina state senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="306" end="326" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="332" end="344" title="2010_United_States_Senate_election_in_North_Carolina#Democratic_primary" label="2010 primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42916329" start="392" end="435" title="2020 U.S. Senate election in North Carolina" label="2020 U.S. Senate election in North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786750" start="477" end="488" title="Thom Tillis" label="Thom Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="543" end="572" title="Winston-Salem, North Carolina" label="Winston-Salem, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q181370" start="589" end="614" title="Lexington, North Carolina" label="Lexington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="628" end="649" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="677" end="720" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="774" end="791" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="796" end="806" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168000" start="851" end="870" title="American University" label="American University"/>
<link wikidata="Q444652" start="938" end="948" title="Carl Levin" label="Carl Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1043" end="1069" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="1076" end="1088" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q167102" start="1098" end="1140" title="University of North Carolina School of Law" label="University of North Carolina School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210871" start="1236" end="1271" title="Judge Advocate General&amp;#x27;s Corps" label="Judge Advocate General&amp;#x27;s Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q540280" start="1319" end="1334" title="United States Army Airborne School" label="Airborne School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934393" start="1465" end="1485" title="Multi-National Corps – Iraq" label="Multi-National Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424958" start="1579" end="1611" title="Uniform Code of Military Justice" label="Uniform Code of Military Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="1694" end="1705" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–present)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566263" start="1813" end="1844" title="North Carolina General Assembly" label="North Carolina General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q511713" start="1870" end="1878" title="Davidson County, North Carolina" label="Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q507966" start="1880" end="1885" title="Rowan County, North Carolina" label="Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q502875" start="1891" end="1898" title="Iredell County, North Carolina" label="Iredell"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796386" start="2310" end="2358" title="Redistricting in North Carolina" label="split between three Republican-leaning districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408147" start="2486" end="2505" title="Kilpatrick Townsend &amp;amp; Stockton" label="Kilpatrick Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241643" start="2602" end="2635" title="Davidson County Community College" label="Davidson County Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118808" start="2950" end="2966" title="pay as you throw" label="pay-as-you-throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q331278" start="3345" end="3357" title="Richard Burr" label="Richard Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q159478" start="3405" end="3417" title="Wesley Clark" label="Wesley Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054424" start="3620" end="3659" title="North Carolina Association of Educators" label="North Carolina Association of Educators"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054588" start="3800" end="3833" title="North Carolina Secretary of State" label="North Carolina Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324820" start="3834" end="3849" title="Elaine Marshall" label="Elaine Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625418" start="3963" end="3972" title="2020 North Carolina lieutenant gubernatorial election" label="candidacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538949" start="3977" end="4014" title="Lieutenant Governor of North Carolina" label="lieutenant governor of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4060" end="4080" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786750" start="4094" end="4105" title="Thom Tillis" label="Thom Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124708886" start="4155" end="4164" title="Super PAC" label="Super PAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269863" start="4235" end="4248" title="North Carolina State Senate" label="state Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193759" start="4249" end="4260" title="Erica D. Smith" label="Erica Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414593" start="4446" end="4465" title="Affordable Care Act" label="Affordable Care Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="4498" end="4506" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076813" start="4539" end="4569" title="public health insurance option" label="public health insurance option"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068307" start="4603" end="4617" title="Green New Deal" label="Green New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="4689" end="4697" title="net zero" label="net zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="4698" end="4714" title="carbon emissions" label="carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786750" start="4760" end="4771" title="Thom Tillis" label="Thom Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q96150192" start="4835" end="4855" title="Defund the Police" label="defunding the police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602337" start="4938" end="4943" title="op-ed" label="op-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q97360341" start="5027" end="5040" title="police reform" label="police reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182511" start="5080" end="5093" title="de-escalation" label="de-escalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172336" start="5104" end="5113" title="chokehold" label="chokehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042789" start="5122" end="5138" title="no-knock warrant" label="no-knock warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q896527" start="5177" end="5189" title="deadly force" label="deadly force"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="5446" end="5454" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="6603" end="6620" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890699" start="6796" end="6803" title="United States Junior Chamber" label="Jaycees"/>
<link wikidata="Q908779" start="6879" end="6907" title="German Marshall Fund" label="Marshall Memorial Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7015" end="7029" title="Presbyterian polity#Elder" label="ordained elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="7037" end="7056" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490747" wikidata="Q11902879" url="?curid=490747" title="Lord mayor">
<text>Lord mayor is a title of a mayor of what is usually a major city in a Commonwealth realm, with special recognition bestowed by the sovereign. However, the title or an equivalent is present in other countries, including forms such as &quot;high mayor&quot;. Aldermen usually elect the lord mayor from their ranks.

==Commonwealth of Nations==

=== Australia ===
In Australia, lord mayor is a special status granted by the monarch to mayors of major cities, primarily the capitals of Australian states and territories. Australian cities with lord mayors are Adelaide, Brisbane, Darwin, Hobart, Melbourne, Newcastle, Parramatta, Perth, Sydney, and Wollongong.

=== Canada ===
In Canada, the only town with a lord mayor in the traditional sense is Niagara-on-the-Lake, as recognition of its role as the first capital of Upper Canada. Unusually, the council of Brantford, Ontario took it upon itself to appoint an honorary Lord Mayor Walter Gretzky in addition to the elected mayor. This is the only example of a council granting the cachet itself, rather than it being granted by a higher authority, such as the Crown or national government.

=== United Kingdom ===

In England, Wales, and Northern Ireland, it is a purely ceremonial post conferred by letters patent. Most famously it refers to the Lord Mayor of London, who only has jurisdiction over the City of London, as opposed to the modern title of Mayor of London governing Greater London.

=== Uganda ===
In Uganda, the only jurisdiction with a lord mayor is Kampala, in recognition of its status as the capital city of the country.

==Ireland==
In Ireland, the posts of Lord Mayor of Dublin (granted under the Kingdom of Ireland) and Lord Mayor of Cork (granted when this city was part of the United Kingdom) still exist, and are symbolic titles as in the UK. The Irish version of the title is , &quot;high mayor.&quot;

==Province of Maryland==
Annapolis, the only city in the Thirteen Colonies to receive a royal charter, used the title &#x27;lord mayor&#x27; prior to the American Revolution.

==Equivalents in other languages==
* In Denmark, as the translation of Danish &quot;Overborgmester&quot;, it is the title of the highest mayor of Denmark&#x27;s capital city, Copenhagen.
* In Germany, it is sometimes (and perhaps anachronistically or incongruously) used to translate German &quot;Oberbürgermeister&quot;, the title of the mayors of large, often county-free cities. Especially in large cities that consist of subunits governed by &quot;District mayors&quot; (&quot;Bezirksbürgermeister&quot;), the title &quot;Oberbürgermeister&quot; is usually used to distinguish the head executive of the entire city from those of the subunits. As in Austria, Germany&#x27;s mayors serve as the actual executive leaders of their cities and are elected officials. The post of mayor in the three German city-states is equivalent to that of a Ministerpräsident (head of government of one of Germany&#x27;s constitutive states) and the respective post is referred to as &quot;Regierender Bürgermeister&quot; (governing mayor) in Berlin and &quot;Erster Bürgermeister&quot; (first mayor) in Hamburg. In the third city-state of Bremen, which consists of the two cities Bremen and Bremerhaven, each city has its own respective lord mayor; the &quot;Bürgermeister und Präsident des Senates&quot; (Mayor and President of the Senate) is elected by the Bürgerschaft of Bremen formed by elected representatives from both cities and serves as head of state government and mayor of Bremen in personal union.
* In Poland, the title (President of the City) is used in a corresponding fashion to the German &quot;Oberbürgermeister&quot;, as the title of the mayors of large, county-free cities. While historically, this title was also translated as &quot;Lord Mayor&quot; in English, this usage is no longer common.
* In Finland, the head city manager of the capital, Helsinki, is customarily given by the country&#x27;s President the title &quot;ylipormestari&quot; [loosely translated: &quot;high mayor&quot;] (which then generally is much more used of the official than &quot;kaupunginjohtaja&quot;, the title of the office itself), a tradition that resembles closely the lord mayoralties in other countries.
* In Romania and Moldova, the mayors of the capitals (Bucharest and Chişinău, respectively) are named Primar General which means general mayor. The name is ceremonial and it has no higher powers than mayors of other cities.
* In Hungary, the mayor of the capital Budapest is called &quot;főpolgármester&quot; which means chief mayor or grand mayor. Only the capital has a &quot;főpolgármester&quot;. Between 1873 and 1945, the Lord Mayor of Budapest was representative of the Hungarian government at the capital&#x27;s municipal authority.
* In ancient China, jīng zhào yĭn (京兆尹) was the title given to the mayor of capital city, jīng zhào (京兆). Today, on the other hand, city mayor and party-appointed secretary (actual leader) of the four direct-controlled municipalities, Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing, though without special titles, share the rank of provincial governor and party-appointed secretary.
* In Estonia, the mayor of the capital (Tallinn), was named Lord Mayor (&quot;Ülemlinnapea&quot;) from 1938 to 1940.
* In Czech Republic, the mayor of the capital Prague and so-called statutory cities (listed in law, currently 25 cities) is called &quot;Primátor&quot;.
* In Sweden, the titles of mayor and lord mayor have no direct equivalent since the 1970s. The executive leader of Swedish municipalities is one of sometimes several &quot;Kommunalråd&quot; in the function of the chair of the municipal board. In the capital Stockholm the chief executive is traditionally called &quot;Finansborgarråd&quot; (City Councillor of Finance)—&quot;council&quot; in this context referring to the executive rather than the legislative branch of local government.
* The Welsh translation of lord mayor is &quot;Arglwydd Faer&quot;.
* The Irish translation of lord mayor is &quot;Ard-Mhéara&quot;, which means &quot;chief mayor&quot;.
* The Malay translation of lord mayor is &quot;Datuk bandar&quot;, which means &quot;city chief&quot;.
* In the Ethiopian Empire, the Mayor of Addis Ababa was known as Lord Mayor (Kantiba).

==Style of address==
The style of address for the office of the lord mayors of Belfast, Cardiff, Bristol, the City of London, and York is The Right Honourable. All other lord mayors are The Right Worshipful. This refers only to the post, rather than the person. The title Sir can be used for salutations when a lord mayor is being addressed.

== See also ==
*Lord provost, the similar post in Scotland

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11902879" start="0" end="10" title="Lord mayor" label="Lord mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="27" end="32" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="70" end="88" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11902879" start="239" end="249" title="Lord mayor" label="high mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="257" end="265" title="Alderman" label="Aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="364" end="373" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="421" end="428" title="Monarchy of Australia" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627380" start="556" end="564" title="Lord Mayor of Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467089" start="566" end="574" title="Lord Mayor of Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627379" start="576" end="582" title="List of Mayors and Lord Mayors of Darwin" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627382" start="584" end="590" title="List of Mayors and Lord Mayors of Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627381" start="592" end="601" title="List of Mayors and Lord Mayors of Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797048" start="603" end="612" title="Lord Mayor of Newcastle (New South Wales)" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079799" start="614" end="624" title="City of Parramatta" label="Parramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589520" start="626" end="631" title="Lord Mayor of Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797067" start="633" end="639" title="Lord Mayor of Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061590" start="645" end="655" title="List of mayors and lord mayors of Wollongong" label="Wollongong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="676" end="682" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q448372" start="744" end="763" title="Niagara-on-the-Lake" label="Niagara-on-the-Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="816" end="828" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q34180" start="856" end="865" title="Brantford" label="Brantford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965007" start="929" end="943" title="Walter Gretzky" label="Walter Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1186" end="1202" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="1248" end="1262" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="1295" end="1315" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="1352" end="1366" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q38931" start="1402" end="1417" title="Mayor of London" label="Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23306" start="1428" end="1442" title="Greater London" label="Greater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="1463" end="1469" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q116442679" start="1500" end="1510" title="Lord Mayor of Kampala" label="lord mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="1514" end="1521" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1604" end="1611" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645132" start="1626" end="1646" title="Lord Mayor of Dublin" label="Lord Mayor of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="1666" end="1684" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679767" start="1690" end="1708" title="Lord Mayor of Cork" label="Lord Mayor of Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1749" end="1763" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28271" start="1902" end="1911" title="Annapolis" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="1934" end="1951" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="2031" end="2050" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2093" end="2100" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="2124" end="2130" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="2228" end="2238" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2245" end="2252" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="2856" end="2866" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099723" start="2895" end="2912" title="Ministerpräsident" label="Ministerpräsident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="2971" end="2977" title="States of Germany" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858914" start="3060" end="3075" title="List of mayors of Berlin" label="governing mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q567016" start="3125" end="3136" title="List of mayors of Hamburg" label="first mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3141" end="3148" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209" start="3177" end="3183" title="Bremen (state)" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="3218" end="3224" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706" start="3229" end="3240" title="Bremerhaven" label="Bremerhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q314340" start="3297" end="3336" title="Mayor of Bremen" label="Bürgermeister und Präsident des Senates"/>
<link wikidata="Q317147" start="3397" end="3419" title="Bürgerschaft of Bremen" label="Bürgerschaft of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="3533" end="3547" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3554" end="3560" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="3859" end="3866" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="3906" end="3914" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="4255" end="4262" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="4267" end="4274" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="4304" end="4313" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="4318" end="4326" title="Chişinău" label="Chişinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="4479" end="4486" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q383291" start="4492" end="4497" title="Mayor of Budapest" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="4513" end="4521" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q99739318" start="4677" end="4699" title="Lord Mayor of Budapest" label="Lord Mayor of Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="4795" end="4808" title="History of China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4810" end="4823" title=":zh::京兆尹" label="jīng zhào yĭn"/>
<link wikidata="Q499073" start="4991" end="5023" title="direct-controlled municipalities" label="direct-controlled municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="5025" end="5032" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="5034" end="5041" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="5043" end="5051" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="5057" end="5066" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="5173" end="5180" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="5208" end="5215" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="5290" end="5304" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5443" end="5449" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="5696" end="5705" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="5932" end="5937" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="6000" end="6005" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="6102" end="6107" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="6208" end="6224" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146930" start="6230" end="6250" title="Mayor of Addis Ababa" label="Mayor of Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864897" start="6276" end="6283" title="Ethiopian aristocratic and court titles" label="Kantiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480896" start="6425" end="6445" title="The Right Honourable" label="The Right Honourable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036977" start="6473" end="6493" title="The Right Worshipful" label="The Right Worshipful"/>
<link wikidata="Q209690" start="6559" end="6562" title="Sir" label="Sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q516766" start="6579" end="6590" title="salutations" label="salutations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259398" start="6646" end="6658" title="Lord provost" label="Lord provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="6680" end="6688" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490764" wikidata="Q277325" url="?curid=490764" title="99 Bottles of Beer">
<text>&quot;99 Bottles of Beer&quot; or &quot;100 Bottles of Pop on the Wall&quot; is a traditional reverse counting song from the United States and Canada. It is popular to sing on road trips, as it has a very repetitive format which is easy to memorize and can take a long time when sung in full. In particular, the song is often sung by children on long school bus trips, such as class field trips, or on Scout or Girl Guide outings. 99 Bottles of Beer&#x27;s lyrics can be printed in normal programming languages or esoteric programming languages.

== History ==

&lt;score sound&gt;
{ \key d \major \relative c&#x27;
 { d8 d d4 fis8 a4. e8 e e fis d4 r
 d&#x27;8 d d4 d8 a4. b8 b cis d a4 r
 d d8 d d2 b4 d a2
 d,8 d d4 fis8 a4. e8 e e fis d2 \bar &quot;:|.&quot; }
 \addlyrics { For -- ty nine bot -- tles hang -- ing on the wall,
 For -- ty nine bot -- tles ha -- nging on the wall,
 Take one a -- way from them all,
 For -- ty eight bott -- les hang -- ing on the wall. }
&lt;/score&gt;
== Lyrics ==

The song&#x27;s lyrics are as follows, beginning with n=99:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;(n) bottles of beer on the wall.
(n) bottles of beer.
If one of the bottles just happen to fall,
(n−1) bottles of beer on the wall.&lt;/poem&gt;

&lt;score sound&gt;
\layout { \set Score.tempoHideNote = ##t \context { \Score \remove &quot;Bar_number_engraver&quot; } }
{ \key g \major \time 3/4 \tempo 4.=210 \set Staff.midiInstrument = #&quot;harmonica&quot; \relative c&quot;
 { g4 g g | d d d | g g g | g2. |
 a4 a a | e e e | a2.~ | a2. |
 fis2 fis4 | fis2. | fis4 fis fis | fis2. |
 d4 d d | d e fis | g g g | g2. \bar &quot;:|.&quot;
 \addlyrics { Nine -- ty nine bot -- tles of beer on the wall,
 nine -- ty nine bot -- tles of beer.
 Take one down, pass it a -- round,
 nine -- ty eight bot -- tles of beer on the wall.}
&lt;/score&gt;

The same verse is repeated, each time with one bottle fewer, until there is none left. Variations on the last verse following the last bottle going down include lines such as:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;No more bottles of beer on the wall,
no more bottles of beer.
Go to the store and buy some more,
99 bottles of beer on the wall...&lt;/poem&gt;

Or:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;No more bottles of beer on the wall,
no more bottles of beer.
We&#x27;ve taken them down
and passed them around;
now we&#x27;re drunk and passed out!&lt;/poem&gt;

Other alternate lines read:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;If that one bottle should happen to fall,
what a waste of alcohol!&lt;/poem&gt;

Or:
&lt;poem style=&quot;margin-left: 2em;&quot;&gt;No more bottles of beer on the wall,
no more bottles of beer.
There&#x27;s nothing else to fall,
because there&#x27;s no more bottles of beer on the wall.&lt;/poem&gt;

Or the song does not stop at the last &quot;1&quot; or &quot;0&quot; bottles of beer but continues counting with −1 (Negative one) Bottles of beer on the wall Take one down, pass it around, −2 (negative 2) bottles of beer on the wall... continuing onward through the negative numbers.

==Full-length recitals==
Singing all verses takes an extraordinarily long time. The American comedian Andy Kaufman used this for comedic effect early in his career when he actually sang all 100 verses.

Atticus, a band from Knoxville, Tennessee, recorded a thirteen and a half minute live version of the song in its entirety at the Glasgow Cathouse in Scotland. It was included in the 2001 album &quot;Figment&quot;. Rich Stewart &quot;aka&quot; Homebrew Stew listed it as the number one drinking song out of 86 in an article for &quot;Modern Drunkard Magazine&quot; the following year.

==Mathematically inspired variants==
Donald Byrd has collected dozens of variants inspired by mathematical concepts and written by himself and others.
(A subset of his collection has been published.) Byrd argues that the collection has pedagogic as well as amusement value. Among his variants are:
*&quot;Infinity bottles of beer on the wall&quot;. If one bottle is taken down, there are still infinite bottles of beer on the wall (thus creating an unending sequence much like &quot;The Song That Doesn&#x27;t End&quot;).
**&quot;Aleph-null bottles of beer on the wall&quot;. Aleph-null is the size of the set of all natural numbers, and is the smallest infinity and the only countable one; therefore, even if an infinite aleph-null of bottles fall, the same amount remains.
**&quot;Aleph-one/two/three/etc. bottles of beer on the wall&quot;. Aleph-one, two, three, etc. are uncountable infinite sets, which are larger than countable ones; therefore, if only a countable infinity of bottles fall, an uncountable number remains.

Other versions in Byrd&#x27;s collection involve concepts including geometric progressions, differentials, Euler&#x27;s identity,
complex numbers, summation notation, the Cantor set, the Fibonacci sequence, and the continuum hypothesis, among others.

==References in computer science==
The computer scientist Donald Knuth proved that the song has a complexity of formula_1 in his in-joke-article &quot;The Complexity of Songs&quot;.

Numerous computer programs exist to output the lyrics to the song. This is analogous to &quot;Hello, World!&quot; programs, with the addition of a loop. As with &quot;Hello, World!&quot;, this can be a practice exercise for those studying computer programming, and a demonstration of different programming paradigms dealing with looping constructs and syntactic differences between programming languages within a paradigm.

The program has been written in over 1,500 different programming languages.

=== Example ===

==== C ====

#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

int main(void) {
 for (size_t i = 99; i &gt; 0; i--) {
 printf(&quot;%zu bottle%s of beer on the wall, %zu bottle%s of beer.\nTake one down &amp; pass it around, now there&#x27;s &quot;,
 i, (i == 1 ? &quot;&quot; : &quot;s&quot;), i, (i == 1 ? &quot;&quot; : &quot;s&quot;));

 printf((i &gt; 1) ? &quot;%zu bottle%s of beer on the wall\n&quot;
 : &quot;no more bottles of beer on the wall!\n&quot;,
 i - 1, i==2?&quot;&quot;:&quot;s&quot;);
}

==== Rust ====
fn main() {
 for i in (3..100).rev() {
 println!(&quot;{i} bottles of beer on the wall, {i} bottles of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, now there&#x27;s {} more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;, (i - 1));
 println!(&quot;2 bottles of beer on the wall, 2 bottles of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, now there&#x27;s 1 more bottle of beer on the wall!&quot;, );
 println!(&quot;1 bottle of beer on the wall, 1 bottle of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, there&#x27;s no more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;);

==== Haskell ====

verses :: [String]
verses =
 &quot;1 bottle of beer on the wall, 1 bottle of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, there&#x27;s no more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;
 : &quot;2 bottles of beer on the wall, 2 bottles of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, now there&#x27;s 1 more bottle of beer on the wall!&quot;
 : map (\n -&gt; show n
 ++ &quot; bottles of beer on the wall, &quot; 
 ++ show n
 ++ &quot; bottles of beer.\nTake one down and pass it around, now there&#x27;s &quot;
 ++ show (n-1)
 ++ &quot; more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;) [3..]

main :: IO ()
main = mapM_ putStrLn (reverse $ take 99 verses)

==== Python ====
for i in range(99,0,-1):
 print(i,&quot;bottles of beer on the wall,&quot;,i,&quot;bottles of beer.&quot;)
 if i != 1:
 print(&quot;Take one down and pass it around, now there&#x27;s&quot;,i-1,&quot;more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;)

 else:
 print(&quot;Take one down and pass it around, there&#x27;s no more bottles of beer on the wall!&quot;)

== See also ==
* &quot;Potje met vet&quot; – a traditional Dutch song sung in the same style
* &quot;Ten Green Bottles&quot; – a similar song which is popular in the United Kingdom

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q277325" start="6" end="24" title="99 Bottles of Beer" label="99 Bottles of Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q277325" start="40" end="70" title="99 Bottles of Beer" label="100 Bottles of Pop on the Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314000" start="205" end="222" title="repetitive song" label="repetitive format"/>
<link wikidata="Q58678" start="351" end="361" title="school bus" label="school bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18121791" start="402" end="407" title="Scout (Scouting)" label="Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942803" start="411" end="421" title="Girl Guiding and Girl Scouting" label="Girl Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q277325" start="431" end="449" title="99 Bottles of Beer" label="99 Bottles of Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="482" end="510" title="Programming language" label="normal programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="514" end="544" title="Esoteric programming language" label="esoteric programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="3207" end="3219" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818355" start="3308" end="3315" title="Atticus (band)" label="Atticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566768" start="3437" end="3453" title="Glasgow Cathouse" label="Glasgow Cathouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165184" start="3593" end="3606" title="drinking song" label="drinking song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888639" start="3641" end="3665" title="Modern Drunkard Magazine" label="Modern Drunkard Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3787" end="3799" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q205" start="4087" end="4095" title="Infinity" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765223" start="4176" end="4206" title="The Song That Doesn&amp;#x27;t End" label="The Song That Doesn&amp;#x27;t End"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4269" end="4279" title="Aleph number#Aleph-null" label="Aleph-null"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="4310" end="4324" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="4369" end="4378" title="Uncountable set" label="countable"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="4536" end="4563" title="Aleph number" label="Aleph-one, two, three, etc."/>
<link wikidata="Q173523" start="4790" end="4811" title="geometric progression" label="geometric progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="4814" end="4826" title="differential (infinitesimal)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q204819" start="4829" end="4850" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="4852" end="4866" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4869" end="4887" title="Summation#Capital-sigma notation" label="summation notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="4893" end="4903" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="4909" end="4927" title="Fibonacci sequence" label="Fibonacci sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="4937" end="4957" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="5013" end="5031" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="5032" end="5044" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="5072" end="5082" title="time complexity" label="complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274840" start="5103" end="5110" title="in-joke" label="in-joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410432" start="5125" end="5148" title="The Complexity of Songs" label="The Complexity of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="5245" end="5278" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5304" end="5308" title="Control flow#Loops" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188267" start="5451" end="5471" title="programming paradigm" label="programming paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="5680" end="5681" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="6165" end="6169" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="6716" end="6723" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="7369" end="7375" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221407" start="7757" end="7770" title="Potje met vet" label="Potje met vet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403229" start="7835" end="7852" title="Ten Green Bottles" label="Ten Green Bottles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490767" wikidata="Q93144" url="?curid=490767" title="Mark Spencer (computer engineer)">
<text>Mark Spencer (born April 8, 1977) is an American computer engineer and is the original author of the GTK+-based instant messaging client Gaim (which has since been renamed to Pidgin), the L2TP daemon l2tpd and the Cheops Network User Interface.

Mark Spencer is also the creator of Asterisk, a Linux-based open-sourced PBX. He is the founder, chairman and CTO of Digium, an open-source telecommunications supplier most notable for its development and sponsorship of Asterisk. Spencer shifted from CEO to chairman and CTO in early 2007.

== Early life ==
Spencer was born and raised in Auburn, Alabama. He attended Auburn University where both his parents were professors. In high school, he was mentored by another Auburn professor, Thaddeus Roppel, and Mark Smith, co-founder of Adtran.

== Career ==
While attending Auburn University, Spencer co-oped at Adtran when he wrote l2tpd. He went on to start a Linux technical support business. Spencer did not have enough money to buy a PBX (private branch exchange) for his company so he decided to write Asterisk and later founded Digium.

As a pilot, Mark founded Avilution, LLC. to create Android apps including QuickWeather and AviationMaps. AviationMaps was later spun out to FlightPro, then DroidEFB. Adapting a similar strategy as Asterisk, he developed the eXtensible Flight System, XFS, a cross-platform avionics architecture. XFS has already been integrated in the Zenith CH750 STOL aircraft in the form of both a three-screen panel and the &quot;Unpanel,&quot; a portrait-orientation (also landscape) screen to replace the entire traditional glass cockpit.

==References==
==External links==
*Mark Spencer&#x27;s previous homepage (copies at the Internet Archive)
*Interview with Mark Spencer at OSDir.com
* at CNet
*Linux Link Tech Show interview (audio), 2005
*Global open source enthusiasts interview Mark Spencer December 2009
*News story regarding changing roles at Digium</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93144" start="0" end="12" title="Mark Spencer (computer engineer)" label="Mark Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="49" end="66" title="Computer engineering" label="computer engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189464" start="101" end="105" title="GTK+" label="GTK+"/>
<link wikidata="Q71380" start="175" end="181" title="Pidgin (software)" label="Pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q546739" start="188" end="192" title="L2TP" label="L2TP"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="193" end="199" title="daemon (computer software)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q622754" start="282" end="290" title="Asterisk (PBX)" label="Asterisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="294" end="299" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q204896" start="319" end="322" title="Private branch exchange" label="PBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287861" start="356" end="359" title="Chief Technical Officer" label="CTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q461517" start="363" end="369" title="Digium" label="Digium"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="497" end="500" title="Chief Executive Officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q79728" start="585" end="591" title="Auburn, Alabama" label="Auburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="593" end="600" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651203" start="780" end="786" title="ADTRAN" label="Adtran"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="818" end="835" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q461517" start="1079" end="1085" title="Digium" label="Digium"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="1704" end="1720" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490771" wikidata="Q684402" url="?curid=490771" title="Black belt (martial arts)">
<text>In East Asian martial arts, the black belt is associated with expertise, but may indicate only competence, depending on the martial art. The use of colored belts is a relatively recent invention dating from the 1880s.

==Origin==
The systematic use of belt colour to denote rank was first used in Japan by Jigoro Kano, the founder of judo in the 1880s. Previously, Japanese Koryu instructors tended to provide rank certificates only. Initially the wide obi was used. As practitioners trained in a kimono, only white and black obi were used. This kind of ranking is less common in arts that do not claim a far Eastern origin, though it is used in the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program.

==Relative rank==

Rank and belts are not equivalent between arts, styles, or even within some organisations. In some arts, a black belt may be awarded in three years or even less, while in others it takes dedicated training of ten years or more. Testing for black belt is commonly more rigorous and more centralised than for lower grades.

==Ability==
In contrast to the &quot;black belt as master&quot; stereotype, a black belt commonly indicates the wearer is competent in a style&#x27;s basic technique and principles.

Another way to describe this links to the terms used in Japanese arts; shodan (for a first degree black belt), means literally the first/beginning step, and the next grades, nidan and sandan are each numbered as &quot;ni&quot; is two and &quot;san&quot; is three, meaning second step, third step, etc.

As a &quot;black belt&quot; is commonly viewed as conferring some status, achieving one has been used as a marketing gimmick. For example, a school might guarantee that one will be awarded within a certain period, or for a certain amount of money. Such schools are sometimes referred to as McDojos or belt factories.

===Teaching===
In some Japanese schools, after obtaining a black belt the student also begins to instruct, and may be referred to as a senpai (senior student) or sensei (teacher). In others, a black belt student should not be called sensei until they are Sandan (third-degree black belt), or the titles or sabom in Korean martial arts as a second degree or higher, as this denotes a greater degree of experience and a sensei must have this and grasp of what is involved in teaching a martial art.

==Higher grades==
In Japanese martial arts the further subdivisions of black belt ranks may be linked to &quot;dan&quot; grades and indicated by &#x27;stripes&#x27; on the belt. Yūdansha (roughly translating from Japanese to &quot;person who holds a &quot;dan&quot; grade&quot;) is often used to describe those who hold a black belt rank. While the belt remains black, stripes or other insignia may be added to denote seniority, in some arts, very senior grades will wear differently colored belts. 

In judo and some forms of karate, a sixth dan will wear a red-and-white belt. The red-and-white belt is often reserved only for ceremonial occasions, and a regular black belt is still worn during training. At 9th or 10th dan some schools award red. In some schools of jujutsu, the shihan rank and higher wear purple belts. These other colors are often still referred to collectively as &quot;black belts&quot;.

==See also==
* Brazilian jiu-jitsu ranking system
* Dan (rank)
* Kyū
* Rank in Judo
==References==
==External links==
*Origins of the Karate Rank System (Wayback Machine copy)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17153987" start="3" end="26" title="Modern history of East Asian martial arts" label="East Asian martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q684402" start="32" end="42" title="Black belt (martial arts)" label="black belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190141" start="306" end="317" title="Jigoro Kano" label="Jigoro Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="334" end="338" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280410" start="365" end="373" title="Japanese martial arts" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511809" start="374" end="379" title="Koryu" label="Koryu"/>
<link wikidata="Q483444" start="497" end="503" title="kimono" label="kimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131276" start="510" end="515" title="white belt" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764108" start="650" end="683" title="Marine Corps Martial Arts Program" label="Marine Corps Martial Arts Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499953" start="1281" end="1287" title="shodan (rank)" label="shodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="1803" end="1809" title="McDojo" label="McDojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061411" start="1966" end="1972" title="Senpai and kōhai" label="senpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q678928" start="1993" end="1999" title="sensei" label="sensei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757243" start="2146" end="2165" title="Korean martial arts" label="Korean martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280410" start="2350" end="2371" title="Japanese martial arts" label="Japanese martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2440" end="2443" title="dan (rank)#Usage in martial arts" label="dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="2856" end="2862" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874617" start="3074" end="3077" title="Red belt (martial arts)" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="3098" end="3105" title="jujutsu" label="jujutsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504372" start="3111" end="3117" title="shihan" label="shihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553783" start="3257" end="3291" title="Brazilian jiu-jitsu ranking system" label="Brazilian jiu-jitsu ranking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q373498" start="3294" end="3304" title="Dan (rank)" label="Dan (rank)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131276" start="3307" end="3310" title="Kyū" label="Kyū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943834" start="3313" end="3325" title="Rank in Judo" label="Rank in Judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="3396" end="3411" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490772" wikidata="Q4020014" url="?curid=490772" title="William Fulco">
<text>William James Fulco, [[Jesuits|S.J.]], (February 24, 1936 – November 29, 2021) was an American Jesuit priest and National Endowment for the Humanities Professor of Ancient Mediterranean Studies at Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles, California.

Fulco was born in Los Angeles. He entered the Society of Jesus in August 1954 and was ordained a priest in June 1966. He spent most of his career in education.

Fulco died on November 29, 2021.

==Early life and education==
Fulco was born to Dr. Herman J. Fulco and Clelia Marie DeFeo Fulco in the Leimert Park area of Los Angeles. He had a brother, Dr. Armand Fulco, and sister, Yvonne Henriks. He graduated from Loyola High School. He later joined the Society of Jesus in 1954 and was ordained in 1966. Fulco earned his B.A. and Licentiate of Sacred Theology from Jesuit School of Theology, Berkeley, California (now Santa Clara University) and his M.A. at Gonzaga University. Fulco finished his Ph.D. in Near Eastern languages and literatures from Yale University.

Father William Fulco was fluent in nine languages including English, Spanish, Greek, Latin, Aramaic, Arabic, Hebrew, German.

==Loyola Marymount University==
Fuclo began teaching at Loyola Marymount University (LMU) in Los Angeles in August 1998. He founded the school&#x27;s Classics and Archaeology department within the Bellarmine College of Liberal Arts. He was awarded the National Endowment for the Humanities Chair of Ancient Mediterranean Studies.

During his teaching career, he taught courses on topics including Greek and Latin for medicine, archaeology and the Bible, and Mediterranean studies.

Fuclo was also active in the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity on LMU&#x27;s campus. He was the faculty advisor from 2002 to 2019, and was awarded by the national organization with the 2011 SigEp Citation, Volunteer of the Year, and Distinguished Alumnus awards.

Father William Fulco retired from teaching in 2019.

==Collaboration in the film &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot;==
He was hired to translate the dialogues for the film &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; (2004), by Mel Gibson, into a hypothetical reconstructed form of Aramaic, the Aramaic that Jesus spoke, making him one of the few professional historical linguists specializing in the production (or more precisely translation) of texts in unattested or poorly attested languages known to have existed, with a focus on the needs of the movie industry. Fulco does not reconstruct grammars (open generative structures) of poorly attested or unattested language forms known to have existed. Rather, he reconstructs &quot;finite texts&quot; in these language forms, and the reconstruction is limited to the necessities of the production of such texts. His reconstructed Aramaic used in the film incorporated elements of the Biblical Aramaic of the Book of Daniel, fourth-century Syriac, and Hebrew. Fulco has also worked on such films as &quot;The Nativity Story&quot; and &quot;Constantine&quot;.

==Personal life==
Fulco was public about his alcoholism from 1968 to 1985. He was able to become sober via a Washington, D.C., program. Fulco later helped others via community alcohol addiction groups. During the late 1980s, Fuclo recalled the alcohol groups nearly turned into AIDS support groups as the AIDS epidemic tore through the United States and the groups became a place to mourn loved ones and find community. He recalls it was one of the most profound times in his life and &quot;these people had learned how to live in a way I hadn&#x27;t. I had to learn from them.&quot;

Fulco died November 29, 2021, at Sacred Heart Jesuit Center in Los Gatos from pulmonary fibrosis at the age of 85.

==References==
==External links==
*Home page
*Bellamine College of Liberal Arts: William Fulco</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4020014" start="0" end="37" title="William Fulco" label="William James Fulco, [[Jesuits|S.J.]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="95" end="101" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="102" end="108" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="113" end="150" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="151" end="160" title="Professor" label="Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786078" start="197" end="224" title="Loyola Marymount University" label="Loyola Marymount University"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="228" end="251" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="300" end="316" title="Society of Jesus" label="Society of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229192" start="552" end="564" title="Leimert Park, Los Angeles" label="Leimert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694570" start="668" end="686" title="Loyola High School (Los Angeles)" label="Loyola High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q749020" start="785" end="795" title="Licentiate (degree)" label="Licentiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q992830" start="873" end="895" title="Santa Clara University" label="Santa Clara University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537303" start="913" end="931" title="Gonzaga University" label="Gonzaga University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1005" end="1020" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1083" end="1090" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1092" end="1099" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1101" end="1106" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1108" end="1113" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="1115" end="1122" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1124" end="1130" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1132" end="1138" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1140" end="1146" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="1401" end="1438" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512359" start="1660" end="1677" title="Sigma Phi Epsilon" label="Sigma Phi Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="1977" end="2002" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="2070" end="2095" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42229" start="2113" end="2123" title="Mel Gibson" label="Mel Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="2167" end="2174" title="Aramaic language" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332483" start="2180" end="2204" title="Language of Jesus" label="Aramaic that Jesus spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="2821" end="2837" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Biblical Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="2845" end="2859" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="2876" end="2882" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="2888" end="2894" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q171365" start="2941" end="2959" title="The Nativity Story" label="The Nativity Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q219150" start="2976" end="2987" title="Constantine (film)" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3105" end="3121" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="3301" end="3314" title="AIDS epidemic" label="AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747509" start="3644" end="3653" title="Los Gatos, California" label="Los Gatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q32446" start="3659" end="3677" title="pulmonary fibrosis" label="pulmonary fibrosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490774" wikidata="Q7637925" url="?curid=490774" title="Summoner">
<text>Summoner may refer to:

==Magic and religion==
* Summoner, a person who practices evocation, the act of summoning a supernatural agent
* Apparitor, or summoner, an officer of an ecclesiastical court
* Summoner (Wicca), a position in a Wiccan coven

==Arts and entertainment==
===Literature===
* The Summoner, a character in &quot;The Summoner&#x27;s Tale&quot;
* &quot;The Summoner&quot;, a 2007 novel by Gail Z. Martin

===Video games===
* &quot;Summoner&quot; (video game), a 2000 video game
** &quot;Summoner 2&quot;, a 2002 video game
* Summoner, a &quot;League of Legends&quot; player

==Other uses==
* Summoner (horse) (foaled 1997), British Thoroughbred racehorse

==See also==
*Summon (disambiguation)
*Summoned (disambiguation)
*Summoning (disambiguation)
*Summons (disambiguation)
*Sumner (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7637925" start="0" end="8" title="Summoner" label="Summoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="82" end="91" title="evocation" label="evocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780946" start="137" end="146" title="Apparitor" label="Apparitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637924" start="201" end="217" title="Summoner (Wicca)" label="Summoner (Wicca)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767297" start="330" end="354" title="The Summoner&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Summoner&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q751234" start="405" end="419" title="Gail Z. Martin" label="Gail Z. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q663540" start="441" end="474" title="Summoner (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Summoner&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637927" start="503" end="513" title="Summoner 2" label="Summoner 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q223341" start="559" end="576" title="League of Legends" label="League of Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q56280388" start="608" end="624" title="Summoner (horse)" label="Summoner (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122940244" start="686" end="709" title="Summon (disambiguation)" label="Summon (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122905681" start="711" end="736" title="Summoned (disambiguation)" label="Summoned (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637926" start="738" end="764" title="Summoning (disambiguation)" label="Summoning (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55553990" start="766" end="790" title="Summons (disambiguation)" label="Summons (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q296293" start="792" end="815" title="Sumner (disambiguation)" label="Sumner (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490777" wikidata="Q355119" url="?curid=490777" title="Black Belt">
<text>Black Belt may refer to:
==Martial arts==
* Black belt (martial arts), an indication of attainment of expertise in martial arts
* &quot;Black Belt&quot; (magazine), a magazine covering martial arts news, technique, and notable individuals

==Places==
* Black Belt in the American South, a region of highly fertile black soil in the American South that was the center of slavery, and continues to have a large black population into the 21st century
* Black Belt (geological formation), geological formation of dark fertile soil in the Southern United States
** Black Belt (region of Alabama), a geographic and socio-political region of Alabama
* Black Belt (region of Chicago), a historical region in Chicago, Illinois, in the South Side area

==Entertainment==
*&quot;Black Belt Jones&quot;, a 1974 action film
* &quot;Black Belt&quot; (1978 film), an Indian Malayalam film
* &quot;Black Belt&quot; (2007 film), a Japanese film, also known as &quot;Kuro-obi&quot;
* &quot;Black Belt&quot; (1984 video game), game for Apple II and Commodore 64
* &quot;Black Belt&quot; (1986 video game), game for Sega Master System based on the anime &quot;Fist of the North Star&quot;
* Black Belt (&quot;8-bit Theatre&quot;), a character in the webcomic &quot;8-bit Theatre&quot;

== Military ==

* Operation Black Belt, Israeli code name for the November 2019 Gaza clashes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q355119" start="0" end="10" title="Black Belt" label="Black Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q684402" start="44" end="69" title="Black belt (martial arts)" label="Black belt (martial arts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q783472" start="130" end="163" title="Black Belt (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Black Belt&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q880087" start="253" end="285" title="Black Belt in the American South" label="Black Belt in the American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850272" start="450" end="483" title="Black Belt (geological formation)" label="Black Belt (geological formation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549318" start="560" end="590" title="Black Belt (region of Alabama)" label="Black Belt (region of Alabama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197373" start="645" end="675" title="Black Belt (region of Chicago)" label="Black Belt (region of Chicago)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453957" start="768" end="784" title="Black Belt Jones" label="Black Belt Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210246" start="813" end="847" title="Black Belt (1978 film)" label="&amp;quot;Black Belt&amp;quot; (1978 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619161" start="876" end="910" title="Black Belt (2007 film)" label="&amp;quot;Black Belt&amp;quot; (2007 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500065" start="966" end="1006" title="Black Belt (1984 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Black Belt&amp;quot; (1984 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626447" start="1045" end="1085" title="Black Belt (1986 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Black Belt&amp;quot; (1986 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644270" start="1171" end="1209" title="Black Belt (8-bit Theatre)" label="Black Belt (&amp;quot;8-bit Theatre&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q74835818" start="1284" end="1304" title="Gaza–Israel clashes (November 2019)" label="Operation Black Belt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490778" wikidata="Q7995721" url="?curid=490778" title="White wizard">
<text>White wizard or white mage may refer to:

* White Mage (&quot;Final Fantasy&quot;), a character class in the series
* White Wizard, a character in the episode &quot;The Dragon&#x27;s Secret&quot; of &quot;Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated&quot;
* White Wizard, a character in &quot;Kamen Rider Wizard&quot;
* White Mage, a character in &quot;8-Bit Theater&quot;
* White wizard, a seal in the Dreamspell Mayan calendar interpretation and game
* White Wizard, a variation of the drinking game &quot;Wizard Staff&quot;
* Burling Hull (1889–1982), nicknamed The White Wizard, an American magician
* White Wizard Games, an American games company 

==See also==
*
* White Wizzard, an American heavy metal band
* White Witch (disambiguation)
* Wizard (disambiguation)
** Wizard (fantasy)
* Mage (disambiguation)
* Gandalf the White, in J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s novels</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7995721" start="0" end="12" title="White wizard" label="White wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995721" start="16" end="26" title="White wizard" label="white mage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114685" start="44" end="82" title="White Mage (Final Fantasy)" label="White Mage (&amp;quot;Final Fantasy&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461281" start="159" end="195" title="List of Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated episodes" label="&amp;quot;The Dragon&amp;#x27;s Secret&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575625" start="260" end="305" title="List of Kamen Rider Wizard characters" label="a character in &amp;quot;Kamen Rider Wizard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="320" end="360" title="List of 8-Bit Theater characters#White Mage" label="a character in &amp;quot;8-Bit Theater&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q610636" start="391" end="401" title="Dreamspell" label="Dreamspell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028741" start="496" end="508" title="Wizard Staff" label="Wizard Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999164" start="517" end="529" title="Burling Hull" label="Burling Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910983" start="594" end="612" title="White Wizard Games" label="White Wizard Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319289" start="659" end="672" title="White Wizzard" label="White Wizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995540" start="705" end="733" title="White Witch (disambiguation)" label="White Witch (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q398599" start="736" end="759" title="Wizard (disambiguation)" label="Wizard (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="763" end="779" title="Wizard (fantasy)" label="Wizard (fantasy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876248" start="782" end="803" title="Mage (disambiguation)" label="Mage (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177499" start="806" end="823" title="Gandalf the White" label="Gandalf the White"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490779" wikidata="Q7505012" url="?curid=490779" title="Shun Fat Supermarket">
<text>Shun Fat Supermarket (; also known as SF Supermarket) is a Chinese Vietnamese American supermarket chain in the San Gabriel Valley region in California, Little Saigon, Orange County, California, Sacramento, California, San Pablo, California, Las Vegas, Nevada, Portland, Oregon and Garland, Texas.

Shun Fat Supermarket was started in the mid-1990s by a Chinese Vietnamese entrepreneur named Hieu Tai Tran (陳才孝). Its first store was opened in the Chinese American suburban community of Monterey Park, California. Despite some amusement in the English-speaking press, the name &quot;Shun Fat&quot; actually means &quot;prosperity&quot; in Chinese.

The Asian supermarket chain that sells imported grocery items from Asia – particularly mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, Thailand, and Vietnam – and also a few mainstream American brands as well. Its locations tend to be in newer suburban Chinatowns as well as in developing ethnic Vietnamese American commercial districts.

The market chain competes mainly with the 99 Ranch Market and Hong Kong Supermarket. Like these two supermarket chains, Shun Fat Supermarket usually serves as a major anchor store in some Asian shopping centers and strip malls, which in some cases have been renovated extensively by Hieu Tran. The &quot;Superstores&quot; in Dallas, El Monte, Garden Grove, Las Vegas, San Gabriel and Westminster are uniquely Chinese hypermarkets, as they sell clothing, small electronics and other products in addition to groceries, although these stalls are operated by independent vendors with separate payment.

In 2005, Shun Fat Supermarket opened a megastore in the Little Saigon of Westminster, California, joining the already highly competitive Vietnamese supermarket commerce in the community.

In June 2013, the market opened Dallas Superstore, marking its first expansion in Texas.

In 2017, Shun Fat sold the Monterey Park and Rowland Heights locations to Great Wall Supermarket.

In June 2019, the popular Asian supermarket opened its first Oregon branch in Southeast Portland&#x27;s Jade District on 82nd Avenue and Foster Road, formerly a Fred Meyer store. This marked Shun Fat&#x27;s fifteenth location and first in the Northwest.

==Locations==
*California
**South El Monte – 2650 Rosemead Blvd
**Garden Grove – 13861 Brookhurst St
**San Gabriel – 1635 S San Gabriel Blvd
**San Diego – 6935 Linda Vista Rd
**Westminster – 15440 Beach Blvd #123
**Fresno – 4970 E Kings Canyon Rd
**Sacramento – 4562 Mack Rd
**Sacramento – 6930 65th St #123
**Sacramento – 5820 South Land Park Dr
**Stockton – 8004 West Ln
**San Pablo – 2368 El Portal Dr
**Rancho Cordova – 2738 Sunrise Blvd
*Nevada
**Las Vegas – 4801 Spring Mountain Rd
**Las Vegas – 5115 Spring Mountain Rd
*Oregon
**Portland – 5323 SE 82nd Ave
*Texas
**Garland – 3212 N Jupiter Rd

==Notes==
==External links==
* Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7505012" start="0" end="20" title="Shun Fat Supermarket" label="Shun Fat Supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505012" start="38" end="52" title="Shun Fat Supermarket" label="SF Supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193617" start="59" end="77" title="Hoa people" label="Chinese Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363753" start="112" end="130" title="San Gabriel Valley" label="San Gabriel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17034333" start="153" end="181" title="Little Saigon, Orange County" label="Little Saigon, Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="195" end="217" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q983863" start="219" end="240" title="San Pablo, California" label="San Pablo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="242" end="259" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="261" end="277" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="282" end="296" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193617" start="354" end="372" title="Hoa people" label="Chinese Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="464" end="472" title="suburban" label="suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q927213" start="486" end="511" title="Monterey Park, California" label="Monterey Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q653793" start="652" end="669" title="Asian supermarket" label="Asian supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="715" end="719" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="735" end="749" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="751" end="760" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="762" end="768" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="770" end="775" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="777" end="785" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="791" end="798" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="827" end="835" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q202509" start="895" end="904" title="Chinatown" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="938" end="957" title="Vietnamese American" label="Vietnamese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646307" start="1023" end="1038" title="99 Ranch Market" label="99 Ranch Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114423" start="1043" end="1064" title="Hong Kong Supermarket" label="Hong Kong Supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q750656" start="1398" end="1409" title="hypermarket" label="hypermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113369" start="1636" end="1649" title="Little Saigon" label="Little Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838759" start="1653" end="1676" title="Westminster, California" label="Westminster, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600137" start="1932" end="1954" title="Great Wall Supermarket" label="Great Wall Supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="2227" end="2237" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q983845" start="2240" end="2254" title="South El Monte, California" label="South El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q50054" start="2278" end="2290" title="Garden Grove, California" label="Garden Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q953437" start="2315" end="2326" title="San Gabriel, California" label="San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2355" end="2364" title="San Diego, California" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q838759" start="2389" end="2400" title="Westminster, California" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301" start="2427" end="2433" title="Fresno, California" label="Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2461" end="2471" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2489" end="2499" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2522" end="2532" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="2561" end="2569" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q983863" start="2587" end="2596" title="San Pablo, California" label="San Pablo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2619" end="2633" title="Sacramento, California" label="Rancho Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="2655" end="2661" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="2664" end="2673" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="2702" end="2711" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="2739" end="2745" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="2748" end="2756" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="2777" end="2782" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="2785" end="2792" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490780" wikidata="Q194453" url="?curid=490780" title="Bangladeshi taka">
<text>The Bangladeshi taka (, sign: , code: BDT, short form: Tk) is the currency of Bangladesh. In Unicode, it is encoded at .

Issuance of banknotes 10 and larger is controlled by Bangladesh Bank, while the 2 and 5 govt. notes are the responsibility of the ministry of finance. The govt. notes of Tk. 2 and Tk.5 have mostly been replaced by coins while lower denomination coins (including all poysha coins) up to Tk. 1 have almost gone out of circulation due to inflation. The most commonly used symbol for the taka is &quot;&quot; and &quot;Tk&quot;, used on receipts while purchasing goods and services. It is divided into 100 poysha, but poysha coins are no longer in circulation. The poysha is still used for accounting purposes (e.g., Tk 123,456.78 for 123,456 taka and 78 poysha).

On 8 May 2024, the central bank placed the taka in a crawling peg to the US dollar, with a rate of 117 takas per US dollar.

==Etymology==

According to &quot;The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language&quot; and &quot;Banglapedia&quot;, the word &quot;taka&quot; came from the Sanskrit word &quot;tankah&quot;, meaning silver coin. The word &quot;taka&quot; in Bangla is also commonly used generically to mean any money, currency, or notes. Thus, colloquially, a person speaking in Bangla may use &quot;taka&quot; to refer to money regardless of what currency it is denominated in. This is also common in the Indian states of West Bengal and Tripura, where the official name of the Indian rupee is &quot;taka&quot; as well. In other eastern Indian languages with the influence of Prakrit in Bihar it is &quot;taka&quot; in Maithili and Magadhi languages, in Assam it is টকা &quot;tôka&quot; and it is ଟଙ୍କା &quot;taṅkā&quot; in Odisha.

==History==
===1947–1971===
After the Partition of Bengal in 1947, East Bengal became the eastern wing of Pakistan and was renamed to East Pakistan in 1956. The Pakistani rupee also bore the word taka on official notes and coins. Bangla was one of the two national languages of the Pakistan union between 1956 and 1971 (the other being Urdu). The Bangladeshi taka came into existence since 1972, a year after the independence of the eastern wing of the union, as the independent nation of Bangladesh.

Prior to the Liberation war in 1971, banknotes of the State Bank of Pakistan circulated throughout Bangladesh, and continued to be used in Bangladesh even after independence for only about three months until the official introduction of the taka on 4 March 1972. During the war, it was an unofficial practice of some Bengali nationalists to protest Pakistani rule by stamping banknotes with &quot;&quot; and &quot;BANGLA DESH&quot; as two words in either Bangla or English. These locally produced stamps are known to exist in several varieties, as are forgeries. On 8 June 1971, the Pakistani government declared that all banknotes bearing such stamps ceased to be legal tender. Furthermore, to prevent looted high-denomination notes from disrupting the Pakistani economy, the government also withdrew the legal tender status of all 100- and 500-rupee notes.

===Since 1972===
The taka was introduced in Bangladesh in 1972, replacing the Pakistani rupee at par.

====Treasury banknotes====
* The first treasury notes in 1972 for 1 and notes of the Bangladesh Bank for 5, 10 and 100.
* In 1977, banknotes for 50 were introduced, followed by 500 in 1979 and 20 in 1982.
* 1 treasury notes were issued until 1992, with 2 treasury notes introduced in 1989.
* 1000 banknotes were introduced in 2008.
* 5 banknotes, previously issued by Bangladesh Bank, are now issued by the Government of Bangladesh. These have mostly been replaced by coins since the early 2000s.

====Banknotes and issues====

In 2000, the government issued polymer 10 notes as an experiment (similar to the Australian dollar). They proved unpopular, however, and were withdrawn later. At present, the 1 and 5 notes have mostly been replaced with coins, and in 2008, the government issued 1,000 notes.

In 2011, Bangladesh Bank began issuing a new series of banknotes denominated in 2, 5, 100, 500, and 1000. All are dated 2011 and feature a portrait and watermark of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, along the National Martyr&#x27;s Monument in Savar at center front.

From 2011, the Bangladesh Bank introduced new notes denominated in 10, 20, and 50 on 7 March 2012. The notes bear the portrait of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the National Martyr&#x27;s Monument in Savar on the front. On the back of the notes, the 10 will picture the Baitul Mukarram mosque, the 20 pictures the Shat Gombuj mosque in Bagherat, and the 50 notes feature Shilpacharjo Zainul Abedin&#x27;s famous painting &quot;Ploughing&quot;.

On 7 March 2019, Bangladesh Bank released new ৳100 notes, which had the same design as 2011 Version, but had better security, a stronger Blue and were made of a different material.

On 15 December 2019, Bangladesh Bank issued new ৳50 banknotes, with the same design as the 2011 version, but had a different colour (orange, brown and fluorescent yellow-green), and a slightly different design in some parts.

On 17 March 2020, Bangladesh Bank introduced new ৳200 notes. They bear a portrait of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on both sides and a landscape picture of a village, river and boats.

====Commemorative banknotes====

In 2011, Bangladesh Bank also introduced a 40 note to commemorate the &quot;40th Victory Anniversary of Bangladesh&quot;. The commemorative note features a portrait of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the National Martyr&#x27;s Monument in Savar on front, and six armed men on back. Curiously, this note has an electrotype 10 in the watermark, indicating it was likely printed on extra 10 banknote paper.

On 15 February 2012, Bangladesh Bank has introduced a 60 note to commemorate &quot;60 years of National Movement&quot;. The commemorative note measures and features the Shaeed Minar (Martyrs&#x27; monument) in Dhaka and five men on the back. Like the 40 commemorative note, this note has an electrotype 50 in the watermark. It was likely printed on extra 50 banknote paper.

On 26 January 2013, Bangladesh Bank issued a 25 note to commemorate the 25th anniversary (silver jubilee) of the Security Printing Corporation (Bangladesh) Ltd. On the front is the National Martyr&#x27;s Monument in Savar, the designs of the previous series of the Bangladeshi taka notes and its postage stamps, three spotted deer and the magpie-robin (&quot;doyel&quot;). On the reverse is the headquarters of the Security Printing Corporation. Curiously, this note has an electrotype 10 in the watermark, indicating it was likely printed on extra 10 banknote paper.

On 8 July 2013, Bangladesh Bank issued a 100 note to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the Bangladesh National Museum. The commemorative note features an 18th-century terracotta plaque of a horseman on the front and the Bangladesh National Museum on the back.

==Coins==
In 1973, coins were introduced in denominations of 5, 10, 25 and 50 poysha. 1 poysha coins followed in 1974, with 1 coins introduced in 1975. The 1, 5 and 10 poysha were struck in aluminium, with the 25 and 50 poysha struck in steel and the 1 in copper-nickel. The 5 poysha were square with rounded corners, and the 10 poysha were scalloped. Steel 5 were introduced in 1994, and a steel 2 coin followed in 2004.

1 and 5 poysha coins are rarely found in circulation. The same is the case with the 10, 25, and 50 poysha coins, as they have lost value due to inflation over the years. Only the 1, 2 and 5 are occasionally found in circulation. Unlike most other countries, coins are not issued every year. The most recent coins, 1, 2 and 5, were issued in 2013.

==Banknotes==
=== Previous issues ===
;First Series:Bangladesh introduced its first banknotes on 4 March 1972. At first 1 taka and 100 taka banknotes were introduced. Later 10 and 5 taka notes were added. This first issued series is commonly known as &quot;Map Series&quot;. These banknotes are considered as emergency issue banknotes to replace the Pakistan rupee banknotes both with and without rubber stamp overprints.
;Second Series: After issuing the first banknotes, there were many conspiracy theories, counterfeiting problems and rumours, so the government issued the second series. These second series banknotes were printed by Thomas De La Rue of England. First-issued banknotes were subsequently withdrawn from circulation by 30 April 1974 after having ceased to hold legal tender status from 30 March 1974.

;Third Series: Bangladesh Government signed agreements with Thomas De La Rue and Bradbury Wilkinson at the same time. Both of them printed same denominations with different design almost at the same time. As a result, two different series were circulating at the same time.

;Fourth Series: During 1976 a completely new series of notes was introduced, with the exception of the 1-taka note, which was released as the second variety of the third issue during 1976. The notes of this issue are notable for the absence of the portrait of Sheikh Mujib, whose portrait had dominated all issues of the Bangladesh Bank until this issue. Instead of the familiar portrait, each note has an illustration of the Star Mosque on its front. 50 and 500 taka denomination was added in this series. 5,10,50 and 100 taka denominations were printed by Thomas De La Rue. 500 taka notes were printed by Giesecke and Devrient of Germany.

;Fifth Series: The fifth issue of banknotes was introduced over a two-year period from December 1977 to September 1979. The notes of this issue are very similar to those of the fourth issue; except the &#x27;Star Mosque&#x27; was replaced on most notes by a new vignette and the colours of the notes are a little darker. There was no 500-taka note released in this issue, but a new denomination note of 20 taka was introduced on 20 August 1979, being the last note of this issue prepared by the Bangladesh Bank.

;Sixth Series: During the 1980s, some designs of taka notes were introduced, but most of the designs were the same. A new denomination of taka 2 note was also introduced. 10 and 50 takas were redesigned. Other denominations were the same as the previous series.

;Seventh Series: During the 90s newly designed banknotes of 10,50 and 500 taka were printed. 10 taka note had a portrait of Bangabandhu.
;Eighth Series: This series was printed between 2000 and 2001. A polymer banknote of denomination 10 was added, but later withdrawn due to lack of popularity. Paper notes of denomination 100 and 500 were printed with new designs. A portrait of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was added on each new note replacing the National Martyrs&#x27; Memorial Monument.
;Ninth Series: After a change in government new series of banknotes were introduced in 2002–2003. The portrait of Bangabandhu was absent in this series. In 2008, 1000 taka note was introduced for the first time.
===Tenth Series===
The Bangladesh Bank has issued a new series of banknotes, phasing out the older designs for new, more secure ones. All banknotes other than the 1 taka feature a portrait of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on the obverse along with the watermark of the National Martyrs&#x27; Memorial.
===Eleventh Series===
In September 2024, the Bangladesh Bank announced plans to redesign Taka banknotes by 2025. The central bank’s Currency and Design Advisory Committee, made up of nine members was selected to submit theme proposals to the Ministry of Finance.

===Commemorative banknotes===
The folder of the banknote for the 40th anniversary of the independence of Bangladesh had a spelling error of the name of the country. It was inserted as &quot;Bangldesh&quot; instead of &quot;Bangladesh&quot;.

== Exchange rates ==
=== Historic exchange rates ===

Upon Bangladesh&#x27;s independence, the value of the Bangladeshi taka was set between ৳7.5 and ৳8.0 to US$1. Except for fiscal year 1978, the taka&#x27;s value relative to the US dollar declined every year from 1971 through the end of 1987. To help offset this phenomenon, Bangladesh first used the compensatory financing facility of the International Monetary Fund in fiscal year 1974. Despite the increasing need for assistance, the Mujib government was initially unwilling to meet the IMF&#x27;s conditions on monetary and fiscal policy. By fiscal year 1975, however, the government revised its stance, declaring a devaluation of the taka by 56 percent and agreeing to establishing the Bangladesh Aid Group by the World Bank.

Between 1980 and 1983, the taka sustained a decline of some 50 percent because of a deterioration in Bangladesh&#x27;s balance of payments. Between 1985 and 1987, the taka was adjusted in frequent incremental steps, stabilising again around 12 percent lower in real terms against the US dollar, but at the same time narrowing the difference between the official rate and the preferential secondary rate from 15 percent to 7.5 percent. Accompanying this structural adjustment was an expansion in trade conducted at the secondary rate, to 53 percent of total exports and 28 percent of total imports. In mid-1987, the official rate was relatively stable, approaching less than ৳31 to US$1. In January 2011, US$1 was equivalent to approximately ৳72, as of 21 April 2012, US$1 was worth close to ৳82, and as of 9 September 2015 US$1 valued ৳77.

==See also==
* Economy of Bangladesh
* The Security Printing Corporation (Bangladesh) Ltd.

==References==

* 
==External links==
* Bangladesh Bank&#x27;s page on currencies in circulation 
* High resolution scans of Bangladeshi currency
* Historical banknotes of Bangladesh
* 51 Years Of Taka History : Notes In Circulation
* Bangladeshi Taka Rates (bn)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q194453" start="4" end="20" title="Bangladeshi taka" label="Bangladeshi taka"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="24" end="28" title="currency sign" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q194453" start="30" end="30" title="Bangladeshi taka" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="32" end="36" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q194453" start="38" end="41" title="Bangladeshi taka" label="BDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="43" end="53" title="Short form (linguistics)" label="short form"/>
<link wikidata="Q194453" start="55" end="57" title="Bangladeshi taka" label="Tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="78" end="88" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="134" end="142" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q806532" start="175" end="190" title="Bangladesh Bank" label="Bangladesh Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068712" start="252" end="271" title="Ministry of Finance (Bangladesh)" label="ministry of finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="624" end="630" title="paisa" label="poysha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139161" start="836" end="848" title="crawling peg" label="crawling peg"/>
<link wikidata="Q464886" start="942" end="998" title="The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language" label="The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642057" start="1015" end="1026" title="Banglapedia" label="Banglapedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="1074" end="1082" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="1423" end="1434" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363" start="1439" end="1446" title="Tripura" label="Tripura"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="1479" end="1491" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192170" start="1577" end="1584" title="Prakrit" label="Prakrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="1588" end="1593" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36109" start="1620" end="1628" title="Maithili language" label="Maithili"/>
<link wikidata="Q33728" start="1633" end="1640" title="Magahi language" label="Magadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164" start="1655" end="1660" title="Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22048" start="1725" end="1731" title="Odisha" label="Odisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596142" start="1772" end="1799" title="Partition of Bengal (1947)" label="Partition of Bengal in 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="1801" end="1812" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="1840" end="1848" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="1868" end="1881" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188289" start="1895" end="1910" title="Pakistani rupee" label="Pakistani rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="1964" end="1970" title="Bengali language" label="Bangla"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="2223" end="2233" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="2249" end="2263" title="Bangladesh Liberation war" label="Liberation war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323248" start="2290" end="2312" title="State Bank of Pakistan" label="State Bank of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250202" start="2553" end="2573" title="Bengali nationalism" label="Bengali nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="3042" end="3054" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q806532" start="3284" end="3299" title="Bangladesh Bank" label="Bangladesh Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806532" start="3567" end="3582" title="Bangladesh Bank" label="Bangladesh Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056319" start="3606" end="3630" title="Government of Bangladesh" label="Government of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="4194" end="4227" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q804009" start="4575" end="4590" title="Baitul Mukarram" label="Baitul Mukarram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834259" start="4619" end="4630" title="Sixty Dome Mosque" label="Shat Gombuj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443222" start="4676" end="4709" title="Zainul Abedin" label="Shilpacharjo Zainul Abedin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="5243" end="5276" title="Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456484" start="5722" end="5733" title="electrotype" label="electrotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q266761" start="6551" end="6556" title="doyel" label="doyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51876" start="6855" end="6881" title="Bangladesh National Museum" label="Bangladesh National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="6931" end="6941" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21862903" start="7100" end="7109" title="Bangladeshi fifty-poysha coin" label="50 poysha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="10433" end="10444" title="Bangabandhu" label="Bangabandhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="10690" end="10711" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="11199" end="11220" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351595" start="11268" end="11299" title="National Martyrs&amp;#x27; Memorial" label="National Martyrs&amp;#x27; Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q115632732" start="11866" end="11896" title="Independence of Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh&amp;#x27;s independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="12200" end="12227" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="12480" end="12491" title="devaluation" label="devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="12579" end="12589" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="12711" end="12730" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="13045" end="13066" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088369" start="13448" end="13469" title="Economy of Bangladesh" label="Economy of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q22680075" start="13472" end="13523" title="The Security Printing Corporation (Bangladesh) Ltd." label="The Security Printing Corporation (Bangladesh) Ltd."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490783" wikidata="Q80524" url="?curid=490783" title="Indian rupee">
<text>The Indian Rupee (symbol: [[Indian rupee sign|₹]]; code: INR) is the official currency of the Republic of India. The rupee is subdivided into 100 &quot;paise&quot; (Hindi plural; singular: &quot;paisa&quot;). The issuance of the currency is controlled by the Reserve Bank of India. The Reserve Bank derives this role from powers vested to it by the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.

== Etymology ==
Pāṇini (6th to 4th century BCE), the ancient Indian grammarian and logician, writes of the (). While it is unclear whether Panini was referring specifically to coinage, some scholars conclude that
he uses the term &quot;rūpa&quot; to mean a piece of precious metal (typically silver) used as a coin, and a &quot;rūpya&quot; to mean a stamped piece of metal, a coin in the modern sense. The &quot;Arthashastra&quot;, written by Chanakya, prime minister to the first Maurya emperor Chandragupta Maurya (), mentions silver coins as . Other types of coins, including gold coins (), copper coins (), and lead coins (), are also mentioned. The immediate precursor to the rupee is the &quot;rūpiya&quot;—the silver coin weighing 178 grains minted in northern India, first by Sher Shah Suri during his brief rule between 1540 and 1545, and later by the Mughal Empire. The weight remained unchanged well beyond the end of Mughal rule into the 20th century.

== History ==

The history of the Indian rupee traces back to ancient India around the 6th century BCE; ancient India was one of the earliest issuers of coins in the world, alongside the Chinese wen and Lydian staters.

&quot;Arthashastra&quot;, written by Chanakya, the prime minister to the first Mauryan emperor Chandragupta Maurya (c. 340–290 BCE), mentions silver coins as &quot;rūpyarūpa&quot;, gold coins as suvarṇarūpa, copper coins as tamrarūpa, and lead coins as sīsarūpa. means &#x27;shape&#x27; or &#x27;form&#x27;.

The Gupta Empire under Chandragupta II produced large numbers of silver coins clearly influenced by those of the earlier Western Satraps. The silver &quot;Rūpaka&quot; () coins weighed approximately 20 rattis (2.2678g).

In the intermediate times following the Guptas, there appears to have been no fixed monetary system of coinage as reported in the travelogue &quot;Da Tang Xi Yu Ji&quot;.

During his five-year rule from 1540 to 1545, Sultan Sher Shah Suri issued a coin of silver, weighing 178 grains (or 11.53 grams), which was also termed the &quot;rupiya&quot;. During Babur&#x27;s time, the brass to silver exchange ratio was roughly 50:2. The silver coin remained in use during the Mughal period, the Maratha era as well as in British India. Some of the earliest issuers of paper rupees include the Bank of Hindustan (1770–1832), the General Bank of Bengal and Bihar (1773–1775, established by Warren Hastings), and the Bengal Bank (1784–91).

=== 1800s ===

Historically, the rupee was a silver coin. This had severe consequences in the nineteenth century when the strongest economies in the world were on the gold standard (that is, paper linked to gold). The discovery of large quantities of silver in the United States and several European colonies caused the panic of 1873 which resulted in a decline in the value of silver relative to gold, devaluing India&#x27;s standard currency. This event was known as &quot;the fall of the rupee&quot;. In Britain War, the Long Depression resulted in bankruptcies, escalating unemployment, a halt in public works, and a major trade slump that lasted until 1897.

India was unaffected by the imperial order-in-council of 1825, which attempted to introduce British sterling coinage to the British colonies. India, at that time, was controlled by the British East India Company. The silver rupee coin continued as the currency of India through the British Raj and beyond. In 1835, British India adopted a mono-metallic silver standard based on the rupee coin; this decision was influenced by a letter written by Lord Liverpool in 1805 extolling the virtues of mono-metallism.

Following the First War of Independence in 1857, the British government took direct control of India. From 1851, gold sovereigns were produced &quot;en masse&quot; at the Royal Mint in Sydney. In an 1864 attempt to make the British gold sovereign the &quot;imperial coin&quot;, the treasuries in Bombay and Calcutta were instructed to receive (but not to issue) gold sovereigns; therefore, these gold sovereigns never left the vaults. As the British government gave up hope of replacing the rupee in India with the pound sterling, it realised for the same reason it could not replace the silver dollar in the Straits Settlements with the Indian rupee (as the British East India Company had desired). Since the silver crisis of 1873, several nations switched over to a gold exchange standard (wherein silver or banknotes circulate locally but with a fixed gold value for export purposes), including India in the 1890s.

=== India Council Bill ===
In 1870, India was connected to Britain by a submarine telegraph cable.
Around 1875, Britain started paying India for exported goods in India Council (paper) Bills (instead of silver).
If, therefore, the India Council in London should not step in to sell bills on India, the merchants and bankers would have to send silver to make good the (trade) balances. Thus a channel for the outflow of silver was stopped, in 1875, by the India Council in London.

The great importance of these (Council) Bills, however, is the effect they have on the Market Price of Silver: and they have in fact been one of the most potent factors in recent years in causing the diminution in the Value of Silver as compared to Gold.

The Indian and Chinese products for which silver is paid were and are, since 1873–74, very low in price, and it therefore takes less silver to purchase a larger quantity of Eastern commodities. Now, on taking the several agents into united consideration, it will certainly not seem very mysterious why silver should not only have fallen in price

The great nations had recourse to two expedients for replenishing their exchequers, first, loans, and, second, the more convenient forced loans of paper money۔

=== Fowler Committee (1898) ===
The Indian Currency Committee or Fowler Committee was a government committee appointed by the British-run Government of India on 29 April 1898 to examine the currency situation in India. They collected a wide range of testimony, examined as many as forty-nine witnesses, and only reported their conclusions in July 1899, after more than a year&#x27;s deliberation.
The prophecy made before the Committee of 1898 by Mr. A. M. Lindsay, in proposing a scheme closely similar in principle to that which was eventually adopted, has been largely fulfilled. &quot;This change,&quot; he said, &quot;will pass unnoticed, except by the intelligent few, and it is satisfactory to find that by this almost imperceptible process, the Indian currency will be placed on a footing which Ricardo and other great authorities have advocated as the best of all currency systems, viz., one in which the currency media used in the internal circulation are confined to notes and cheap token coins, which are made to act precisely as if they were bits of gold by being made convertible into gold for foreign payment purposes. The committee concurred in the opinion of the Indian government that the mints should remain closed to the unrestricted coinage of silver and that a gold standard should be adopted without delay...they recommended (1) that the British sovereign be given full legal tender power in India, and (2) that the Indian mints be thrown open to its unrestricted coinage (for gold coins only).
These recommendations were acceptable to both governments and were shortly afterwards translated into laws. The act making gold a legal tender was promulgated on 15 September 1899, and preparations were soon thereafter undertaken for the coinage of gold sovereigns in the mint at Bombay.

Silver, therefore, has ceased to serve as, and standard; and the Indian currency system of to-day (that is 1901) may be described as that of a &quot;limping&quot; gold standard similar to the systems of France, Germany, and Holland, and the United States.

The Committee of 1898 explicitly declared themselves to be in favour of the eventual establishment of a gold currency.This goal, if it was their goal, the Government of India have never attained.

=== 1900s ===
In 1913, John Maynard Keynes writes in his book &quot;Indian Currency and Finance&quot; that during the financial year 19001901, gold coins (sovereigns) worth £6,750,000 were given to the Indian people in the hope that they would circulate as currency. But against the expectation of the Government, not even half of that was returned to accounts. As this experiment failed spectacularly, the government abandoned the practice but did not abandon the narrative of the gold standard. Subsequently, much of the gold held by the Government of India was shipped to the Bank of England in 1901 and held there.
During World War II, Colonial British control over parts of Nagaland was lost to Japanese forces, the British Indian rupee was banned and the Japanese rupee (1942–44) was introduced.

=== Problems caused by the gold standard ===

At the onset of the First World War, the cost of gold was very low and therefore the pound sterling had high value. But during the war, the value of the pound fell alarmingly due to rising war expenses. At the end of the war, the value of the pound was only a fraction of what it had been before the war. It remained low until 1925, when the then Chancellor of the Exchequer (finance minister) of the United Kingdom, Winston Churchill, restored it to pre-war levels. As a result, the price of gold fell rapidly. While the rest of Europe purchased large quantities of gold from the United Kingdom, there was little increase in her gold reserves. This dealt a blow to an already deteriorating British economy. The United Kingdom began to look to its possessions as India to compensate for the gold that was sold.

However, the price of gold in India, on the basis of the official exchange rate of the rupee around 1s. 6d., was lower than the price prevailing abroad practically throughout; the disparity in prices made the export of the metal profitable; and this continued for almost a decade. Thus, in 1931–32, there were net exports of 7.7 million ounces, valued at INR 57.98 crore. In the following year, both the quantity and the price rose further: net exports totalled 8.4 million ounces, valued at INR 65.52 crore. In the ten years ended March 1941, total net exports were of the order of 43 million ounces (1337.3 tons) valued at about INR 375 crore, or an average price of INR 32-12-4 per tola.

In the autumn of 1917 (when the silver price rose to 55 pence), there was danger of uprisings in India (against paper currency) which would handicap seriously British participation in the war. Inconvertibility (of paper currency into coin) would lead to a run on Post Office Savings Banks. It would prevent the further expansion of (paper currency) note issues and cause a rise of prices, in paper currency, that would greatly increase the cost of obtaining war supplies for export; to have reduced the silver content of this historic [rupee] coin might well have caused such popular distrust of the Government as to have precipitated an internal crisis, which would have been fatal to British success in the war.

From 1931 to 1941, the United Kingdom purchased large amounts of gold from India and its many other colonies just by increasing price of gold, as Britain was able to pay in printable paper currency. Similarly, on 19 June 1934, Roosevelt made Silver Purchase Act (which increased the price of silver) and purchased about 44,000 tons of silver, paying with paper silver certificates.

In 1939, Dickson H. Leavens wrote in his book &quot;Silver Money&quot;: &quot;In recent years the increased price of gold, measured in depreciated paper currencies, has attracted to the market (of London) large quantities (of gold) formerly hoarded or held in the form of ornaments in India and China&quot;.

In their respective former colonies, the Indian rupee replaced the Danish Indian rupee in 1845, the French Indian rupee in 1954 and the Portuguese Indian escudo in 1961. Following the independence of India in 1947 and the accession of the princely states to the new Union, the Indian rupee replaced all the currencies of the previously autonomous states (although the Hyderabadi rupee was not demonetised until 1959). Some of the states had issued rupees equal to those issued by the British (such as the Travancore rupee). Other currencies (including the Hyderabadi rupee and the Kutch kori) had different values.

The values of the subdivisions of the rupee during British rule (and in the first decade of independence) were:

* In 1957, the rupee was decimalised and divided into 100 &quot;naye paise&quot; (Hindi for &quot;new paise&quot;); in 1964, the initial &quot;naye&quot; was dropped.
* Many still refer to 25-, 50- and 75-paise coins as 4, 8, and 12 annas, respectively; compare the expression &quot;two bits&quot; in colloquial American English for a quarter-dollar coin.

===New currency sign for the Indian rupee===
In 2010, a new rupee sign () was officially adopted. As its designer explained, it was derived from the combination of the Devanagari consonant &quot;र&quot; (&quot;ra&quot;) and the Latin capital letter &quot;R&quot; without its vertical bar. The parallel lines at the top (with white space between them) are said to make an allusion to the flag of India, and also depict an equality sign that symbolises the nation&#x27;s desire to reduce economic disparity. The first series of coins with the new rupee sign started in circulation on 8 July 2011. Before this, India used &quot;₨&quot; and &quot;Re&quot; as the symbols for multiple rupees and one rupee, respectively, and these symbols are still used in situations where the official symbol is unavailable.

=== Digitization of Indian rupee ===

==Legal framework==
British East India Company (EIC) was given the right in 1717 to mint coins in the name of the Mughal emperor Farrukhsiyar on the island of Bombay. By 1792 the EIC demonetised all other coins till they were reduced to only 3 types of coins, i.e. EIC, Mughal &amp; Maratha coins. After EIC expanded its control over India, it brought the &quot;Coinage Act of 1835&quot; and started to mint coins in the name of the British king. EIC rule was replaced by British Crown raj which brought the &quot;Paper Currency Act of 1861&quot; and the &quot;Uniform Coinage Act of 1906&quot;.

After 2021, the government of independent India amended &quot;The Coinage Act, 2011&quot;, the &quot;Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999,&quot; the &quot;Information Technology Act, 2000&quot; and the &quot;Crypto-currency and Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill, 2021&quot;.

== Coins ==
=== Post-independence issues ===
==== Independent pre-decimal issues, 1950–1957 ====
India&#x27;s first coins after independence were issued in 1950 in denominations of 1 pice, , one and two annas, , and one-rupee. The sizes and composition were the same as the final regal issues, except for the one-piece (which was bronze, but not holed).

==== Independent decimal issues, 1957–present ====

The first decimal-coin issues in India consisted of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25 and 50 naye paise, and 1 rupee. The 1 naya paisa was bronze; the 2, 5, and 10 naye paise were cupro-nickel, and the 25 naye paise (nicknamed &quot;chawanni&quot;; 25 naye paise equals 4 annas), 50 naye paise (also called &quot;athanni&quot;; 50 naye paise equalled 8 old annas) and 1-rupee were nickel. In 1964, the words &quot;naya&quot;/&quot;naye&quot; were removed from all coins. Between 1957 and 1967, aluminium one-, two-, three-, five- and ten-paise coins were introduced. In 1968 nickel-brass 20-paise coins were introduced, and replaced by aluminium coins in 1982. Between 1972 and 1975, cupro-nickel replaced nickel in the 25- and 50-paise and the 1-rupee coins; in 1982, cupro-nickel two-rupee coins were introduced. In 1988 stainless steel 10-, 25- and 50-paise coins were introduced, followed by 1- and 5-rupee coins in 1992. Five-rupee coins, made from brass, are being minted by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI).

In 1997 the 20 paise coin was discontinued, followed by the 10 paise coin in 1998, and the 25 paise in 2002.

Between 2005 and 2008 new, lighter fifty-paise, one-, two-, and five-rupee coins were introduced, made from ferritic stainless steel. The move was prompted by the melting-down of older coins, whose face value was less than their scrap value. The demonetisation of the 25-paise coin and all paise coins below it took place, and a new series of coins (50 paise – nicknamed &quot;athanni&quot; – one, two, five, and ten rupees with the new rupee sign) were put into circulation in 2011. In 2016 the 50 paise coin was last minted. Coins commonly in circulation are one, two, five, ten, and twenty rupees. Although it is still legal tender, the 50-paise (&quot;athanni&quot;) coin is rarely seen in circulation.

The coins are minted at the four locations of the India Government Mint. The 1, 2, and 5 coins have been minted since independence. The Government of India is set to introduce a new 20 coin with a dodecagonal shape, and like the 10 coin, also bi-metallic, along with new designs for the new versions of the 1, 2, 5 and 10 coins, which was announced on 6 March 2019.

==== Minting ====

The Government of India has the only right to mint the coins and one rupee note. The responsibility for coinage comes under the Coinage Act, 1906 which is amended from time to time. The designing and minting of coins in various denominations is also the responsibility of the Government of India. Coins are minted at the four India Government Mints at Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Noida. The coins are issued for circulation only through the Reserve Bank in terms of the RBI Act.

==== Commemorative coins ====

After independence, the Government of India Mint, minted numismatics coins imprinted with Indian statesmen, historical and religious figures. In the years 2010 and 2011, for the first time ever, 75, 150 and 1000 coins were minted in India to commemorate the Platinum Jubilee of the Reserve Bank of India, the 150th birth anniversary of the birth of Rabindranath Tagore and 1000 years of the Brihadeeswarar Temple, respectively. In 2012, a 60 piececoins was also issued to commemorate 60 years of the Government of India Mint, Kolkata. 100 coin was also released commemorating the 100th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi&#x27;s return to India. Commemorative coins of 125 were released on 4 September 2015 and 6 December 2015 to honour the 125th anniversary of the births of Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and B. R. Ambedkar, respectively.

=== Pre-independence issues ===




==== East India Company, 1835 ====
The three Presidencies established by the British East India Company (Bengal, Bombay and Madras) each issued their own coinages until 1835. All three issued rupees and fractions thereof down to - and -rupee in silver. Madras also issued two-rupee coins.

Copper denominations were more varied. Bengal issued one-pie, -, one- and two-paise coins. Bombay issued 1-pie, -, -, 1-, 1-, 2- and 4-paise coins. In Madras, there were copper coins for two and four pies and one, two and four paise, with the first two denominated as and one dub (or and ) rupee. Madras also issued the Madras fanam until 1815.

All three Presidencies issued gold mohurs and fractions of mohurs including , , in Bengal, (a gold rupee) and (pancia) in Bombay and , and in Madras.

In 1835, a single coinage for the EIC was introduced. It consisted of copper , and anna, silver , and 1 rupee and gold 1 and 2 mohurs. In 1841, silver 2 annas were added, followed by copper pice in 1853. The coinage of the EIC continued to be issued until 1862, even after the company had been taken over by the Crown.

==== Regal issues, 1862–1947 ====
In 1862, coins were introduced (known as &quot;regal issues&quot;) which bore the profile of Queen Victoria and the designation &quot;India&quot;. Their denominations were anna, pice, and anna (all in copper), 2 annas, , and one rupee (silver), and five and ten rupees and one mohur (gold). The gold denominations ceased production in 1891, and no -anna coins were issued after 1877.

In 1906, bronze replaced copper for the lowest three denominations; in 1907, a cupro-nickel one-anna coin was introduced. In 1918–1919 cupro-nickel two-, four- and eight-annas were introduced, although the four- and eight-annas coins were only issued until 1921 and did not replace their silver equivalents. In 1918, the Bombay mint also struck gold sovereigns and 15-rupee coins identical in size to the sovereigns as an emergency measure during the First World War.

In the early 1940s, several changes were implemented. The anna and pice ceased production, the anna was changed to a bronze, holed coin, cupro-nickel and nickel-brass -anna coins were introduced, nickel-brass was used to produce one- and two-annas coins, and the silver composition was reduced from 91.7 to 50 per cent. The last of the regal issues were cupro-nickel -, - and one-rupee pieces minted in 1946 and 1947, bearing the image of George VI, King and Emperor on the obverse and an Indian lion on the reverse.

== Banknotes ==
=== Post-independence issues ===

After independence, new designs were introduced to replace the portrait of George VI. The government continued issuing the ₹1 note, while the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued other denominations (including the 5,000 and 10,000 notes introduced in 1949). All pre-independence banknotes were officially demonetised with effect from 28 April 1957.

During the 1970s, 20 and 50 notes were introduced; denominations higher than 100 were demonetised in 1978. In 1987, the 500 note was introduced, followed by the 1,000 note in 2000 while 1 and 2 notes were discontinued in 1995.
The design of banknotes is approved by the central government, on the recommendation of the central board of the Reserve Bank of India. Currency notes are printed at the Currency Note Press in Nashik, the Bank Note Press in Dewas, the Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran (P) Ltd at Salboni and Mysore and at the Watermark Paper Manufacturing Mill in Narmadapuram. The Mahatma Gandhi Series of banknotes are issued by the Reserve Bank of India as legal tender. The series is so named because the obverse of each note features a portrait of Mahatma Gandhi. Since its introduction in 1996, this series has replaced all issued banknotes of the Lion Capital Series. The RBI introduced the series in 1996 with 10 and 500 banknotes. The printing of 5 notes (which had stopped earlier) resumed in 2009.

As of January 2012, the new &quot; sign has been incorporated into banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series in denominations of 10, 20, 50, 100, 500 and 1,000. In January 2014 RBI announced that it would be withdrawing from circulation all currency notes printed prior to 2005 by 31 March 2014. The deadline was later extended to 1 January 2015. The deadline was further extended to 30 June 2016.

On 8 November 2016, the RBI announced the issuance of new 500 banknotes in a new series after demonetisation of the older 500 and 1000 notes. The new 500 banknote has a stone-grey base colour with an image of the Red Fort along with the Indian flag printed on the back. Both the banknotes also have the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan logo printed on the back. The banknote denominations of 200, 100 and 50 have also been introduced in the new Mahatma Gandhi New Series intended to replace all banknotes of the previous Mahatma Gandhi Series. On 13 June 2017, RBI introduced new 50 notes, but the old ones continue being legal tender. The design is similar to the current notes in the Mahatma Gandhi (New) Series, except they will come with an inset &#x27;A&#x27;.

On 8 November 2016, the Government of India announced the demonetisation of 500 and 1,000 banknotes with effect from midnight of the same day, making these notes invalid. A newly redesigned series of 500 banknote, in addition to a new denomination of 2,000 banknote is in circulation since 10 November 2016.

From 2017 to 2019, the remaining banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series were released in denominations of 10, 20, 50, 100 and 200. The 1,000 note has been suspended.

==== Current circulating banknotes ====

As of 20 May 2023, current circulating banknotes are in denominations of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 from the Mahatma Gandhi Series and in denominations of ₹10, ₹20, ₹50, 100, 200, 500 from the Mahatma Gandhi New Series.

===== Micro printing =====

The new Indian banknote series features a few micro-printed texts in various locations. The first one lies on the inner surface of the left temple of Gandhi&#x27;s spectacles that reads &quot;भारत&quot; (Bhārata), the Hindi word for India. The next one (which is printed only in 10 and 50 denominations) is placed on the outer surface of the right temple of Gandhi&#x27;s spectacles near his ear and reads &quot;RBI&quot; (Reserve Bank of India) and the face value in numerals &quot;10&quot; or &quot;50&quot;. The last one is written on both sides of Gandhi&#x27;s collar and reads &quot;भारत&quot; and &quot;INDIA&quot; respectively. Currency notes have 17 languages on the panel which appears on the reverse of the notes.

=== Pre-independence issues ===


In 1861, the Government of India introduced its first paper money: 10 note in 1864, 5 note in 1872, 10,000 note in 1899, 100 note in 1900, 50 note in 1905, 500 note in 1907 and 1,000 note in 1909. In 1917, 1 and 2 notes were introduced. The Reserve Bank of India began banknote production in 1938, issuing 2, 5, 10, 50, 100, 1,000 and 10,000 notes while the government continued issuing 1 note but demonetized the 500 and 2 notes.

== Convertibility ==

Officially, the Indian rupee has a market-determined exchange rate. However, the Reserve Bank of India trades actively in the USD/INR currency market to impact effective exchange rates. Thus, the currency regime in place for the Indian rupee with respect to the US dollar is a &quot;de facto&quot; controlled exchange rate. This is sometimes called a &quot;managed float&quot;. On 9 May 2022, the Indian Rupee traded at ₹77.41 against the US dollar, hitting an all-time low. Other rates (such as the EUR/INR and INR/JPY) have the volatility typical of floating exchange rates, and often create persistent arbitrage opportunities against the RBI. Unlike China, successive administrations (through RBI, the central bank) have not followed a policy of pegging the INR to a specific foreign currency at a particular exchange rate. RBI intervention in currency markets is solely to ensure low volatility in exchange rates, and not to influence the rate (or direction) of the Indian rupee in relation to other currencies.

Also affecting convertibility is a series of customs regulations restricting the import and export of rupees. Legally, only up to 25000 can be imported or exported in cash at a time, and the possession of 200 and higher notes in Nepal is prohibited. The conversion of currencies for and from rupees is also regulated.

RBI also exercises a system of capital controls in addition to (through active trading) in currency markets. On the current account, there are no currency-conversion restrictions hindering buying or selling foreign exchange (although trade barriers exist). On the capital account, foreign institutional investors have concerning convertibility to bring money into and out of the country and buy securities (subject to quantitative restrictions). Local firms can take capital out of the country to expand globally. However, local households are restricted in their ability to diversify globally. Because of the expansion of the current and capital accounts, India is increasingly moving towards full &quot;de facto&quot; convertibility.

There is some confusion regarding the interchange of the currency with gold, but the system that India follows is that money cannot be exchanged for gold under any circumstances due to gold&#x27;s lack of liquidity; therefore, money cannot be changed into gold by the RBI. India follows the same principle as Great Britain and the US.

Reserve Bank of India clarifies its position regarding the promissory clause printed on each banknote:

&quot;&quot;As per Section 26 of Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Bank is liable to pay the value of banknote. This is payable on demand by RBI, being the issuer. The Bank&#x27;s obligation to pay the value of banknote does not arise out of a contract but out of statutory provisions. The promissory clause printed on the banknotes i.e., &quot;I promise to pay the bearer an amount of X&quot; is a statement that means that the banknote is a legal tender for X amount. The obligation on the part of the Bank is to exchange a banknote for coins of an equivalent amount.&quot;&quot;

=== Chronology ===
* 1991 – India began to lift restrictions on its currency. Several reforms removed restrictions on current account transactions (including trade, interest payments and remittances and some capital asset-based transactions). Liberalised Exchange Rate Management System (LERMS) (a dual-exchange-rate system) introduced partial convertibility of the rupee in March 1992.
* 1997 – A panel (set up to explore capital account convertibility) recommended that India move towards full convertibility by 2000, but the timetable was abandoned in the wake of the 1997–1998 East Asian financial crisis.
* 2006 – Prime Minister Manmohan Singh asked the Finance Minister and the Reserve Bank of India to prepare a road map for moving towards capital account convertibility.
* 2016 – The Government of India announced the demonetisation of all ₹500/- and ₹1,000/- banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series. The government claimed that the action would curtail the shadow economy and crack down on the use of illicit &quot;black money&quot; and counterfeit cash to fund illegal activity and terrorism.
* 2023 – Reserve Bank of India issued a circular on 19 May stating currency notes of ₹ 2000 denomination will be withdrawn from circulation The reason given for this withdrawal is the decline in the number of currency notes in circulation. According to the circular, there were only 10.8% of Notes in Circulation on March 31, 2023.

== Exchange rates ==
=== Historic exchange rates ===
==== Pre-Independence ====

For almost a century following the Great Recoinage of 1816, and adoption of the Gold Standard, until the outbreak of World War I, the silver-backed Indian rupee lost its value against a basket of gold-pegged currencies and was periodically devalued to reflect the then current gold to silver reserve ratios. In 1850, the official conversion rate between the pound sterling and the rupee was £0 / 2s / 0d (or £1:₹10), while between 1899 and 1914, the official conversion rate was set at £1 to 1s to 4d (or £1:₹15). However, this was just half of market exchange rates between 1893 and 1917.

The gold-to-silver ratio expanded between 1870 and 1910. Unlike India, Britain was on the gold standard. To meet the Home Charges (i.e., expenditure in the United Kingdom), the colonial government had to remit a larger number of rupees, and this necessitated increased taxation, unrest and nationalism.

Between both world wars, the rate improved from 1s to 6d (or £1:₹13.33), and remained pegged at this rate for the duration of the Breton Woods agreement, to its devaluation and pegging to the US dollar, at $1:7.50, in 1966.

==== Post-Independence ====
Following the country&#x27;s independence, India implemented a Par value exchange rate regime until 1971. The country switched to a fixed exchange rate regime in 1971 and graduated to a basket peg against five major currencies in 1975. Since 1991, the rupee has been under a floating exchange rate regime.

The first major impact on the rupee&#x27;s exchange rate after independence was the devaluation of the pound sterling against the US dollar in 1949, which impacted currencies that maintained a peg to the sterling, which included the Indian rupee. In 1966, the Indian rupee was devaluated by 57% against United States dollar, which also led to the depreciation of the sterling. Five years later, when the Bretton Woods system was suspended, India initially announced that it will maintain a fixed rate of $1 to INR 7.50 and leave the sterling under a floating regime. However, by the end of 1971, following the Smithsonian Agreement and the subsequent devaluation of the US dollar, India pegged the rupee with the pound sterling once again at a rate of £1 to INR 18.9677. During this period, India had a non-commercial exchange rate with the Soviet Union. The ruble to rupee exchange rates was announced by the Soviet Union, as the ruble was not a freely traded currency and the commercial trade between both nations used to take place in rupees following a treaty between India and the Soviet Union in 1953.

In September 1975, the exchange rate of the Indian rupee started to be determined based on the basket peg. The details of currencies which form the basket, and their weightage were kept confidentially by Reserve Bank of India and the exchange rate of the rupee based on market fluctuation of these currencies was periodically announced by the RBI.

The next major change that occurred was the devaluation of the rupee by about 18% in July 1991 following the balance of payments crisis. Thereafter, in March 1992, the Liberalized Exchange Rate Management System was introduced, enabling the transition to a floating exchange rate regime.

=== Current exchange rates ===
== Worldwide rupee usage ==

As the Straits Settlements were originally an outpost of the British East India Company, the Indian rupee was made the sole official currency of the Straits Settlements in 1837, as it was administered as part of British India. This attempt was resisted by the locals. However, Spanish dollars continued to circulate and 1845 saw the introduction of coinage for the Straits Settlements using a system of 100 cents = 1 dollar, with the dollar equal to the Spanish dollar or Mexican peso. In 1867, the administration of the Straits Settlements was separated from India and the Straits dollar was made the standard currency, and attempts to reintroduce the rupee were finally abandoned.

After the Partition of India, the Pakistani rupee came into existence, initially using Indian coins and Indian currency notes simply over-stamped with &quot;Pakistan&quot;. Previously the Indian rupee was an official currency of other countries, including Aden, Oman, Dubai, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the Trucial States, Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda, the Seychelles and Mauritius.

The Indian government introduced the Gulf rupee as a replacement for the Indian rupee for circulation outside the country with the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act of 1 May 1959. The creation of a separate currency was an attempt to reduce the strain on India&#x27;s foreign reserves from gold smuggling. After India devalued the rupee on 6 June 1966, those countries still using it – Oman, Qatar, and the Trucial States (which became the United Arab Emirates in 1971) – replaced the Gulf rupee with their own currencies. Kuwait and Bahrain had already done so in 1961 with Kuwaiti dinar and in 1965 with Bahraini dinar, respectively.

The Bhutanese ngultrum is pegged at par with the Indian rupee; both currencies are accepted in Bhutan. The Nepalese rupee is pegged at 0.625; the Indian rupee is accepted in Bhutan and Nepal, except 500 and 1000 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi Series and the 200, 500 banknotes of the Mahatma Gandhi New Series, which are not legal tender in Bhutan and Nepal and are banned by their respective governments, though accepted by many retailers. On 29 January 2014, Zimbabwe added the Indian rupee as a legal tender to be used.

== See also ==

* Coinage of India
* Rupee
** History of the rupee
* Paisa
** Indian paisa
* History of the taka
* Coins of British India
* Great Depression in India
* Coins of the Indian rupee
** Indian anna
** Indian pie
* Zero-rupee note
* Fake Indian currency note
* &quot;The Standard Reference Guide to Indian Paper Money&quot;
* Reserve Bank of India
** Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
** RBI Monetary Museum
* Digital rupee
* British currency in the Middle East
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 


== External links ==
* A gallery of all Indian currency issues
* Denomination Calculator
* The banknotes of India 
* Banknotes catalog of India </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="4" end="16" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian Rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="18" end="24" title="Currency symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="26" end="49" title="Indian rupee" label="[[Indian rupee sign|₹]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="51" end="55" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="57" end="60" title="Indian rupee" label="INR"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="78" end="86" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="87" end="111" title="India" label="of the Republic of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004905" start="152" end="157" title="Indian paisa" label="paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="165" end="170" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="259" end="280" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895846" start="349" end="380" title="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934" label="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="399" end="405" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="568" end="590" title="Coinage of India#Early" label="some scholars conclude"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="795" end="807" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9045" start="826" end="834" title="Chanakya" label="Chanakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="864" end="878" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="879" end="898" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q693944" start="1125" end="1131" title="Grain (mass)" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q83680" start="1167" end="1181" title="Sher Shah Suri" label="Sher Shah Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="1244" end="1257" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="1389" end="1394" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="1410" end="1423" title="ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="1501" end="1505" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279611" start="1535" end="1546" title="Chinese wen" label="Chinese wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="1551" end="1556" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921668" start="1558" end="1564" title="stater" label="stater"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="1574" end="1586" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9045" start="1605" end="1613" title="Chanakya" label="Chanakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="1647" end="1662" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="1663" end="1682" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="1881" end="1893" title="Gupta Empire" label="Gupta Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q844536" start="1900" end="1915" title="Chandragupta II" label="Chandragupta II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086608" start="1998" end="2013" title="Western Satraps" label="Western Satraps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295967" start="2079" end="2085" title="Ratti (unit)" label="rattis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146069" start="2245" end="2261" title="Great Tang Records on the Western Regions" label="Da Tang Xi Yu Ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="2315" end="2321" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83680" start="2322" end="2336" title="Sher Shah Suri" label="Sher Shah Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q693944" start="2375" end="2381" title="Grain (mass)" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q797848" start="2453" end="2458" title="Babur" label="Babur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="2568" end="2581" title="Mughal period" label="Mughal period"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="2587" end="2598" title="Maratha Empire" label="Maratha era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="2613" end="2626" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="2660" end="2672" title="banknote" label="paper rupees"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169989" start="2685" end="2702" title="Bank of Hindostan" label="Bank of Hindustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333994" start="2780" end="2795" title="Warren Hastings" label="Warren Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="2863" end="2868" title="rupee" label="rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q557728" start="2875" end="2886" title="Bullion coin" label="silver coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="2997" end="3010" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="3150" end="3163" title="panic of 1873" label="panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310809" start="3199" end="3204" title="Relative value (economics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584286" start="3208" end="3223" title="Silver as an investment" label="silver relative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417847" start="3354" end="3369" title="Long Depression" label="Long Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="3531" end="3547" title="Order in Council" label="order-in-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="3594" end="3602" title="Pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="3661" end="3671" title="Company rule in India" label="controlled"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="3687" end="3705" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633931" start="3711" end="3728" title="Silver Rupee" label="silver rupee coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="3776" end="3787" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="3833" end="3846" title="Fine silver" label="mono-metallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7516600" start="3847" end="3862" title="Silver standards" label="silver standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q312569" start="3940" end="3954" title="Lord Liverpool" label="Lord Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="4019" end="4044" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="First War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="4089" end="4096" title="British Raj" label="control"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="4176" end="4186" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="4190" end="4196" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q584496" start="4237" end="4251" title="gold sovereign" label="gold sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="4301" end="4307" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="4312" end="4320" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="4526" end="4534" title="Sterling silver" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q476883" start="4593" end="4606" title="trade coin" label="silver dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="4614" end="4633" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="4715" end="4736" title="silver crisis of 1873" label="silver crisis of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4773" end="4795" title="Gold standard#Gold exchange standard" label="gold exchange standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="5006" end="5015" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020220" start="6205" end="6230" title="Indian Currency Committee" label="Indian Currency Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="6295" end="6326" title="British Raj" label="British-run Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="8453" end="8472" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="9009" end="9024" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9056" end="9068" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q707238" start="9122" end="9145" title="Battle of Imphal" label="lost to Japanese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141608" start="9151" end="9171" title="Coins of British India" label="British Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158177" start="9191" end="9205" title="Japanese government–issued rupee in Burma" label="Japanese rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9299" end="9314" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="9626" end="9653" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9696" end="9713" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q736526" start="10192" end="10194" title="Shilling (British coin)" label="s."/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="10196" end="10197" title="Penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="10428" end="10434" title="troy ounce" label="ounces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137675" start="10456" end="10461" title="crore" label="crore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304664" start="10776" end="10780" title="tola (unit)" label="tola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593203" start="10839" end="10844" title="Penny (British pre-decimal coin)" label="pence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375388" start="11046" end="11071" title="Postal savings system" label="Post Office Savings Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="11725" end="11734" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835949" start="11740" end="11759" title="American Silver Purchase Act" label="Silver Purchase Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q15914574" start="11859" end="11877" title="silver certificate" label="silver certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942822" start="12257" end="12276" title="Danish Indian rupee" label="Danish Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299665" start="12290" end="12309" title="French Indian rupee" label="French Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348127" start="12326" end="12350" title="Portuguese Indian escudo" label="Portuguese Indian escudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="12374" end="12395" title="independence of India" label="independence of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056679" start="12412" end="12421" title="Instrument of Accession" label="accession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336152" start="12429" end="12443" title="princely state" label="princely state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="12456" end="12461" title="Dominion of India" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139143" start="12558" end="12574" title="Hyderabadi rupee" label="Hyderabadi rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4506895" start="12695" end="12711" title="Travancore rupee" label="Travancore rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784415" start="12771" end="12781" title="Kutch kori" label="Kutch kori"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="12857" end="12869" title="British Raj" label="British rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="12944" end="12955" title="decimalised" label="decimalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004905" start="12983" end="12993" title="Naya paise" label="naye paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174116" start="13108" end="13111" title="Indian 25-paisa coin" label="25-"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180378" start="13113" end="13116" title="Indian 50-paisa coin" label="50-"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="13152" end="13157" title="Indian anna" label="annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301841" start="13206" end="13210" title="Bit (money)" label="bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="13231" end="13247" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270398" start="13332" end="13346" title="Indian rupee sign" label="new rupee sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q619459" start="13377" end="13389" title="D. Udaya Kumar" label="its designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="13444" end="13454" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q96400925" start="13471" end="13472" title="र" label="र"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="13504" end="13509" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41673" start="13663" end="13676" title="flag of India" label="flag of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="13762" end="13780" title="Economic inequality" label="economic disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632420" start="13901" end="13902" title="Rupee sign" label="₨"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="14234" end="14248" title="Mughal emperor" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q559490" start="14249" end="14261" title="Farrukhsiyar" label="Farrukhsiyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="14403" end="14410" title="Maratha empire" label="Maratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="14567" end="14575" title="Company rule" label="EIC rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="14592" end="14609" title="British Raj" label="British Crown raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077139" start="14818" end="14849" title="Foreign Exchange Management Act" label="Foreign Exchange Management Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522823" start="14880" end="14912" title="Information Technology Act, 2000" label="Information Technology Act, 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="15195" end="15199" title="Indian pice" label="pice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074541" start="15228" end="15237" title="Indian 1-rupee coin" label="one-rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="15429" end="15441" title="Decimal coinage" label="decimal-coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179468" start="15471" end="15472" title="1 naya paisa (Indian coin)" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074287" start="15474" end="15475" title="2 naye paise (Indian coin)" label="2"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074463" start="15477" end="15478" title="5 naye paise (Indian coin)" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004905" start="15494" end="15504" title="Naya paise" label="naye paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074541" start="15510" end="15517" title="Indian 1-rupee coin" label="1 rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174116" start="15634" end="15642" title="chawanni" label="chawanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="15673" end="15678" title="Indian anna" label="annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180378" start="15714" end="15721" title="athanni" label="athanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179451" start="15905" end="15908" title="Indian 1-paisa coin" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q79333012" start="15911" end="15914" title="Indian 2-paisa coin" label="two"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074298" start="15917" end="15922" title="Indian 3-paisa coin" label="three"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074660" start="15925" end="15929" title="Indian 5-paisa coin" label="five"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733120" start="15935" end="15944" title="Indian 10-paisa coin" label="ten-paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733122" start="15989" end="15997" title="Indian 20-paisa coin" label="20-paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174116" start="16121" end="16124" title="Indian 25-paisa coin" label="25-"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180378" start="16129" end="16137" title="Indian 50-paisa coin" label="50-paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174118" start="16183" end="16192" title="Indian 2-rupee coin" label="two-rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="16224" end="16239" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28174085" start="16304" end="16311" title="Indian 5-rupee coin" label="5-rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="16355" end="16360" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="16386" end="16407" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019300" start="17284" end="17305" title="India Government Mint" label="India Government Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="17624" end="17643" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019300" start="17946" end="17967" title="India Government Mint" label="India Government Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019304" start="17972" end="17978" title="India Government Mint, Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019316" start="17980" end="17987" title="India Government Mint, Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q28180328" start="17989" end="17998" title="India Government Mint, Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28173588" start="18004" end="18009" title="India Government Mint, Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="18065" end="18077" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895846" start="18094" end="18101" title="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934" label="RBI Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019300" start="18159" end="18183" title="India Government Mint" label="Government of India Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="18192" end="18203" title="numismatics" label="numismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="18417" end="18438" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="18484" end="18503" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q916943" start="18526" end="18547" title="Brihadeeswarar Temple" label="Brihadeeswarar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888715" start="18670" end="18678" title="Indian 100-rupee coin" label="100 coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="18736" end="18750" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q855973" start="18775" end="18793" title="Commemorative coin" label="Commemorative coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156349" start="18905" end="18929" title="Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan" label="Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q231690" start="18934" end="18948" title="B. R. Ambedkar" label="B. R. Ambedkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="19046" end="19058" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="Presidencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="19086" end="19104" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="19106" end="19112" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q891827" start="19114" end="19120" title="Bombay Presidency" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772596" start="19125" end="19131" title="Madras Presidency" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141608" start="19151" end="19163" title="Coins of British India" label="own coinages"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022692" start="19348" end="19351" title="Indian pie" label="pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="19369" end="19374" title="Paisa" label="paise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543447" start="19611" end="19623" title="Madras fanam" label="Madras fanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414902" start="19672" end="19677" title="mohur" label="mohur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="19822" end="19825" title="East India Company" label="EIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="19871" end="19875" title="Indian anna" label="anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="19978" end="19982" title="Indian pice" label="pice"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="20082" end="20105" title="Crown rule in India" label="taken over by the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="20235" end="20249" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="20314" end="20318" title="Indian anna" label="anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="20320" end="20324" title="Indian pice" label="pice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414902" start="20419" end="20424" title="mohur" label="mohur"/>
<link wikidata="Q649090" start="20606" end="20618" title="Cupronickel" label="cupro-nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q584496" start="20872" end="20886" title="gold sovereign" label="gold sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="21054" end="21058" title="Indian anna" label="anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="21063" end="21067" title="Indian pice" label="pice"/>
<link wikidata="Q55374692" start="21121" end="21131" title="holed coin" label="holed coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203874" start="21150" end="21162" title="Nickel brass" label="nickel-brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="21435" end="21444" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="21485" end="21496" title="Indian lion" label="Indian lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="21639" end="21648" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733128" start="21687" end="21694" title="Indian 1-rupee note" label="₹1 note"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="21706" end="21727" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022889" start="21930" end="21932" title="Indian 20-rupee note" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056011" start="21937" end="21945" title="Indian 50-rupee note" label="50 notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022673" start="21989" end="21992" title="Indian 100-rupee note" label="100"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179683" start="21998" end="22017" title="The High Denomination Bank Notes (Demonetisation) Act, 1978" label="demonetised in 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794717" start="22032" end="22040" title="Indian 500-rupee note" label="500 note"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813871" start="22073" end="22083" title="Indian 1000-rupee note" label="1,000 note"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733128" start="22098" end="22099" title="Indian 1-rupee note" label="1"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614411" start="22104" end="22111" title="Indian 2-rupee note" label="2 notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="22182" end="22200" title="Government of India" label="central government"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="22252" end="22273" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="22332" end="22338" title="Nashik" label="Nashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266413" start="22363" end="22368" title="Dewas" label="Dewas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003106" start="22374" end="22408" title="Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran" label="Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403746" start="22420" end="22427" title="Salboni" label="Salboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="22432" end="22438" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="22506" end="22527" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="22677" end="22691" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616901" start="22778" end="22797" title="Lion Capital Series" label="Lion Capital Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022874" start="22842" end="22844" title="Indian 10-rupee note" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733129" start="22880" end="22887" title="Indian 5-rupee note" label="5 notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270398" start="22962" end="22973" title="Indian rupee sign" label="&amp;quot; sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="23018" end="23039" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="23424" end="23470" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="demonetisation of the older 500 and 1000 notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45957" start="23543" end="23551" title="Red Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q41673" start="23567" end="23578" title="Flag of India" label="Indian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175130" start="23633" end="23654" title="Swachh Bharat Abhiyan" label="Swachh Bharat Abhiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37880457" start="23711" end="23714" title="Indian 200-rupee note" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831796" start="23764" end="23789" title="Mahatma Gandhi New Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi New Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="23840" end="23861" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="24110" end="24129" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="24140" end="24185" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="the demonetisation of 500 and 1,000 banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831796" start="24265" end="24282" title="Mahatma Gandhi New Series" label="redesigned series"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794717" start="24286" end="24298" title="Indian 500-rupee note" label="500 banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q27795158" start="24337" end="24351" title="Indian 2000-rupee note" label="2,000 banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831796" start="24445" end="24470" title="Mahatma Gandhi New Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi New Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022874" start="24505" end="24507" title="Indian 10-rupee note" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022889" start="24509" end="24511" title="Indian 20-rupee note" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056011" start="24513" end="24515" title="Indian 50-rupee note" label="50"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022673" start="24517" end="24520" title="Indian 100-rupee note" label="100"/>
<link wikidata="Q37880457" start="24525" end="24528" title="Indian 200-rupee note" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813871" start="24534" end="24544" title="Indian 1000-rupee note" label="1,000 note"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733129" start="24680" end="24681" title="Indian 5-rupee note" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022874" start="24683" end="24685" title="Indian 10-rupee note" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022889" start="24687" end="24689" title="Indian 20-rupee note" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056011" start="24691" end="24693" title="Indian 50-rupee note" label="50"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022673" start="24698" end="24701" title="Indian 100-rupee note" label="100"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="24711" end="24732" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q37880457" start="24777" end="24780" title="Indian 200-rupee note" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794717" start="24782" end="24785" title="Indian 500-rupee note" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831796" start="24795" end="24820" title="Mahatma Gandhi New Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi New Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25055" end="25062" title="Names for India#Bharat" label="Bhārata"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="25274" end="25295" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="25624" end="25643" title="British Raj" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="25852" end="25873" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="26146" end="26167" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q195816" start="26225" end="26249" title="Trade weighted index" label="effective exchange rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="26327" end="26336" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="26348" end="26356" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415489" start="26422" end="26435" title="managed float" label="managed float"/>
<link wikidata="Q594063" start="26617" end="26639" title="floating exchange rate" label="floating exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q273088" start="26670" end="26679" title="arbitrage" label="arbitrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26718" end="26723" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="26736" end="26751" title="Government of India" label="administrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="27127" end="27134" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="27311" end="27316" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946428" start="27432" end="27447" title="capital control" label="capital control"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895846" start="28611" end="28642" title="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934" label="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="29351" end="29362" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688685" start="29462" end="29480" title="Dual exchange rate" label="dual-exchange-rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="29745" end="29772" title="1997 Asian Financial Crisis" label="East Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="29783" end="29797" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q41914" start="29798" end="29812" title="Manmohan Singh" label="Manmohan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q377358" start="29823" end="29839" title="P. Chidambaram" label="Finance Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="29848" end="29869" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035689" start="29911" end="29941" title="capital account convertibility" label="capital account convertibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="29956" end="29975" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794967" start="29990" end="30004" title="2016 Indian banknote demonetisation" label="demonetisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="30049" end="30070" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="30275" end="30296" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578" start="30318" end="30324" title="May 19" label="19 May"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599849" start="30715" end="30738" title="Great Recoinage of 1816" label="Great Recoinage of 1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="30760" end="30773" title="Gold Standard" label="Gold Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584286" start="30957" end="30986" title="gold silver ratio" label="gold to silver reserve ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="31077" end="31078" title="shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="31173" end="31174" title="shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q234129" start="31179" end="31180" title="Penny" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584286" start="31275" end="31295" title="gold silver ratio" label="gold-to-silver ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="31624" end="31625" title="shilling" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q234129" start="31630" end="31631" title="Penny" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="31705" end="31727" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Breton Woods agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q975735" start="31891" end="31900" title="Par value" label="Par value"/>
<link wikidata="Q66143" start="31958" end="31986" title="Fixed exchange rate system" label="a fixed exchange rate regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="32438" end="32458" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="32539" end="32559" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040554" start="32745" end="32766" title="Smithsonian Agreement" label="Smithsonian Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="32816" end="32821" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="32926" end="32931" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32976" end="32988" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622116" start="33192" end="33233" title="India–Russia relations" label="treaty between India and the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="33448" end="33469" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153957" start="33702" end="33728" title="1991 Indian economic crisis" label="balance of payments crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q594063" start="33850" end="33872" title="floating exchange rate" label="floating exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="33949" end="33968" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="34011" end="34029" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="34154" end="34167" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039722" start="34219" end="34233" title="Spanish dollar" label="Spanish dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="34349" end="34354" title="Cent (currency)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="34414" end="34426" title="Mexican peso" label="Mexican peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q261447" start="34516" end="34530" title="Straits dollar" label="Straits dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="34636" end="34654" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q188289" start="34660" end="34675" title="Pakistani rupee" label="Pakistani rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49910" start="34882" end="34886" title="Colony of Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="34888" end="34892" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="34894" end="34899" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="34901" end="34907" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="34909" end="34916" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="34918" end="34923" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852345" start="34929" end="34943" title="Trucial States" label="Trucial States"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="34945" end="34950" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q158725" start="34952" end="34962" title="Tanganyika (territory)" label="Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="34964" end="34970" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="34976" end="34986" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="34991" end="35000" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q476195" start="35040" end="35050" title="Gulf rupee" label="Gulf rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="35447" end="35467" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q476195" start="35492" end="35502" title="Gulf rupee" label="Gulf rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="35518" end="35528" title="Currency" label="currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193098" start="35582" end="35595" title="Kuwaiti dinar" label="Kuwaiti dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201871" start="35613" end="35627" title="Bahraini dinar" label="Bahraini dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201799" start="35648" end="35666" title="Bhutanese ngultrum" label="Bhutanese ngultrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202895" start="35751" end="35765" title="Nepalese rupee" label="Nepalese rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794717" start="35843" end="35846" title="Indian 500-rupee note" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813871" start="35851" end="35865" title="Indian 1000-rupee note" label="1000 banknotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733525" start="35873" end="35894" title="Mahatma Gandhi Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q37880457" start="35903" end="35906" title="Indian 200-rupee note" label="200"/>
<link wikidata="Q27831796" start="35929" end="35954" title="Mahatma Gandhi New Series" label="Mahatma Gandhi New Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643989" start="36143" end="36155" title="legal tender" label="legal tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141571" start="36187" end="36203" title="Coinage of India" label="Coinage of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="36206" end="36211" title="Rupee" label="Rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633931" start="36215" end="36235" title="History of the rupee" label="History of the rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480044" start="36238" end="36243" title="Paisa" label="Paisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004905" start="36247" end="36259" title="Indian paisa" label="Indian paisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591844" start="36262" end="36281" title="History of the taka" label="History of the taka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141608" start="36284" end="36306" title="Coins of British India" label="Coins of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599050" start="36309" end="36334" title="Great Depression in India" label="Great Depression in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888715" start="36337" end="36362" title="Coins of the Indian rupee" label="Coins of the Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="36366" end="36377" title="Indian anna" label="Indian anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022692" start="36381" end="36391" title="Indian pie" label="Indian pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224617" start="36394" end="36409" title="Zero-rupee note" label="Zero-rupee note"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431468" start="36412" end="36437" title="Fake Indian currency note" label="Fake Indian currency note"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760535" start="36440" end="36502" title="The Revised Standard Reference Guide to Indian Paper Money" label="&amp;quot;The Standard Reference Guide to Indian Paper Money&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="36505" end="36526" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895846" start="36530" end="36561" title="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934" label="Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q61499023" start="36565" end="36584" title="RBI Monetary Museum" label="RBI Monetary Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q114975111" start="36587" end="36600" title="Digital rupee" label="Digital rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971319" start="36603" end="36638" title="British currency in the Middle East" label="British currency in the Middle East"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490788" wikidata="Q1506870" url="?curid=490788" title="George Anthony Dondero">
<text>George Anthony Dondero (December 16, 1883 – January 29, 1968) was a Republican member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Michigan.

== Background ==
Dondero was born on a farm in Greenfield Township, Michigan, which has since become part of Detroit. His father was an immigrant from Italy and his mother was an immigrant from Germany.

==Career==
Dondero served as the village clerk of Royal Oak, Michigan, in 1905 and 1906; as town treasurer in 1907 and 1908; and as village assessor in 1909. He graduated from the Detroit College of Law in 1910, was admitted to the bar, and started a practice in Royal Oak the same year. He was village attorney in 1911 to 1921 and assistant prosecuting attorney for Oakland County in 1918 and 1919. He was mayor of Royal Oak in 1921 and 1922 and a member of the board of education in 1910 to 1928.

In 1932, Dondero was elected as a Republican to the 73rd United States Congress and the eleven succeeding Congresses, serving from March 4, 1933, to January 3, 1957. He represented Michigan&#x27;s 17th congressional district, which had been newly created by redistricting after the 1930 census. After the 1950 census, most of Dondero&#x27;s territory became the 18th district. Dondero was elected two more times from that district. Both districts are now obsolete.

From 1937, to 1947 Dondero served as ranking member of the House Committee on Education. He was chairman of the Committee on Public Works in the 80th and 81st Congresses. In 1954, he sponsored the bill creating the Saint Lawrence Seaway, which allowed large ocean-going vessels access to the Great Lakes.

Sympathetic to McCarthyism, Dondero claimed that American liberals had been responsible for a &quot;whitewash&quot; over the Amerasia affair.

In 1947, Dondero tried to block the trial of IG Farben executives for war crimes at Nuremberg by withholding funding for the prosecution team before indictments could be handed down.

On July 9, 1947, Dondero included Rosenberg when he publicly questioned the &quot;fitness&quot; of US Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson for failing to ferret out communist infiltrators in his department. His cause for concern arose from what Dondero called Patterson&#x27;s lack of ability to &quot;fathom the wiles of the international Communist conspiracy&quot; and to counteract them with &quot;competent personnel.&quot; Dondero cited ten government personnel in the War Department who had communist backgrounds or leanings:
* Colonel Bernard Bernstein
* Russel A. Nixon
* Abraham L. Pomerantz
* Josiah E. DuBois Jr.
* Richard Sasuly
* George Shaw Wheeler
* Heinz Norden
* Max Lowenthal
* Allan Rosenberg (member of Lowenthal&#x27;s staff)

Dondero stated, &quot;It is with considerable regret that I am forced to the conclusion the Secretary Patterson falls short of these standards.&quot;

==Attack on modern art==
Dondero was most notable for mounting an attack on modern art, which he claimed to be inspired by communism. He asserted that &quot;Cubism aims to destroy by designed disorder... Dadaism aims to destroy by ridicule... Abstractionism aims to destroy by the creation of brainstorms.&quot; In 1952, Dondero went on to tell Congress that modern art was a conspiracy by Moscow to spread communism to the United States. The speech won him the International Fine Arts Council&#x27;s Gold Medal of Honor for &quot;dedicated service to American Art.&quot; When the art critic Emily Genauer, who later won the Pulitzer Prize for Criticism, interviewed Dondero in the mid-1950s, he stated that &quot;modern art is Communistic because it is distorted and ugly, because it does not glorify our beautiful country, our cheerful and smiling people, our material progress. Art which does not glorify our beautiful country in plain simple terms that everyone can understand breeds dissatisfaction. It is therefore opposed to our government and those who promote it are our enemies.&quot; When Genauer pointed out the resemblance between his views and those of the Stalinist communists that he despised, Dondero was so enraged that he arranged to have her fired from her job at the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot;.

==Death==
Dondero died at the age of 84 in Royal Oak, Michigan, and is interred there at Oakview Cemetery.

== References ==

* The Political Graveyard
* &quot;The Detroit News&quot;, Sunday, February 8, 1932. Feature-Fiction Section, page 3. Dondero writes of knowing Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s son, Robert Todd, and daughter-in-law, Mary Harlan. He states that Mary Harlan Lincoln gave him the original letter written to President-elect Abraham Lincoln by 11-year-old Grace Bedell, suggesting that he grow a beard. Dondero further states that, though not a collector of &quot;Lincoln relics,&quot; he did &quot;make it a point to get acquainted with Lincoln&#x27;s relatives, those who knew him, and those writers who have gathered biographical material about him.&quot;

== Notes ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1506870" start="0" end="22" title="George Anthony Dondero" label="George Anthony Dondero"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="68" end="78" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="93" end="122" title="U.S. House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="128" end="136" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604001" start="186" end="215" title="Greenfield Township, Michigan" label="Greenfield Township, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="248" end="255" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="290" end="295" title="Italians" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="333" end="340" title="Germans" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q529165" start="393" end="412" title="Royal Oak, Michigan" label="Royal Oak, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837719" start="523" end="545" title="Detroit College of Law" label="Detroit College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="575" end="578" title="bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q498024" start="710" end="724" title="Oakland County, Michigan" label="Oakland County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="877" end="887" title="Republican (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643305" start="895" end="922" title="73rd United States Congress" label="73rd United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970744" start="1024" end="1067" title="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 17th congressional district" label="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 17th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085671" start="1125" end="1136" title="United States Census, 1930" label="1930 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q585978" start="1148" end="1159" title="United States Census, 1950" label="1950 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837414" start="1205" end="1218" title="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 18th congressional district" label="18th district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293294" start="1346" end="1360" title="ranking member" label="ranking member"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889964" start="1368" end="1396" title="United States House Committee on Education" label="House Committee on Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125500" start="1421" end="1446" title="United States House Committee on Public Works" label="Committee on Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387124" start="1454" end="1458" title="80th United States Congress" label="80th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644572" start="1463" end="1467" title="81st United States Congress" label="81st"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="1524" end="1545" title="Saint Lawrence Seaway" label="Saint Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1601" end="1612" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="1630" end="1641" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275936" start="1740" end="1748" title="Amerasia" label="Amerasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q704237" start="1794" end="1823" title="Farben trial" label="trial of IG Farben executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="2041" end="2060" title="US Secretary of War" label="US Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q723287" start="2061" end="2080" title="Robert P. Patterson" label="Robert P. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892930" start="2484" end="2501" title="Bernard Bernstein" label="Bernard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2504" end="2519" title="Russel A. Nixon" label="Russel A. Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669132" start="2522" end="2542" title="Abraham L. Pomerantz" label="Abraham L. Pomerantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290470" start="2545" end="2565" title="Josiah E. DuBois Jr." label="Josiah E. DuBois Jr."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2568" end="2582" title="Richard Sasuly" label="Richard Sasuly"/>
<link wikidata="Q60763604" start="2585" end="2604" title="George Shaw Wheeler" label="George Shaw Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700806" start="2607" end="2619" title="Heinz Norden" label="Heinz Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794983" start="2622" end="2635" title="Max Lowenthal" label="Max Lowenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731850" start="2638" end="2653" title="Allan Rosenberg (spy)" label="Allan Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="2998" end="3004" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034" start="3045" end="3052" title="Dadaism" label="Dadaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="3084" end="3098" title="Abstract art" label="Abstractionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3231" end="3237" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3248" end="3257" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3265" end="3278" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3303" end="3334" title="International Fine Arts Council" label="International Fine Arts Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015483" start="3433" end="3446" title="Emily Genauer" label="Emily Genauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3466" end="3480" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="4135" end="4158" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q529165" start="4210" end="4229" title="Royal Oak, Michigan" label="Royal Oak, Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490800" wikidata="Q564403" url="?curid=490800" title="Memories (1995 film)">
<text>Memories is a 1995 Japanese animated science fiction anthology film with Katsuhiro Otomo as executive producer, and based on three of his manga short stories. The film is composed of three shorts: , directed by Studio 4°C co-founder Kōji Morimoto and written by Satoshi Kon; , directed by Tensai Okamura and written by Otomo, and , written and directed by Otomo himself.

Originally released on home video in North America by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, Discotek Media acquired the rights in 2020 along with Mill Creek Entertainment. Their 2021 Blu-ray release includes English subtitles and a new English dub produced by NYAV Post (for &quot;Magnetic Rose&quot;) and Sound Cadence Studios (for &quot;Stink Bomb&quot; and &quot;Cannon Fodder&quot;).

==Plot==
===&quot;Magnetic Rose&quot;===
The &quot;Corona&quot;, a deep space salvage freighter, is out on a mission when it encounters a distress signal and responds to it. They come upon a spaceship graveyard orbiting a giant space station. The crew&#x27;s two engineers, Heintz and Miguel, enter it to get a closer look. Once inside, they discover an opulent European interior and several furnished rooms in varying states of decay, but find no signs of life.

The men learn that the station belongs to a once-famous opera diva named Eva Friedel who disappeared after the murder of her fiancé, Carlo Rambaldi, a fellow singer. Continuing to search for the distress signal&#x27;s source, the engineers split up, with each experiencing paranormal encounters, including strange noises and visions of Eva. Miguel enters the dilapidated underbelly of the station, and in a cavernous chamber, he finds a broken piano playing the distress signal. He begins to hallucinate and Eva suddenly runs up to kiss him. Heintz finds a theater stage and sees Eva, who stabs him when he approaches. Suddenly paralyzed, Heintz relives a memory of his wife and his daughter Emily. The illusion disappears when Eva takes his wife&#x27;s form and tells him that he &quot;will never leave&quot;.

Heintz rushes to save Miguel, but Miguel disappears deeper into the cavern, having been seduced by Eva into thinking he is Carlo. Eva reveals to Heintz that she murdered the real Carlo for refusing to marry her and has since forced others to relive his likeness. She makes Heintz relive Emily&#x27;s death, and entices Heintz to stay with his daughter&#x27;s doppelganger. Heintz resists and shoots the massive computer embedded in the ceiling of the cavern, causing the AI hologram of Eva to malfunction.

Meanwhile, the &quot;Corona&quot; has been struggling against a powerful magnetic field coming from the station, pulling the ship towards it. In desperation, the crewmen Aoshima and Ivanov fire a powerful energy cannon; gouging deep enough into the structure to reach the cavern and Heintz, moments before the ship is torn apart. Heintz is ejected into space along with the space-suit-clad skeletons of Eva&#x27;s past victims, as Eva hauntingly sings to a conjured audience. The &quot;Corona&quot; is destroyed and becomes part of the rose-shaped structure around the station. The whereabouts of the real (and long-deceased) Eva is shown, and a representation of Eva is seen talking romantically with Miguel (now fully embracing his new identity as Carlo). Heintz is last seen drifting in space, still alive.

===&quot;Stink Bomb&quot;===
Lab technician Nobuo Tanaka, battling the flu, mistakes some experimental pills for medicine and swallows one. The pills were intended to help soldiers counter biological weapons, but it reacts to a flu shot that he had received before the medicine, causing his body to produce vast amounts of a highly toxic gas. While taking a nap, the odor he emits kills everyone in the laboratory. Horrified, he reports the incident to headquarters, who instruct him to deliver the experimental drug to Tokyo. Nobuo has become a living weapon of mass destruction.

Meanwhile, the odor he emits grows stronger to where it affects several miles of the surrounding area, killing every animal exposed to it, though plants appear to be strengthened by the unknown chemicals responsible. The odor is so potent that neither gas masks nor NBC suits offer any protection against its effects. As Nobuo travels through Yamanashi Prefecture, the deadly odor kills all animal life in its path, including all 200,000 residents of the city of Kōfu. Nobuo continues on to Tokyo unaware of the death his smell is causing, but the rest of the country is in a complete panic. The head of the research company and the Japanese military deduce that Tanaka is causing the poisonous gas and order him to be killed. The Japan Self Defense Forces try in vain to stop Nobuo, causing immense collateral damage to the Japanese countryside, but to no avail, as the chemicals in Nobuo&#x27;s smell interfere with the targeting systems of their weapons.

The U.S. military, who have been observing the situation to that point, invokes the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty to take over the operation to recover Nobuo, and calls in a NASA unit with space suits to try and capture Nobuo alive. After Nobuo enters a tunnel, the Japanese army collapses part of the bridge and the tunnel behind him, trapping him with only one way out. They turn on wind generators in an attempt to stop the odor&#x27;s advance. As the soldiers in space suits approach Nobuo, he becomes scared and more of his odor bursts out of him, disabling the lights and wind generators.

After the cloud settles, the soldiers appear to have subdued Nobuo. One of the suit-wearing soldiers is escorted to the military headquarters in Tokyo and delivers the drug. Then the visor opens, revealing that it was actually Nobuo, who was placed inside the suit by one of the other soldiers, but is still unaware of his condition. He then opens his suit, killing everyone in the room.

===&quot;Cannon Fodder&quot;===
In a walled city perpetually at war, everyone&#x27;s livelihood depends upon maintaining and firing the enormous cannons that make up most of the city. Nearly every building in the city is equipped with cannons of varying size, able to fire huge artillery shells over the city walls. The story is animated into one long take, conveying the daily life of a young schoolboy; his father, who works as a lowly cannon-loader; and his mother, a munitions factory worker.

The city is surrounded by a crater-filled wasteland that is covered in clouds of smoke and dust provoked by the cannon fire. Despite propaganda emphasizing the threat of the enemy, there is no visual confirmation that this is true, or even if there is an enemy at all. The boy&#x27;s father is assigned to one of the city&#x27;s largest cannons: an enormous red railway gun that is personally fired by a lavishly-dressed officer. The father is blamed for a safety mishap, and made to stand next to the cannon without safety gear while it is fired again.

That night, the family is at home and hears a news report proclaiming the devastation unleashed on the enemy city. The boy then asks his father why they are fighting in the first place, only for his father to tell him that he will understand when he is older. As the boy gets into his bed, he fantasizes becoming the lavish officer who fires the cannons. As he sleeps, a civil defense siren sounds and a blue light sweeps across the window.

==Cast==
==Production==
===&quot;Magnetic Rose&quot;===
Directed by Kōji Morimoto and animated by Studio 4°C. Script by noted anime director Satoshi Kon, based on a story by Katsuhiro Otomo. This episode featured music from Puccini&#x27;s &quot;Madama Butterfly&quot; and &quot;Tosca&quot;. Specifically sampled in the episode was &quot;Un Bel Di Vedremo&quot; and &quot;Con Onor Muore... Tu, tu? Piccolo iddio&quot; from &quot;Madama Butterfly&quot; and &quot;Non la Sospiri, la Nostra Casetta&quot; from Act I of &quot;Tosca&quot;.

Music was composed by Yoko Kanno and largely influenced by Giacomo Puccini&#x27;s &quot;Madama Butterfly&quot;. It is primarily operatic and highly involved, reflecting the serious, intense nature the film takes on as it progresses.

===&quot;Stink Bomb&quot;===
Directed by Tensai Okamura and animated by Madhouse. Script by Katsuhiro Otomo. Music is by Jun Miyake and uses jazz and funk as its main influence, adding to the film&#x27;s chaotic, comedic nature.

It is mentioned in the interview featurette that the story for &quot;Stink Bomb&quot; is based on an actual event.

Otomo initially asked Yoshiaki Kawajiri to direct the film, but Kawajiri did not accept because the script was different from his own style. Kawajiri was involved in storyboard revisions as a supervisor, and also worked on the tunnel scene as a key animator.

===&quot;Cannon Fodder&quot;===
Written and directed by Katsuhiro Otomo and animated by Studio 4 °C. Music by Hiroyuki Nagashima. The score of &quot;Cannon Fodder&quot; is difficult to categorize; blending brass band, orchestral and avant-garde compositional techniques.

Through unusual animation techniques, the illusion is created that the film consists of one continuous shot or long take.

==Reception==
In 2001, &quot;Animage&quot; magazine ranked &quot;Memories&quot; 68th in their list of the 100 greatest anime productions. The film was met with positive reviews, although reception for each of the three stories varied. &quot;Magnetic Rose&quot; has generally been deemed the best episode, with critics at Anime Meta-Review and T.H.E.M Anime saying it alone made the film worth watching. Anime Academy thought it was &quot;a pure symphonic treat from start to finish” and “running only forty-five minutes, it can still be compared with the greatest anime productions in every single aspect from animation to storyline.&quot; John Wallis of DVD Talk called it &quot;a great opener, a strong, moving story of love, loss, haunting heartbreak, and horror chills.&quot; &quot;Magnetic Rose&quot; was also regarded as &quot;a science fiction marvel&quot; by Homemademech’s Mark McPherson, who praised its dialogue and realistic presentation of outer space physics. Chris Beveridge from Mania.com, however, felt that the story had &quot;some feel of being done before to some degree.&quot;

Comments on &quot;Stink Bomb&quot; and &quot;Cannon Fodder&quot; were less favorable. T.H.E.M. Anime reviewer Carlos Ross stated that &quot;the other two entries don&#x27;t quite equal the sheer excellence of &quot;‘Magnetic Rose’&quot;. McPherson referred to &quot;Stink Bomb&quot; by saying &quot;compared to the other episodes of &quot;Memories&quot;, it&#x27;s the weakest and less creative of the bunch&quot;, while Anime Jump’s Chad Clayton thought &quot;Cannon Fodder&quot; did not &quot;match the complexity of the preceding two films.&quot; &quot;Stink Bomb&quot; was nonetheless praised for its humor and high quality visuals. &quot;Cannon Fodder&quot; was viewed as &quot;the strongest work in terms of its allegorical message&quot; by DVD Talk, and visually &quot;inventive&quot; by both Anime Jump and Anime Academy. Tasha Robinson at SciFi.com described the animation of every episode as &quot;stellar&quot;, claiming the film as a whole went &quot;well beyond memorable&quot;.

==See also==
* List of animated feature films
* List of package films
* &quot;Neo Tokyo&quot; – An Otomo anthology film from 1987.
* &quot;Robot Carnival&quot; – An Otomo anthology film from 1987.
* &quot;Short Peace&quot; – An Otomo anthology film from 2013.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Entry in The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q850204" start="19" end="27" title="Japanese film" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="28" end="36" title="Animated film" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="37" end="52" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q336144" start="53" end="67" title="anthology film" label="anthology film"/>
<link wikidata="Q378710" start="73" end="88" title="Katsuhiro Otomo" label="Katsuhiro Otomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="138" end="143" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q182361" start="211" end="221" title="Studio 4°C" label="Studio 4°C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495073" start="233" end="246" title="Kōji Morimoto" label="Kōji Morimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q333643" start="262" end="273" title="Satoshi Kon" label="Satoshi Kon"/>
<link wikidata="Q926096" start="289" end="303" title="Tensai Okamura" label="Tensai Okamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="426" end="458" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281717" start="460" end="474" title="Discotek Media" label="Discotek Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="551" end="558" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956027" start="628" end="637" title="NYAV Post" label="NYAV Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q461363" start="2392" end="2404" title="Doppelgänger" label="doppelganger"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="2504" end="2506" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341528" start="2745" end="2758" title="Directed-energy weapon" label="energy cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="2914" end="2924" title="Space Suit" label="space-suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="3422" end="3425" title="flu" label="flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="3540" end="3558" title="Biological agent" label="biological weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="3871" end="3876" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="3904" end="3930" title="weapon of mass destruction" label="weapon of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q754396" start="4185" end="4193" title="gas mask" label="gas mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q16682231" start="4199" end="4207" title="NBC suit" label="NBC suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q132720" start="4276" end="4296" title="Yamanashi Prefecture" label="Yamanashi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q201932" start="4396" end="4400" title="Kōfu" label="Kōfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="4664" end="4689" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="Japan Self Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062935" start="4896" end="4909" title="United States Forces Japan" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="4976" end="5002" title="Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan" label="U.S.-Japan Security Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="5063" end="5067" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931170" start="6221" end="6230" title="long take" label="long take"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="6734" end="6745" title="railway gun" label="railway gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q695738" start="7298" end="7317" title="civil defense siren" label="civil defense siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495073" start="7437" end="7450" title="Kōji Morimoto" label="Kōji Morimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q182361" start="7467" end="7477" title="Studio 4°C" label="Studio 4°C"/>
<link wikidata="Q333643" start="7510" end="7521" title="Satoshi Kon" label="Satoshi Kon"/>
<link wikidata="Q378710" start="7543" end="7558" title="Katsuhiro Otomo" label="Katsuhiro Otomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19005" start="7614" end="7630" title="Madama Butterfly" label="Madama Butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192941" start="7647" end="7652" title="Tosca" label="Tosca"/>
<link wikidata="Q224981" start="7926" end="7936" title="Yoko Kanno" label="Yoko Kanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311" start="7963" end="7978" title="Giacomo Puccini" label="Giacomo Puccini"/>
<link wikidata="Q926096" start="8179" end="8193" title="Tensai Okamura" label="Tensai Okamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q650867" start="8210" end="8218" title="Madhouse (company)" label="Madhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q459789" start="8259" end="8269" title="Jun Miyake" label="Jun Miyake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571446" start="8466" end="8481" title="Death of Gloria Ramirez" label="an actual event"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244156" start="8950" end="8960" title="brass band" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="8962" end="8971" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931170" start="9127" end="9136" title="long take" label="long take"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="9162" end="9190" title="Animage" label="&amp;quot;Animage&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861860" start="10324" end="10338" title="THEM Anime Reviews" label="T.H.E.M. Anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="11086" end="11095" title="Sci Fi Channel (United States)" label="SciFi.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349805" start="11246" end="11276" title="List of animated feature films" label="List of animated feature films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605929" start="11279" end="11300" title="List of package films" label="List of package films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525680" start="11309" end="11318" title="Neo Tokyo (film)" label="Neo Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628801" start="11370" end="11384" title="Robot Carnival" label="Robot Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q11243303" start="11436" end="11447" title="Short Peace" label="Short Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="11540" end="11575" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490811" wikidata="Q206600" url="?curid=490811" title="Maldivian rufiyaa">
<text>The Maldivian rufiyaa (; sign: Rf or ރ; code: MVR) is the currency of the Maldives. The issuance of the currency is controlled by the Maldives Monetary Authority (MMA). The most commonly used symbols for the rufiyaa are MVR and Rf. The ISO 4217 code for Maldivian rufiyaa is MVR. The rufiyaa is subdivided into 100 &quot;laari&quot;.

The name &quot;rufiyaa&quot; is derived from the Sanskrit रूप्य (&quot;rūpya&quot;, wrought silver). The midpoint of exchange rate is Rf. 12/ per US dollar and the rate is permitted to fluctuate within a ±20% band, i.e. between Rf. 10/ and Rf. 15/ as of 10 April 2017.

==History==

The earliest form of currency used in the Maldives was cowrie shells (&quot;Cypraea moneta&quot;) and historical accounts of travellers indicate that they were traded in this manner even during the 13th century. As late as 1344, Ibn Battuta observed that more than 40 ships loaded with cowry shells were exported each year. A single gold dinar was worth 400,000 shells.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, lārin (parallel straps of silver wire folded in half with dyed Persian and Arabic inscriptions) were imported and traded as currency. This form of currency was used in the Persian Gulf, India, Ceylon and the Far East during this time. Historians agree that this new form of currency was most probably exchanged for cowry shells and indicates Maldives&#x27; lucrative trade with these countries. The first Sultan to imprint his own seal onto this currency was Ghaazee Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam. The seal was much broader than the wires hence it was barely legible.
The first known of coins were introduced by Sultan Ibrahim Iskandar (1648–1687). Compared to the previous forms of money, these coins were much neater and minted in pure silver. The coins were minted in the capital city of Malé, a fact which it acknowledged on the reverse. The legend &quot;King of Land and Sea, Iskandhar the Great&quot; () is found on the edge.

After this period, gold coins replaced the existing silver ones during the reign of Sultan Hassan Nooruddin in 1787. He used two different qualities of gold in his coins; one was called Mohoree and the other Baimohoree, of which the former is of higher value. How this gold was obtained is uncertain.

Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, bronze coins were issued denominated in laari. Sultan Mohamed Imaadhudheen IV (1900–1904) introduced what historians believe to be the first machine struck coins, judging the superior quality of the engravements. His successor Sultan Mohamed Shamshudeen III (1904–1935) made the last of these coins, 1 and 4 laari denominations, which were struck in the United Kingdom by Heaton&#x27;s Mint, Birmingham, England in 1913.

Following the end of coin production specifically for the Maldives, the Sultanate came to use the Ceylonese rupee. This was supplemented in 1947 by issues of banknotes denominated in rufiyaa, equal in value to the rupee. In 1960, coins denominated in laari, now worth one hundredth of the rufiyaa, were introduced.

In 1990, the formal ISO 4217 code was changed from (&quot;Maldive rupee&quot;) into (&quot;rufiyaa&quot;).

===Currency Sign===
The currency symbol for Maldivian Rufiyaa was introduced to the public by MMA on 3 July 2022. The symbol represents letter “Ra” of Thaana script which also is the first letter in spelling “Rufiyaa” in Dhivehi. A parallel line is added to letter “Ra” to represent the arithmetic “equal” sign as used in various other currency symbols.
The symbol can be customised to match the ‘look and feel’ of the font with which the symbol is used to be together, whilst maintaining the proportions and ratios of the construction.
The symbol was designed by Mr. Hassan Shujau. It was chosen among 70 concept proposals received by MMA through a nationwide competition. The proposals were evaluated by an evaluation committee comprising members from MMA, Dhivehi Bahuge Academy and other areas of expertise.

==Coins==

In early 1960, Sultan Mohamed Fareed I ordered coins from the Royal Mint in England. The new issue consisted of denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 25 and 50 laari. Unlike his predecessors, Sultan Fareed did not embellish his title on the coins; instead he used the National Emblem on the reverse side with the traditional title of the state (, State of Maldives) and the denomination value on the obverse side. The currency was put into circulation in February 1961 and all the previously traded coins, with the exception of Shamshudeen III&#x27;s 1 and 4 laari, were withdrawn from circulation on 17 June 1966.

The newly established central bank, the Maldives Monetary Authority (MMA), introduced the Rf. 1 coin on 22 January 1983. The coin was minted in West Germany. In 1984, a new series of coins was introduced which did not include the 2 laari denomination. In 1995, Rf. 2 coins were introduced. Coins currently in circulation are 1 laari, 2 laari, 5 laari, 10 laari, 25 laari, 50 laari, Rf. 1, Rf. 2. In 2017, a bimetallic Rf. 2 coin was introduced into circulation to replace the previous RF. 2 coin.
==Banknotes==

In 1945, the Majlis of the Maldives (Parliament) passed bill number 2/66 on the &quot;Maldivian Bank Note&quot;. Under this law, banknotes for Rf. , Rf. 1, Rf. 2, Rf. 5 and Rf. 10 were printed and put into circulation on 5 September 1948. In 1951, Rf. 50 and Rf. 100 banknotes were introduced.

The previous series of banknotes were issued in 1983 in denominations of Rf. 2, Rf. 5, Rf. 10, Rf. 20, Rf. 50 and Rf. 100. Rf. 500 banknotes were added in 1990, with the Rf. 2 replaced by a coin in 1995.

In October 2015, the Maldives Monetary Authority issued a Rf. 5,000 banknote in polymer to commemorate the 50th anniversary of independence, and issued a new family of banknotes in polymer that included a new denomination of Rf. 1,000. A Rf. 5 banknote printed in polymer was revealed in May 2017 and was issued in July 2017. It was originally planned that this denomination was to be replaced by a coin of the same denomination, but public input convinced the Maldives Monetary Authority to go for the banknote.

Illustrations on the banknotes were done by Maizan Hassan Manik and Abbaas (Bamboo).


==See also==
* Currency of Maldives
* Economy of Maldives

==References==
* MMA (Dhivehi) Publication, 1983. (Maldivian Currency)
==External links==
* Currency in Circulation – Maldives Monetary Authority (archived)
*Maldives Rufiyaa Collection (1947–2022)
* Official Exchange Rates (archived)
* Banknotes of the Maldives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206600" start="4" end="21" title="Maldivian rufiyaa" label="Maldivian rufiyaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="25" end="29" title="currency symbol" label="sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q206600" start="31" end="33" title="Maldivian rufiyaa" label="Rf"/>
<link wikidata="Q206600" start="37" end="38" title="Maldivian rufiyaa" label="ރ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="40" end="44" title="ISO 4217" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q206600" start="46" end="49" title="Maldivian rufiyaa" label="MVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="74" end="82" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188022" start="134" end="161" title="Maldives Monetary Authority" label="Maldives Monetary Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="236" end="244" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO 4217"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279414" start="321" end="326" title="Maldivian laari" label="laari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="384" end="392" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="419" end="426" title="Metalworking" label="wrought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="427" end="433" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="481" end="490" title="US dollar" label="US dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q366291" start="673" end="679" title="cowrie" label="cowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="847" end="858" title="Ibn Battuta" label="Ibn Battuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q191830" start="956" end="961" title="dinar" label="dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827085" start="1025" end="1030" title="Larin (currency)" label="lārin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="1088" end="1095" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1100" end="1106" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1197" end="1209" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="1218" end="1224" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43292" start="1430" end="1436" title="Sultan" label="Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25683725" start="1492" end="1522" title="Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam" label="Muhammad Thakurufaanu al-Auzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="1528" end="1532" title="Seal (device)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984585" start="1645" end="1661" title="Ibrahim Iskandar I" label="Ibrahim Iskandar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9347" start="1817" end="1821" title="Malé" label="Malé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679788" start="2050" end="2066" title="Hassan Nooruddin" label="Hassan Nooruddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279414" start="2358" end="2363" title="Maldivian laari" label="laari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932514" start="2372" end="2395" title="Mohamed Imaadhudheen IV" label="Mohamed Imaadhudheen IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="2424" end="2434" title="historians" label="historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932732" start="2552" end="2575" title="Mohamed Shamshudeen III" label="Mohamed Shamshudeen III"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2672" end="2686" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916754" start="2690" end="2708" title="Heaton&amp;#x27;s Mint" label="Heaton&amp;#x27;s Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="2710" end="2720" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2722" end="2729" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="2838" end="2853" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="Ceylonese rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="3076" end="3084" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO 4217"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188022" start="3258" end="3261" title="Maldives Monetary Authority" label="MMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q32656" start="3385" end="3392" title="Maldivian language" label="Dhivehi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270179" start="4010" end="4026" title="Mohamed Fareed I" label="Mohamed Fareed I"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="4050" end="4060" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q213023" start="4248" end="4263" title="Emblem of Maldives" label="National Emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="4618" end="4630" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188022" start="4636" end="4663" title="Maldives Monetary Authority" label="Maldives Monetary Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="4740" end="4752" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q650066" start="5121" end="5143" title="People&amp;#x27;s Majlis" label="Majlis of the Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3860708" start="6224" end="6244" title="Currency of Maldives" label="Currency of Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366880" start="6247" end="6266" title="Economy of Maldives" label="Economy of Maldives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490814" wikidata="Q4596" url="?curid=490814" title="Sri Lankan rupee">
<text>The Sri Lankan Rupee (, ; symbol: රු (plural) in English, රු in Sinhala, ௹ in Tamil; ISO code: LKR) is the currency of Sri Lanka. It is subdivided into 100 cents (, ), but cents are rarely seen in circulation due to their low value. It is issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. The abbreviation &quot;Re&quot; (singular) and &quot;Rs&quot; (plural) is generally used, the World Bank suggests SL Rs as a fully disambiguating abbreviation for distinction from other currencies named &quot;rupee&quot;.

==History==
Sterling became Ceylon&#x27;s official currency in 1825, replacing the Ceylonese rixdollar at a rate of £1 = rixdollars, and British silver coins were made legal tender. Treasury notes denominated in sterling were issued in 1827, replacing the earlier rixdollar notes. Rixdollar notes not presented for exchange were demonetized in June 1831.

The Indian rupee was made Ceylon&#x27;s standard coin on 26 September 1836, and Ceylon reverted to the Indian currency area. Sterling-denominated treasury notes continued to circulate after 1836, along with the rupee. The legal currency remained British silver and accounts were kept in pounds, shillings and pence. However, payments were made in rupees and annas at the &quot;fictitious par&quot; (fixed accounting rate) of two shillings per rupee (i.e. £1 = Rs. 10/-).

The Bank of Ceylon was the first private bank to issue banknotes on the island (1844) and Treasury notes were withdrawn in 1856.

The Indian rupee was formally established as the unlimited legal tender 18 June 1869. The rupee was decimalized 23 August 1871. Thus, the rupee of 100 cents became Ceylon&#x27;s money of account and sole legal tender effective 1 January 1872, replacing sterling at a rate of Re. 1/- equalling two shillings and three pence sterling.

Following the Ceylon banking and monetary crisis of 1884, in which the largest exchange bank in the island, The Orient Bank experienced an acute liquidity shortage, resulting in a run on the other two exchange banks, Chartered Mercantile Bank and the Bank of Madras. The Government of Ceylon, stepped in an enacted the &quot;Paper Currency Ordinance of 1884&quot; which was based on a similar Ordinance in Mauritius in 1876. The Paper Currency Ordinance, established a currency board, the Board of Commissioners of Currency of Ceylon was established consisting of the Colonial Secretary of Ceylon, the Treasurer of Ceylon, and the Auditor-General of Ceylon. This Ordinance linked the Ceylon currency notes and the Indian silver rupees being mutually convertible at the office of the Currency Commissioners at a nominal par without any commission of one Ceylon rupee note to one Indian rupee coin.

By April 2022, political upheaval in Sri Lanka made the Sri Lankan rupee the world&#x27;s &quot;worst performing currency,&quot; according to the &quot;Financial Times.&quot; The currency&#x27;s exchange rate had plummeted to over Rs. 350/- = US$1 .

==Coins==

In 1872, copper c, c, 1c and 5c coins dated 1870 were introduced, followed in 1892 by silver 10c, 25c and 50c. Production of the c ceased in 1904. The large, copper 5c coin was replaced in 1909 by a much smaller cupro-nickel coin which was square with rounded corners. In 1919, the fineness of silver used was reduced from .800 to .550.

Between 1940 and 1944, a wholesale change in the coinage was carried out. Production of the c ceased in 1940, with bronze 1c introduced in 1942 with reduced weight and thickness. Nickel-brass replaced cupro-nickel in the 5c in the same year and replaced silver in the 25c and 50c in 1943. In 1944, nickel-brass, scalloped shaped 2c and 10c coins were introduced. The scalloped 10c coin replaced the silver 10c coin. Later 2c coins issued in 1957 were the only coins from this period to ever depict Queen Elizabeth II. Coins with the portrait of King George VI continued to be in circulation after his death in 1952. In 1957, cupro-nickel Re. 1/- coins and .925 silver Rs. 5/- coins commemorating 2,500 years of Buddhism were issued.

In 1963, a new coinage was introduced which omitted the monarch&#x27;s portrait, depicting instead The Armorial ensign of Ceylon. Coins issued were aluminium 1c and 2c, nickel brass 5c and 10c and cupro-nickel 25c and 50c and Re. 1/-. These coins had the same shapes and sizes of the previous series but were composed of different materials. In 1976, commemorative seven-sided Rs. 2/- and ten-sided Rs. 5/- coins were introduced in limited numbers. In 1978, devaluation prompted aluminum to be the replacement of nickel-brass in the 5c and 10c, while shortly after 1c and 2c were discontinued. Cupro-nickel Rs. 2/- and aluminium-bronze Rs. 5/- coins were introduced in 1984 fully replacing the corresponding banknotes. In 1987, commemorative Rs. 10/- were released which like the 5c coin was square with round edges. In 1998 a bimetallic commemorative Rs. 10/- coin was released. Like earlier forerunner rupee denominations, these were again only issued in limited supply, not intended to replace the corresponding banknotes.

The obverse of the coins issued since 1972 carry the Armorial Ensign of the Republic of Sri Lanka. The reverse of the coin the value in numerals and in Sinhala, Tamil and English below and year of issue at the bottom with SRI LANKA in Sinhala on top. The lower denominations of 1c, 2c, 5c, 10c, 25c and 50c are not in circulation and the minting of these denominations had been discontinued.

The obverse and reverse designs of the new coins remained identical to the circulating coins of the new series based on similar denominations. However their weights and compositions have been changed to electroplated steel as opposed to a solid alloy for easier identification purposes and to save on production expense.

In the year 2017, a complete new series of stainless steel coins was introduced and is currently in circulation. 
&lt;br&gt;
===2017 - New coin series===

===Commemorative coins===
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka has issued commemorative coins since 1957.

On 15 December 2010, to mark the 60th Anniversary, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka issued a frosted proof crown size multi-colour silver commemorative coin in the denomination of Rs. 5,000/-. It was the first multi-colour coin issued by the Central Bank. CBSL has published a new limited edition of 1000 Rs commemorative coin on 9 March 2023, to commemorate Sri Lanka&#x27;s 75th Independence Day Celebration. The 1000 Rs commemorative coins will be up for sale for Rs.6,000 per coin at listed CBSL sales outlets.

Commemorative coins issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka:

==Banknotes==

The Government of Ceylon introduced its first rupee banknote issue in 1885. A Rs. 5/- note (1885–1925) was followed by Rs. 10/- (1894–1926) and Rs. 1,000/- notes (1899 and 1915). A second issue included the Re. 1/- (1917–1939), Rs. 2/- (1917–1921), Rs. 50/- (1914) and Rs. 100/- (1919) notes. During the 1920s (and in some cases the 1930s) the Re. 1/- (mentioned above), Rs. 2/- (1925–39), two types of Rs. 5/- (1925–28 and 1929–39), two types of Rs. 10/- (1927–28 and 1929–39), Rs. 50/- (1922–39), Rs. 100/- (1926–39), Rs. 500/- (1926), and Rs. 1,000/- (1929) notes were all in circulation.

There were two issues in 1941. The first consisted of a Re. 1/-, Rs. 2/-, Rs. 5/-, Rs. 10/- banknote issued only in 1941. Though issued slightly earlier, a Rs. 1,000/- note (1938) has been grouped with this issue. The 1941 second issue consisted of Re. 1/- (1941–49), Rs. 2/- (1941–49), Rs. 5/- (1941–49), Rs. 10/- (1941–46), Rs. 50/- (1941–45), Rs. 100/- (1941–45), Rs. 1,000/- (1941), and Rs. 10,000/- (1947) notes. In 1942, fractional banknote issues were introduced. A 25c and 50c note (1942) were followed by a second issue of 5c (1942), 10c (1942–43), 25c (1942–49), and 50c notes (1942–49).

The Central Bank of Ceylon issued Re. 1/- and Rs. 10/- notes (1951), Rs. 1/-, Rs. 2/-, Rs. 5/-, Rs. 50/-, and Rs. 100/- notes (1952–54)

The Re. 1/- notes were replaced by coins in 1963.

From 1977, banknotes were issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Rs. 20/- notes were introduced in 1979, followed by Rs. 500/- and Rs. 1,000/- in 1981. The Rs. 200/- in 1998 and Rs. 2,000/- in 2006 (discontinued). Sri Lankan banknotes are unusual in that they are printed vertically on the reverse. In 1998, a Rs. 200/- note was issued to commemorate the 50th anniversary of independence (1948–1998). This is the first polymer banknote issued in Sri Lanka, and it was printed by Note Printing Australia. All other denominations are printed by the De la Rue Lanka Currency and Securities Print (Pvt) Ltd, a joint venture of the Government of Sri Lanka and De La Rue.

Portraits of former Sri Lankan prime ministers and former president Mahinda Rajapaksa have graced the fronts of Sri Lankan bank notes, while the backs have featured Sri Lankan fauna and flora, Sri Lankan landscapes and industries, and images depicting Sri Lankan culture, history, and achievements.

==Exchange rate==
The Sri Lankan rupee is a closed currency which means it is not available to buy or sell outside of Sri Lanka. One can buy LKR at the Sri Lankan airport or currency outlets available throughout the country.

On 7 March 2023, the rupee gained 0.5% to trade at 250.8 per dollar, registering a 14% increase after the announcement by the IMF that it will finalize a $2.9 billion bailout for Sri Lanka on 20 March and receiving assurances from China that it will assist in the country&#x27;s debt restructuring efforts. However, Fitch Ratings has published a prediction article on 8 March 2023, that the rupee will depreciate by roughly 23%, reaching an all-time low of 290 per dollar by the end of the year.
==See also==
* Economy of Sri Lanka

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Notes===
===Sources===
*


==External links==

*Ceylon and Sri Lanka Collectables – Banknotes and Coins
*Current Coins of Sri Lanka
*Ancient Coins of Sri Lanka
*Polymer Banknotes of Sri Lanka
*Medieval Coins of Polonnaruwa, Sri Lanka
*Dutch V.O.C coins of Ceylon
*The Sinhala copper coinage of the 12th to 15th centuries
*Early coinage of Sri Lanka
* Historical banknotes of Sri Lanka 
*Commemorative Coins and Notes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="4" end="20" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="Sri Lankan Rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="26" end="32" title="Currency symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="34" end="36" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="රු"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="58" end="60" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="රු"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="73" end="74" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="௹"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="85" end="93" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="95" end="98" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="LKR"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="119" end="128" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="156" end="160" title="cent (currency)" label="cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640939" start="253" end="278" title="Central Bank of Sri Lanka" label="Central Bank of Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="374" end="384" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596" start="394" end="399" title="Sri Lankan rupee" label="SL Rs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="515" end="523" title="pound sterling" label="Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057988" start="586" end="605" title="Ceylonese rixdollar" label="Ceylonese rixdollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="863" end="875" title="Indian rupee" label="Indian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17370" start="1217" end="1222" title="Indian anna" label="annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102320" start="1903" end="1918" title="Oriental Bank Corporation" label="The Orient Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818015" start="2012" end="2037" title="Mercantile Bank of India, London and China" label="Chartered Mercantile Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856144" start="2046" end="2060" title="Bank of Madras" label="Bank of Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q496819" start="2264" end="2278" title="currency board" label="currency board"/>
<link wikidata="Q112049937" start="2284" end="2328" title="Board of Commissioners of Currency of Ceylon" label="Board of Commissioners of Currency of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751922" start="2363" end="2391" title="Colonial Secretary of Ceylon" label="Colonial Secretary of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108101606" start="2397" end="2416" title="Treasurer of Ceylon" label="Treasurer of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819985" start="2426" end="2451" title="Auditor General of Sri Lanka" label="Auditor-General of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2509" end="2528" title="Coins of British India#Silver coinage" label="Indian silver rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="3791" end="3809" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="3838" end="3852" title="King George VI" label="King George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="5206" end="5213" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="5215" end="5220" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="8651" end="8660" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q57338" start="8731" end="8748" title="Mahinda Rajapaksa" label="Mahinda Rajapaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="9315" end="9318" title="International Monetary Fund" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="9368" end="9377" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364290" start="9468" end="9486" title="debt restructuring" label="debt restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q871325" start="9505" end="9518" title="Fitch Ratings" label="Fitch Ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043780" start="9700" end="9720" title="Economy of Sri Lanka" label="Economy of Sri Lanka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490831" wikidata="Q597413" url="?curid=490831" title="Wildhaus">
<text>Wildhaus (High Alemannic: &quot;Wildhuus&quot;) is a village and former municipality in the Toggenburg region of the canton of St. Gallen in Switzerland, since 2010 by merger with Alt St. Johann part of the municipality of Wildhaus-Alt St. Johann.

The reformer Huldrych Zwingli was born in Wildhaus in 1484. His birth house can still be visited.

==Geography==
Wildhaus has an area, , of . Of this area, 50.6% is used for agricultural purposes, while 22.8% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 4.1% is settled (buildings or roads) and the remainder (22.5%) is non-productive (rivers or lakes).

The village is located on Wildhaus Pass () from Gams, in the Rhine valley, to Unterwasser in Toggenburg between the Churfirsten peaks and Säntis. The ski slopes above Wildhaus, Unterwasser and Alt St. Johann on the Churfirsten ranges reach .

The municipalities of Alt St. Johann and Wildhaus merged into the municipality of Wildhaus-Alt St. Johann on 1 January 2010.

==Coat of arms==
The blazon of the municipal coat of arms is &quot;Argent an Ibex Sable on a Stone proper between two Pine Trees Vert issuant from a Base of the last.&quot;

==Demographics==
Wildhaus has a population () of 1,209, of which about 11.1% are foreign nationals. Of the foreign population, (), 20 are from Germany, 3 are from Italy, 77 are from ex-Yugoslavia, 7 are from Austria, 5 are from Turkey, and 55 are from another country. Over the last 10 years the population has decreased at a rate of -8.1%. Most of the population () speaks German (91.8%), with Albanian being second most common ( 2.4%) and Serbo-Croatian being third ( 1.8%). Of the Swiss national languages (), 1,157 speak German, 5 people speak French, 2 people speak Italian, and 3 people speak Romansh.

The age distribution, , in Wildhaus is; 140 children or 11.1% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 204 teenagers or 16.2% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 139 people or 11.0% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 170 people or 13.5% are between 30 and 39, 179 people or 14.2% are between 40 and 49, and 150 people or 11.9% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 128 people or 10.2% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 102 people or 8.1% are between 70 and 79, there are 40 people or 3.2% who are between 80 and 89, and there are 8 people or 0.6% who are between 90 and 99.

 there were 202 persons (or 16.0% of the population) who were living alone in a private dwelling. There were 255 (or 20.2%) persons who were part of a couple (married or otherwise committed) without children, and 646 (or 51.3%) who were part of a couple with children. There were 74 (or 5.9%) people who lived in single parent home, while there are 17 persons who were adult children living with one or both parents, 4 persons who lived in a household made up of relatives, and 62 who are either institutionalized or live in another type of collective housing.

In the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 39.5% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the FDP (21.3%), the CVP (18.5%) and the SP (10.1%).

The entire Swiss population is generally well educated. In Wildhaus about 69% of the population (between age 25-64) have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education or additional higher education (either University or a &quot;Fachhochschule&quot;). Out of the total population in Wildhaus, , the highest education level completed by 315 people (25.0% of the population) was Primary, while 448 (35.6%) have completed their secondary education, 136 (10.8%) have attended a Tertiary school, and 32 (2.5%) are not in school. The remainder did not answer this question.

==Heritage sites of national significance==

The Birthplace of the reformer Huldrych Zwingli at Lisighus 167 is listed as a Swiss heritage site of national significance.

The ruins of the , a former castle that was originally built in 1200 by the barons of Sax and sold to the earl Friedrich IV von Toggenburg in 1313. The castle was hit by a lightning and burned down in 1660. In 2010 the restoration of the place was completed and it has become a worthy place to visit.

==Economy==
, Wildhaus had an unemployment rate of 1.25%. , there were 133 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 52 businesses involved in this sector. 60 people are employed in the secondary sector and there are 19 businesses in this sector. 403 people are employed in the tertiary sector, with 51 businesses in this sector.

 the average unemployment rate was 2.2%. There were 122 businesses in the municipality of which 18 were involved in the secondary sector of the economy while 56 were involved in the third.

 there were 466 residents who worked in the municipality, while 194 residents worked outside Wildhaus and 164 people commuted into the municipality for work.

==Religion==
From the , 468 or 37.1% are Roman Catholic, while 572 or 45.4% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there are 17 individuals (or about 1.35% of the population) who belong to the Orthodox Church, and there are 17 individuals (or about 1.35% of the population) who belong to another Christian church. There are 49 (or about 3.89% of the population) who are Islamic. There are 3 individuals (or about 0.24% of the population) who belong to another church (not listed on the census), 88 (or about 6.98% of the population) belong to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 46 individuals (or about 3.65% of the population) did not answer the question.

==Weather==
Wildhaus has an average of 157 days of rain or snow per year and on average receives of precipitation. The wettest month is August during which time Wildhaus receives an average of of rain or snow. During this month there is precipitation for an average of 14.7 days. The month with the most days of precipitation is June, with an average of 15.8, but with only of rain or snow. The driest month of the year is October with an average of of precipitation over 14.7 days.

==References==
==External links==

*http://www.wildhaus.ch </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q597413" start="0" end="8" title="Wildhaus" label="Wildhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q503728" start="10" end="24" title="High Alemannic German" label="High Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q693185" start="92" end="102" title="Toggenburg" label="Toggenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="117" end="123" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12746" start="127" end="137" title="St. Gallen (canton)" label="St. Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="141" end="152" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q286332" start="180" end="194" title="Alt St. Johann" label="Alt St. Johann"/>
<link wikidata="Q70619" start="223" end="246" title="Wildhaus-Alt St. Johann" label="Wildhaus-Alt St. Johann"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="262" end="278" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q378164" start="623" end="636" title="Wildhaus Pass" label="Wildhaus Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q67315" start="645" end="649" title="Gams" label="Gams"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="658" end="663" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q678056" start="675" end="686" title="Unterwasser" label="Unterwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q693185" start="690" end="700" title="Toggenburg (Switzerland)" label="Toggenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16547" start="713" end="724" title="Churfirsten" label="Churfirsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224" start="735" end="741" title="Säntis" label="Säntis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172226" start="747" end="750" title="ski" label="ski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16547" start="812" end="823" title="Churfirsten" label="Churfirsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="987" end="993" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="1011" end="1023" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1283" end="1290" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1303" end="1308" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1325" end="1335" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1348" end="1355" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1368" end="1374" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1665" end="1671" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1688" end="1694" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1711" end="1718" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="1739" end="1746" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q666315" start="2972" end="2993" title="2007 Swiss federal election" label="2007 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="3025" end="3028" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="SVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q13850128" start="3108" end="3111" title="Free Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q659461" start="3125" end="3128" title="Christian Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party of Switzerland" label="CVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q303745" start="3145" end="3147" title="Social Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="SP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3310" end="3335" title="Education in Switzerland#Secondary" label="upper secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="3397" end="3411" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3545" end="3552" title="Education in Switzerland#Primary" label="Primary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3642" end="3650" title="Education in Switzerland#Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="3813" end="3829" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q869941" start="3867" end="3905" title="Swiss inventory of cultural property of national and regional significance" label="heritage site of national significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="4308" end="4331" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="primary economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="4411" end="4427" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="secondary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="4503" end="4518" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4946" end="4960" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="4997" end="5018" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5306" end="5311" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="5494" end="5502" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="5506" end="5513" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="5699" end="5712" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="490832" wikidata="Q837346" url="?curid=490832" title="Pokémon Gold and Silver">
<text>and are 1999 role-playing video games developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Color. They are the first installments in the second generation of the &quot;Pokémon&quot; video game series. They were released in Japan in 1999, Australia and North America in 2000, and Europe in 2001.

The games introduce 100 new species of Pokémon and follow the progress of the player character in their quest to master Pokémon battling. Both games are independent of each other but feature largely the same plot and, while both can be played separately, it is necessary to trade between these games and their predecessors in order to fully complete each games&#x27; Pokédex. The Johto Saga of the &quot;Pokémon&quot; anime is based on the new region introduced in the games. A third game in the generation, &quot;Pokémon Crystal&quot;, was released in 2001. 

&quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were critically acclaimed upon release. They are considered by some to be the best games in the entire series, as well as some of the most significant games of the fifth generation of video game consoles. They continued the enormous success of &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; as &quot;Pokémon&quot; began to form into a multi-billion dollar franchise. The games almost matched the sales of &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; and by 2010 had gone on to sell over 23 million units, making them the best-selling games for the Game Boy Color and the third-best-selling for the Game Boy family of systems.

In 2009, on the 10th anniversary of &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, remakes titled &quot;Pokémon HeartGold&quot; and &quot;SoulSilver&quot; were released for the Nintendo DS.

==Gameplay==

Like previous installments, &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; are played from a third-person, top-down perspective, with players directly navigating the protagonist around the fictional universe, interacting with objects and people. As the player explores this world, they will encounter different terrains, such as grassy fields, forests, caves, and seas in which different Pokémon species reside. As the player randomly encounters one of these creatures, the field switches to a turn-based &quot;battle scene&quot;, where the Pokémon will fight.

There are two main goals within the games: following through the main storyline and defeating the Elite Four and Pokémon Master Lance to become the new Champion, and completing the Pokédex by capturing, evolving, and trading to obtain all 251 creatures. A major aspect of this is developing and raising the player&#x27;s Pokémon by battling other Pokémon, which can be found in the wild or owned by other Trainers. This system of accumulating experience points (EXP) and leveling up, characteristic and integral to all &quot;Pokémon&quot; video games, controls the physical properties of the Pokémon, such as the battle statistics acquired, and the moves learned.

===New features===

While &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; retain the basic mechanics of capturing, battling, and evolving introduced in &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;, new features were added. A time system was introduced using a real-time internal clock that keeps track of the current time and day of the week. Certain events, including Pokémon appearances, are influenced by this feature. New items were added, with some designed to exploit a new mechanic: Pokémon being able to hold items. A new type of item able to be held was the berry, which comes in varieties and can restore health or cure status effects. Other held items can give boosts to the Pokémon during battle. More specialized Poké Balls were introduced, which make Pokémon catching easier in certain situations. A new item called the Pokégear was introduced, functioning as a watch, map, radio, and phone, allowing the player to call other characters who offer their phone number. Trainers will call for a rematch and others will call about rare Pokémon that can be caught in a certain area.

The games introduce Raikou, Entei, and Suicune, some new types of legendary Pokémon that wander around Johto, changing locations frequently in a process known as Roaming Pokémon. They can be tracked by the Pokédex&#x27;s habitat feature once encountered, and will always attempt to flee, but will retain HP loss. In addition, there is the possibility of encountering a shiny Pokémon, which have a different coloration than normal Pokémon of their species, and appear very rarely, around 1 in 8192 for games until Pokémon X and Y. Two new Pokémon types were added, the Steel-type and the Dark-type. Steel-type Pokémon are immune to Poison-type moves, and they have very high defense and resistance to other types, while Dark-type Pokémon are immune to Psychic-type moves and are strong against Psychic-type Pokémon (which provides an offensive strategy, formerly absent against Psychic-types), as well as having few weaknesses. In &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, new moves were added, but Pokémon knowing these moves are not allowed to be traded to the first generation games. To solve this, a move deleter was introduced, capable of erasing moves known by the Pokémon. Another major change was the splitting of the &quot;Special&quot; stat into &quot;Special Attack&quot; and &quot;Special Defense&quot;, which increased aspects of strategy.

With the introduction of Pokémon breeding, Pokémon are assigned to one or two breeding groups. When a male and female Pokémon that share at least one breeding group are left at a Pokémon Daycare, they may produce an egg, which will hatch into a young Pokémon. Do note that Ditto can breed with all but the Pokémon in No Eggs Discovered Group, even if the Pokémon other than Ditto is male.
 The young Pokémon will inherit the species of its mother, and moves from its father. However, legendary and mythical Pokémon, among certain other species, cannot breed.

==Plot==

===Setting===
&quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; are set in the region of Johto, situated to the west of the Kanto region from the previous &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; games, and three years after the conclusion of the previous games. The design of Johto was inspired by Japan&#x27;s Kansai and Tōkai regions, with many of the region&#x27;s temples and more traditional Japanese aesthetics finding their way into Johto.

===Story===

As with the previous games, the player character receives his first Pokémon, a choice between Chikorita, Cyndaquil, and Totodile, from the region&#x27;s local Pokémon scientist, Professor Elm, and then begins his journey to win the eight Gym Badges of the Johto region and then challenge the Elite Four and the Johto League Champion to become the new Pokémon Master. Opposing him is his mysterious rival, a boy who stole one of the other Pokémon from Professor Elm and regularly challenges the player to test his strengths. The player also encounters the villainous Team Rocket, having reunited to seek out their previous leader Giovanni to return the group to their former glory. Eventually, the player thwarts Team Rocket once and for all and defeats the Elite Four and the Johto League Champion on Indigo Plateau. The player can then travel to the Kanto region from the previous games and challenge the Kanto Gym Leaders there, discovering how much has changed in the three years following the events of &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;. For example, Cinnabar Island has been almost completely taken over by a volcano eruption; only a Pokémon Center remains. After defeating the Gym Leaders of the Kanto Region, the player is allowed to enter the treacherous Mt. Silver area, home to very powerful Pokémon. Deep within Mt. Silver&#x27;s caves is Red, the protagonist of &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot; and Kanto League Champion, whom the player can challenge for the most difficult final battle in the game.

==Development==
&quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were first publicly showcased at November 1997, Nintendo Space World Expo in Japan, becoming the most popular exhibit at the program. Unlike the previous game in the series, &quot;Pokémon Yellow&quot;, the new titles were announced to be more than a small upgrade to &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;. Instead, they would feature a new storyline, a new world, and new species of Pokémon. &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were designed for the Game Boy Color, allowing them full color support and more detailed sprites. Other additions that were shown included Pokémon breeding, held items, an in-game gadget known as the PokéGear, a real-time internal clock, and backward compatibility with the previous games in the series.

During an &quot;ABC News&quot; interview, president of Creatures Inc. Tsunekazu Ishihara gave insight into the brainstorming process for developing new Pokémon species. He explained, &quot;The ideas for each of these monsters came from the imagination of the software developers at Game Freak who get these ideas from their childhood experiences, including from reading manga, a style of Japanese comic books. Ideas come from scary experiences they had as kids, catching insects, and so forth. So from these experiences in childhood, these ideas for Pokémon came out&quot;. In the same vein as the Pokémon Mew of &quot;Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;, the exclusive Pokémon Celebi was included in the &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; games but is only accessible after attending a Nintendo promotional event. The first official event offering Celebi was Nintendo Space World 2000 in Japan, in which 100,000 attendees would be awarded the rare Pokémon. In order to be selected, players had to send in a postcard to enter a lottery for one of 100,000 certificates of Celebi, allowing them to enter the event and obtain it.

Ishihara stated that &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; started development right after &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Green&quot; were released in Japan. The original intention was to release the game in 1998, even synchronizing with the supposed end of the anime&#x27;s first season. Development issues, worsened by Game Freak being sidetracked with &quot;Pokémon Stadium&quot; and the localization of the first generation, led the game to be postponed, and the original release slate was taken over by &quot;Pokémon Yellow&quot;. Programmer Shigeki Morimoto stated that part of why development took three and a half years was due to being a small team of only four programmers. Satoru Iwata, then the president of HAL Laboratory who would later become Nintendo&#x27;s CEO, helped the team by developing new tools for compressing the Pokémon graphic code.

Junichi Masuda composed the game&#x27;s music on an Amiga computer, converted it to MIDI data and reconverted again for Game Boy Color.

=== Unused and cut content===
In 2018, ROM images of the early-in-development Japanese-language demo shown during the 1997 Nintendo Space World presentation resurfaced: two debug versions of the games, and two versions that were modified to work on normal Game Boy hardware and most emulators. These ROM images were only rumored to exist until they were anonymously posted on the &quot;&quot;Pokémon&quot; Reverse Engineering Tools&quot; (PRET) Discord server in May 2018. The demo was quickly shared with members of the website &quot;The Cutting Room Floor&quot;. The ROMs were analyzed and translated, and &quot;The Cutting Room Floor&quot; went on to release a spreadsheet containing all the information they had discovered, which includes a list of Pokémon species, Pokémon &quot;moves&quot;, items, non-playable characters, maps, and music. The ROMs were first released anonymously onto 4chan&#x27;s /vp/ board in May, with a formal &quot;The Cutting Room Floor&quot; release coming later that day. The demo has a larger world map than the final game (which itself is based on the entire Japanese archipelago, unlike the final region, which is based on the Kansai region of Japan), and includes around 100 unused and changed Pokémon designs.

Earlier in May 2018, &quot;Pokémon&quot; artist Atsuko Nishida revealed that the popular creature Pikachu was originally supposed to have a third evolution, named &quot;Gorochu&quot;. Additionally, &quot;Pokémon&quot; creator Satoshi Tajiri has revealed four unused designs that would have been included in the original &quot;Pokémon&quot; games.

While cut content is not uncommon in video games, the volume of cut content in the &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; demo has been described as &quot;overwhelming&quot;. Matthew Byrd, writing for &quot;Den of Geek&quot;, stated that a lot of design work had gone into the Pokémon that were eventually cut, suggesting that Game Freak might have taken them out during the testing phase due to balance issues.

==Release==

In September 1999, the games were announced for release in Japan on November 21, 1999, and a North American release date was estimated for September 2000. Nintendo announced the release of the Pocket Pikachu Color, a full-color portable digital pet similar to the one released the year before. The unit is compatible with &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, allowing the transfer of in-game currency known as &quot;watt points&quot;. Pocket Pikachu Color was slated for release in Japan on November 21, 1999, the same day as the release of &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;. In addition, an officially licensed Pikachu-themed Game Link Cable developed by Kemco was set for release in Japan on November 18, 1999. The product functions like a normal Game Link Cable and consists of a yellow cable with a figure of Pikachu on one end, and a Poké Ball on the other.

Anticipating high sales, Nintendo set its first production shipment for the games in Japan at three million, predicting that eventually more than eight million copies would be sold in the country alone. However, they were soon forced to cut the first shipment number in half following an earthquake in Taiwan, which Nintendo claimed had damaged their cartridge manufacturing facilities. Regardless, speculation arose that Nintendo was instead using the event as an excuse to limit shipment and keep the demand high.

As a precursor to the North American release, &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were displayed for audiences to interact with at the 2000 American International Toy Fair in New York City. To further promote the games, Nintendo modified five Chrysler PT Cruisers to resemble the new Pokémon Lugia and had them driven around the United States. The vehicles had fins and tails attached to them and were painted with logos and images of the &quot;Pokémon&quot; franchise. In addition, they were equipped with a television set hooked up to game consoles which allowed spectators to play &quot;Pokémon Puzzle League&quot;, &quot;Hey You, Pikachu!&quot;, and &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;. The television series &quot;Pokémon GS&quot;, based on the games, was announced to be a part of the fall lineup on Kids&#x27; WB. The show features the same protagonist Ash Ketchum in a new region with different Pokémon species from the games. The localized English names of the 100 new Pokémon were kept confidential by Nintendo, with the company releasing names periodically. The domain names &#x27;pokemongold.com&#x27; and &#x27;pokemonsilver.com&#x27; were registered for this very purpose, and such names released included Chikorita, Lugia, Ho-Oh, Togepi, Hoothoot, and Marill.

In September 1999, Nintendo announced that &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; would be released in North America in September 2000. In May 2000, Nintendo announced the official North American release date of &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; would instead be October 16 of that year. The release date was later changed to October 15. In North America, Nintendo started accepting pre-orders for the games in August; a CD-ROM was available as a pre-order bonus that included clips and music from &quot;Pokémon the Movie 2000&quot;, screenshots from &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, a Pokémon-themed desktop wallpaper, an offer for a &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; Player&#x27;s Guide, and Pokémon-related trivia. The games had record pre-order sales — approximately 600,000 copies of the games were pre-ordered in just two months, compared to 150,000 copies for &quot;Pokémon Yellow&quot;. As the release date neared and retailers began to receive shipments of the games, some retailers—such as Electronics Boutique—opted to sell them immediately upon receiving the games; first using them to fulfill pre-orders, and then selling the remaining copies to walk-in customers. The games were reportedly obtainable as early as October 11.

The games were released in Australia on October 13, 2000 and in Europe on April 6, 2001.

Nintendo spent between $12 million and $14 million to market the game in the United States. 

===&quot;Pokémon Crystal&quot;===

 is a third version after &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Color. It was released in Japan on December 14, 2000, North America on July 29, 2001, and in Europe on November 2, 2001. The plot and gameplay of &quot;Crystal&quot; is largely the same as in &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, although it includes several new features.

&quot;Pokémon Crystal&quot; was received well by critics, although many commented that there were just not enough new additions and features to significantly set it apart from &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;. &quot;Pokémon Crystal&quot; has sold nearly 6.4 million units worldwide.

===Nintendo 3DS re-release===
In June 2017, The Pokémon Company announced via a Pokémon Direct broadcast that the games would be re-released worldwide via the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console on September 22, 2017.

==Reception==
&quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were met with critical acclaim, with many saying that the extended length of gameplay and the new features were valued additions that kept the sequels as interesting as the original games. Craig Harris of &quot;IGN&quot; gave the games a &quot;masterful&quot; 10 out of 10 rating, stating that: &quot;As awesome as the original Pokémon edition was, &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; blow it away in gameplay elements, features, and goodies. There are so many little additions to the design it&#x27;s impossible to list them all&quot;. There was particular praise given to the innovative internal clock feature, with Frank Povo of &quot;GameSpot&quot;, noting: &quot;The first major addition to Pokémon GS is the presence of a time element... Although it may sound like a gimmick, the addition of a clock adds quite a bit of variety to the game&quot;. Povo went on to give the games an 8.8 rating of &quot;great&quot;. &quot;Nintendo Power&quot; listed &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; combined as the sixth best Game Boy / Game Boy Color games, praising them for the new Pokémon, features, and full-color graphics.

Overall, &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; were stated to be solid gaming additions that would please a large audience. &quot;After playing the game dozens of hours, I really can&#x27;t think of a bad point to make about &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;. Nintendo and Game Freak have tweaked the original and built a sequel that&#x27;s long, challenging and tremendous fun to play. There&#x27;s a reason why &quot;Pokémon&quot; is so popular, and &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; is going to help the series move further into the 21st century&quot;, said Harris.

===Sales===
&quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; continued the enormous success of &quot;Pokémon Red&quot; and &quot;Blue&quot;, beginning the formation of &quot;Pokémon&quot; into a multi-billion dollar franchise. Upon its first day of release in Japan, the game sold 1,425,768 units. As of April 2000, roughly 6.5 million copies of the games had been sold in Japan. &quot;Silver&quot; proved to be the slightly more popular version, edging out &quot;Gold&quot; by approximately 100,000 copies.

In the U.S., the game generated pre-sales about three weeks before release. Upon the first week of release in the U.S., the games had eclipsed &quot;Pokémon Yellow&quot;″s previous record sales of a little over 600,000 copies; selling a combined total of 1.4 million copies to become the fastest-selling games ever. The commercial success was expected, as Peter Main, the executive vice president of sales and marketing, stated &quot;There&#x27;s no question about it; kids love to play Pokémon. So far in 2000 the best-selling game in America for any home console is Pokémon Stadium for Nintendo 64, and the best-selling game for any handheld video game system is Pokémon Yellow for Game Boy Color, but Pokémon Gold and Silver will eclipse even those impressive sales totals. We project sales of 10 million units total of these two games in less than six months time&quot;. The game sold copies in the U.S. within a few weeks.

In Germany, &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; received two Double Platinum awards from the Verband der Unterhaltungssoftware Deutschland (VUD) for sales above 800,000 copies by 2002. In the United Kingdom, &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; received two Platinum awards for sales above 600,000 copies. By 2010, &quot;Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot; had sold units worldwide.

==Legacy==

===Remakes===
 and are enhanced remakes of &quot;Pokémon Gold&quot; and &quot;Silver&quot;, developed by Game Freak and published by The Pokémon Company and Nintendo for the Nintendo DS. First released in Japan on September 12, 2009, the games were later released in North America, Australia, and Europe during March 2010.

Game director Shigeki Morimoto aimed to respect the feelings of those who played the previous games, while also ensuring that it felt like a new game to those that were introduced to the series in more recent years. Reception to the games was positive, the two being amongst the highest-rated DS games of all time on Metacritic. Commercially, they are among the best-selling Nintendo DS games of all time, with combined sales of 10 million units as of July 2010.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* (US)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="13" end="36" title="role-playing video game" label="role-playing video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q782028" start="51" end="61" title="Game Freak" label="Game Freak"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="79" end="87" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="96" end="110" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="176" end="213" title="Pokémon (video game series)" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot; video game series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="330" end="356" title="List of generation II Pokémon" label="100 new species of Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="430" end="446" title="Pokémon game mechanics#Pokémon battles" label="Pokémon battling"/>
<link wikidata="Q236209" start="677" end="684" title="Pokédex" label="Pokédex"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="708" end="733" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot; anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351827" start="824" end="839" title="Pokémon Crystal" label="Pokémon Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="1083" end="1122" title="fifth generation of video game consoles" label="fifth generation of video game consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="1163" end="1207" title="Pokémon Red and Blue" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607454" start="1426" end="1448" title="List of best-selling Game Boy video games" label="the best-selling games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="1613" end="1620" title="video game remake" label="remakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q611189" start="1628" end="1684" title="Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon HeartGold&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;SoulSilver&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="1707" end="1718" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086092" start="1829" end="1841" title="Third-person (video games)" label="third-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421045" start="2230" end="2240" title="turn-based" label="turn-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q236209" start="2479" end="2486" title="Pokédex" label="Pokédex"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="2741" end="2757" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="2817" end="2848" title="Pokémon (video game series)" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon&amp;quot; video games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2911" end="2928" title="Pokemon statistics" label="battle statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="2947" end="2952" title="Pokémon moves" label="moves"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="3689" end="3698" title="Poké Ball" label="Poké Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="4076" end="4082" title="Raikou (Pokémon)" label="Raikou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="4084" end="4089" title="Entei (Pokémon)" label="Entei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="4095" end="4102" title="Suicune" label="Suicune"/>
<link wikidata="Q236209" start="4122" end="4139" title="legendary Pokémon" label="legendary Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q236209" start="4262" end="4269" title="Pokédex" label="Pokédex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4360" end="4362" title="Pokemon statistics" label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424329" start="4425" end="4438" title="shiny Pokémon" label="shiny Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2769164" start="4569" end="4584" title="Pokémon X and Y" label="Pokémon X and Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="4594" end="4607" title="Pokémon types" label="Pokémon types"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="5031" end="5036" title="Pokémon moves" label="moves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5300" end="5304" title="Pokemon statistics" label="stat"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="5433" end="5449" title="Pokémon breeding" label="Pokémon breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362536" start="5681" end="5686" title="Ditto (Pokémon)" label="Ditto"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="6284" end="6290" title="Kansai region" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q398989" start="6295" end="6307" title="Tōkai region" label="Tōkai region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="6528" end="6537" title="Chikorita" label="Chikorita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="6539" end="6548" title="Cyndaquil" label="Cyndaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="6554" end="6562" title="Totodile" label="Totodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066881" start="7000" end="7011" title="Team Rocket" label="Team Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373876" start="8059" end="8079" title="Nintendo Space World" label="Nintendo Space World"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="8191" end="8205" title="Pokémon Yellow" label="Pokémon Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="8278" end="8322" title="Pokémon Red and Blue" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="8539" end="8546" title="sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="8692" end="8714" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="8771" end="8779" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q512003" start="8810" end="8824" title="Creatures Inc." label="Creatures Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3324428" start="8825" end="8843" title="Tsunekazu Ishihara" label="Tsunekazu Ishihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="9125" end="9130" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12342580" start="9361" end="9364" title="Mew (Pokémon)" label="Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="9368" end="9404" title="Pokémon Red and Blue" label="&amp;quot;Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="9428" end="9434" title="Celebi (Pokémon)" label="Celebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373876" start="9615" end="9635" title="Nintendo Space World" label="Nintendo Space World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9976" end="10021" title="Pokémon Red and Blue#Development" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Green&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="10150" end="10155" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10163" end="10175" title="Pokémon: Indigo League" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034425" start="10249" end="10264" title="Pokémon Stadium" label="Pokémon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="10402" end="10416" title="Pokémon Yellow" label="Pokémon Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q316013" start="10572" end="10584" title="Satoru Iwata" label="Satoru Iwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068734" start="10608" end="10622" title="HAL Laboratory" label="HAL Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190425" start="10750" end="10764" title="Junichi Masuda" label="Junichi Masuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="10802" end="10807" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973327" start="10926" end="10935" title="ROM image" label="ROM image"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="11060" end="11065" title="debug" label="debug"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="11143" end="11151" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907849" start="11332" end="11339" title="Discord (software)" label="Discord"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635148" start="11422" end="11444" title="The Cutting Room Floor (website)" label="The Cutting Room Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q859965" start="11684" end="11689" title="Item (gaming)" label="items"/>
<link wikidata="Q466466" start="11691" end="11714" title="non-playable characters" label="non-playable characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="11716" end="11720" title="Level (video gaming)" label="maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q238330" start="11779" end="11784" title="4chan" label="4chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="11980" end="12000" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274757" start="12183" end="12197" title="Atsuko Nishida" label="Atsuko Nishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q9351" start="12233" end="12240" title="Pikachu" label="Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q295218" start="12361" end="12375" title="Satoshi Tajiri" label="Satoshi Tajiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253643" start="12489" end="12500" title="cut content" label="cut content"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="12691" end="12702" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197737" start="12880" end="12894" title="Balance (game design)" label="balance issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393975" start="13103" end="13123" title="Pokémon Pikachu" label="Pocket Pikachu Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187635" start="13147" end="13158" title="digital pet" label="digital pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9351" start="13532" end="13539" title="Pikachu" label="Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q603583" start="13547" end="13562" title="Game Link Cable" label="Game Link Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q174561" start="13576" end="13581" title="Kemco" label="Kemco"/>
<link wikidata="Q24558579" start="13759" end="13768" title="Poké Ball" label="Poké Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="14086" end="14092" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744198" start="14445" end="14476" title="American International Toy Fair" label="American International Toy Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14480" end="14493" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046867" start="14548" end="14567" title="Chrysler PT Cruiser" label="Chrysler PT Cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="14597" end="14602" title="Lugia" label="Lugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109914" start="14895" end="14916" title="Pokémon Puzzle League" label="Pokémon Puzzle League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525984" start="14930" end="14947" title="Hey You, Pikachu!" label="Hey You, Pikachu!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711972" start="15123" end="15136" title="Kids&amp;#x27; WB" label="Kids&amp;#x27; WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q308950" start="15177" end="15188" title="Ash Ketchum" label="Ash Ketchum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="15537" end="15546" title="Chikorita" label="Chikorita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="15548" end="15553" title="Lugia" label="Lugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211413" start="15555" end="15560" title="Ho-Oh" label="Ho-Oh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="15562" end="15568" title="Togepi" label="Togepi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="15570" end="15578" title="Hoothoot" label="Hoothoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245448" start="15584" end="15590" title="Marill" label="Marill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376555" start="15983" end="15992" title="pre-order" label="pre-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="16021" end="16027" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q868048" start="16104" end="16126" title="Pokémon the Movie 2000" label="Pokémon the Movie 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993686" start="16609" end="16629" title="EB Games" label="Electronics Boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156046" start="17830" end="17849" title="The Pokémon Company" label="The Pokémon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="17945" end="17973" title="Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console" label="Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="18271" end="18274" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="18710" end="18718" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q719801" start="18998" end="19012" title="Nintendo Power" label="Nintendo Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="19891" end="19935" title="Pokémon Red and Blue" label="&amp;quot;Pokémon Red&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Blue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108790" start="20337" end="20346" title="pre-sales" label="pre-sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q637137" start="20454" end="20468" title="Pokémon Yellow" label="Pokémon Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q184839" start="20893" end="20904" title="Nintendo 64" label="Nintendo 64"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21331" end="21376" title=":de:Verband der Unterhaltungssoftware Deutschland" label="Verband der Unterhaltungssoftware Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="21658" end="21674" title="Video game remake" label="enhanced remakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="21809" end="21820" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496335" start="21973" end="21989" title="Shigeki Morimoto" label="Shigeki Morimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="22276" end="22286" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607460" start="22321" end="22351" title="List of best-selling Nintendo DS video games" label="best-selling Nintendo DS games"/>
</links>
</doc>
